THE  GIFT  OF 


£.£:  //cisyf<^// 


3  1924  101  120  883 


The  original  of  tliis  book  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101120883 


THE 

MECHANICAL    THEORY 


OP 


HEAT. 


THE 

MECHANICAL    THEOKY 


OP 


HEAT. 


BY 

R    CLAUSIUS. 


TRANSLATED    BY 

WALTER   E.   BROWNE,    M.A., 

LATE    FELLOW    OF    IRINIIT     COLLEOS,     OAMBKIDGB. 


Hontjon : 

MACMILLAN    AND    CO. 

1879 


Camirtiige : 

PEINTED   BY    C.  J.  CLAY.  M.i 
AT  THE  DNIVEESITY  PiffiSF. 


TRANSLATOE'S  PREFACE. 


The  following  translation  was  undertaken  at  the  instance 
of  Dr  T.  Archer  Hirst,  F.R.S.,  the  translator  of  the  first 
collected  edition  (mentioned  in  the  Author's  Preface  below) 
of  Professor  Clausius'  papers  on  the  Mechanical  Theory  of 
Heat.  The  former  work  has  however  been  so  completely  re- 
written by  Professor  Clausius,  that  Dr  Hirst's  translation  has 
been  found  scarcely  anywhere  available ;  and  I  must  there- 
fore accept  the  full  responsibility  of  the  present  publication. 
I  trust  it  may  be  found  to  supply  a  want  which  I  have 
reason  to  believe  has  been  felt,  namely,  that  of  a  systematic 
and  connected  treatise  on  Thermodynamics,  for  use  in 
Universities  and  Colleges,  and  among  advanced  students 
generally.  With  the  view  of  rendering  it  more  complete  for 
this  purpose,  I  have  added,  with  the  consent  of  Professor 
Clausius,  three  short  appendices  on  points  which  he  had  left 
unnoticed,  but  which  still  seemed  of  interest,  at  any  rate 
to  English  readers.     These  are,  (1)  The  Thermo-elastic  pro- 


vi  translatoe's  preface. 

perties  of  Solids ;  (2)  The  application  of  Thermo-dynamical 
principles  to  Capillarity ;  (3)  The  Continuity  of  the  Liquid 
and  Gaseous  states  of  Matter.  My  best  thanks  are  due  to 
Dr  John  Hopkinson,  F.E..S.,  both  for  the  suggestion  of  these 
three  points,  and  also  for  the  original  and  very  elegant 
investigation  from  first  principles,  contained  in  the  first 
Appendix,  and  in  the  commencement  of  the  second.  My 
thanks  are  also  due  to  Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.,  E.  J.  Routh, 
Esq.,  and  Professor  James  Stuart,  for  kindly  looking  through 
the  first  proof  of  the  translation,  and  for  various  valuable 
suggestions  made  in  connection  with  it. 

WALTER  E.   BROWNE. 


10,  ViCTOKiA  Chambees,  Wesimiksteb, 
November,  1879. 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE. 


Many  representations  having  been  made  to  the  author  from 
different  quarters  that  the  numerous  papers  "On  the  Me- 
chanical Theory  of  Heat,"  which  he  had  published  at  different 
times  during  a  series  of  years,  were  inaccessible  to  many  who, 
from  the  widespread  interest  now  felt  in  this  theory,  were 
anxious  to  study  them,  he  undertook  some  years  back  to 
publish  a  complete  collection  of  his  papers  relating  to  the 
subject. 

As  a  fresh  edition  of  this  book  has  now  become  necessary, 
he  has  determined  to  give  it  an  entirely  new  form.  The 
Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat,  in  its  present  development,  forms 
already  an  extensive  and  independent  branch  of  science. 
But  it  is  not  easy 'to  study  such  a  subject  from  a  series  of 
separate  papers,  which,  having  been  published  at  different 
times,  are  unconnected  in  their  form,  although  they  agree 
in  their  .contents.  Notes  and  additions,  however  freely  used 
to  explain  and  supplement  the  papers,  do  not  wholly  over- 
come the  difficulty.  The  author,  therefore,  thought  it  best 
so  to  re-model  the  papers  that  they  might  form  a  connected 
whole,  and  enable  the  work  to  become  a  text-book  of  the 
science.     He  felt  himself  the  more  bound  to  do  this  because 


Vlll  AUTHOES  PREFACE. 

his  long  experience  as  a  lecturer  on  the. Mechanical  Theory 
of  Heat  at  a  Polytechnic  School  and  at  several  Universities 
had  taught  him  how  the  subject-matter  should  be  arranged 
and  represented,  so  as  to  render  the  new  view  and  the  new 
method  of  calculation  adopted .  in  this  somewhat  difficult 
theory  the  more  readily  intelligible.  This  plan  also  enabled 
him  to  make  use  of  the  investigations  of  other  writers,  and 
by  that  means  to  give  the  subject  greater  completeness  and 
finish.  These  authorities  of  course  have  been  in  every  case 
duly  recognized  by  name.  During  the  ten  years  which  have 
elapsed  since  the  first  volume  of  papers  appeared,  many  fresh 
investigations  into  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat  have  been 
published,  and  as  these  have  also  been  discussed,  the  contents 
of  the  volume  have  been  considerably  increased. 

Therefore  in  submitting  to  the  public  this,  the  first  part 
of  his  new  investigation  of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat, 
the  author  feels  that,  although  it  owes  its  origin  to  the  second 
edition  of  his  former  volume,  still,  as  it  contains  so  much 
that  is  fresh,  he  may  in  many  respects  venture  to  call  it  a  new 
work. 

R.    OLAUSIUS., 

Bonn,  December,  ]87o. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


MATHEMATICAL   INTRODUCTION. 


ON    MECHANICAL   WOKK,    ON    ENERGY,    AND    ON    THE    TREATMENT   OP 
NON-INTEGEABLE   DIFFERENTIAL   EQUATIONS. 


§3. 


Defiuition  and  Measurement  of  Mechanical  Work 

Mathematical  Determination  of  the  Work  done  by  variable  com- 
ponents of  Force 

Integration  of  the  Differential  Equations  for  Work  done 

Geometrical  interpretation  of  the  foregoing  results,  and  obaer- 
Tations  on  Partial  Differential  Coefficients 

Extension  of  the  foregoing  to  three  Dimensions 

On  the  Brgal 

General  Extension  of  the  foregoing 

Eelation  between  Work  and  Vis  Viva  . 

On  Energy 


PAGE 
1 


9 
11 
13 
17 
19 


CHAPTER  I. 


FIRST    MAIN    PRINCIPLE   OP   THE   MECHANICAL     THEORY    OP    HEAT. 

EQUIVALENCE   OF   HEAT   AND   WORK. 

§  1.     Starting  Point  of  the  theory 21 

§  2.    Positive  and  Negative  Values  of  Mechanical  Work        ...  22 

§  3.     Expression  for  the  First  Main  Principle 23 

§  4.     Numerical  Eelation  between  Heat  and  Work        ....  24 

§  5.     The  Mechanical  Unit  of  Heat 25 

§  6.    Development  of  the  First  Main  Principle 27 

§  7.     Different  Conditions  of  the  quantities  J,  W,  and  K      .        .        .27 

§  8.    Energy  of  the  Body 30 

§  9.     Equations  for  Finite  Changes  of  Condition — Cyclical  Processes  .  32 

§  10.  Total  Heat — ^Latent  and  Specific  Heat 33 

§  11.  Expression  for  the  External  Work  in  a  particular  case         .        .  35 


X  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER   II. 

ON    PERFECT   GASES. 

PAOE 

§  1.    The  Gaseous  Condition  of  Bodies 38 

§  2.     Approximate  Principle  as  to  Heat  absorbed  by  Gases  ...      42 
§  3.     On  the  Form  which  the  equation  expressing  the  first  Main  Prin- 
ciple assumes  in  the  case  of  Perfect  Gases       ....      43 
§  4.     Deduction  as  to  the  two  Specific  Heats  and  transformation  of  the 

foregoing  equations 46 

§  5.     Eelation  between  the  two  Specific  Heats,  and  its  appUcatiou  to 

calculate  the  Mechanical  Equivalent  of  Heat  ....  48 
§  6.  Various  Formulse  relating  to  the  Specific  Heats  of  Gases  .  .  52 
§  7.  Numerical  Calculation  of  the  Specific  Heat  at  Constant  Volume  .  56 
§  8.    Integration  of  the  Differential  Equations  which  express  the  First 

Main  Principle  in  the  case  of  Gases 60 

§  9.     Determination  of  the  External  Work  done  during  the  change  of 

Volume  of  a  Gas 64 


CHAPTER  III. 

SECOND  MAIN  PEINCIPLE  OF  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  H!eAT. 

§  1.    Description  of  a  special  form  of  Cyclical  Process  ....      69 

§  2.    Eesult  of  the  CycHoal  Process 71 

§  3.     Cyclical  Process  in  the  case  of  a  body  composed  partly  of  Liquid 

and  partly  of  Vapour 73 

§  4.     Camot's  view  as  to  the  work  performed  during  the  Cyclical 

Process 76 

§  5.  New  Fundamental  Principle  concerning  Heat  .  .  .  '  .  78 
§  6.    Proof  that  the  Eelation  between  the  Heat  carried  over,  and  that 

converted  into  work,  is  independent  of  the  matter  which 

forms  the  medium  of  the  change     ......      79 

§  7.    Determination  of  the  Function  0  (Tj  Tj) 81 

§  8.  Cyclical  Processes  of  a  more  complicated  character  ...  84 
§  9.     Cyclical  Processes  in  which  taking  in  of  Heat  and  change  of 

Temperature  take  place  simultaneously 87 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE    SECOND    MAIN    PEINCIPLE    UNDER    ANOTHER    FORM;      OR     PRIN- 
CIPLE  OF   THE   EQUIVALENCE   OF   TEANSFORJIATIONS. 

§  1.     On  the  different  kinds  of  Transformations 91 

§  2.     On  a  Cyclical  Process  of  Special  Form 92 

§  3.     On  Equivalent  Transformations 86 


CONTENTS.  XI 

PAOB 

§  4.    Equivalence  Values  of  the  Transformations 97 

§  5.    Combined  value  of  all  the  Transformations  wliieh  take  place 

in  a  single  CycHeal  Process  .  .  .  .  ,  .  '  .  101 
§  6.    Proof  that  in  a  reversible  Cyclical  Process  the  total  value  of  all 

the  Transformations  must  be  equal  to  nothing  .  .  .  102 
§  7.    On  the  Temperatures  of  the  various  quantities  of  Heat ;  and  the 

Entropy  of  the  body 106 

§  8.     On  the  Function  of  Temperature,  t      .        .        .        .        .        .107 


.  CHAPTER  V. 

FORMATION  QF  THE  TWO   FUNDAMENTAL   EQUATIOlfS. 

§  1.    Discussion  of  the  Variables  which  determine  the  Condition  of 

the  body  .        , 110 

§  2.    Elimination  of  the  quantities  U  and  S  from  the  two  fundamental 

equations  .        ;        . 112 

§  3.     Case  in  which  the  Temperature  is  taken  as  one  of  the  Independent 

Variables 115 

§  4.  Particular  Assumptions  as  to  the  External  Forces  .  .  .  116 
§  5.  Frequently  occurring  forms  of  the  differential  equations  .  .  118 
§  6.    Equations  in  the  case  of  a  body  which  undergoes  a  partial  change 

in  its  condition  of  aggregation 119 

§  7.     Clapeyron's  Equation  and  Carnot's  Function        ....    121 


CHAPTER  VI. 

APPLICATIOjST  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat  to  SATURATED 

VAPOUR. 

§  1.    Fundamental  equations  for  Saturated  Vapour      ....  126 

§  2.     Specific  Heat  of  Saturated  Steam 129 

§  3.     Numerical  Value  of  h  for  Steam 133 

§  i.     Numerical  Value  of  h  for  other  vapours 135 

§  5.     Specific  Heat  of  Saturated  Steam  as  proved  by  experiment  .        .  139 

g  6.     Specific  Volume  of  Saturated  Vapour 142 

I  7.     Departure  &om  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac  in  the  case 

of  Saturated  Steam  ........  143 

5  8.     Differential-coefficients  of  — 148 

§9.     A  Formula  to  determine  the  Specific  volume  of  Saturated  Steam, 

and  its  comparison  with  Experiment 150 

1 10.  Determination  of  the  Mechanical  Equivalent  of  Heat  from  the 

behaviour  of  Saturated  Steam 155 


Xll  CONTENTS. 


PAGE 


§  11.     Complete  Differential  Ec^aation  for  Q  in  the  case  of  a  body 

composed  both  of  Liquid  and  Vapour 156 

§  12.     Change  of  the  Gaseous  portion  of  the  mass         ....  157 

§  13.     Belation  between  Volume  and  Temperature        ....  159 

§  14.    Determination  of  the  Work  as  a  function  of  Temperature  .        .  160 


CHAPTER  VII. 

FUSION   AND   VAPORIZATION  OF   SOLID   BODIES. 

i  1.  Fundamental  Equations  for  the  process  of  Fusion  .  .  .  163* 
i  2.  Eelation  between  Pressure  and  Temperature  of  Fusion  .  .  167 
i  3.  Experimental  Verification  of  the  Foregoing  Eesult  .  .  .  168 
i  4.  Experiments  on  Substances  which  expand  during  Fusion  .  .  169 
i  5.  Eelation  between  the  Heat  contained  in  Fusion  and  the  Tempe- 
rature of  Fusion 171 

I  6.     Passage  from  the  solid  to  the  gaseous  condition   ....  172 


CHAPTEE  VIII. 

ON   HOMOGENEOUS   BODIES. 

§  1.     Changes  of  Condition  without  Change  in  the  Condition  of  Aggre- 
gation , 175 

§  2.    Improved  Denotation  for  the  differential  coefficients     .        .        .  176 
§  8.    Eelations    between    the   Differential   Coefficients    of  Pressxire, 

Volume,  and  Temperature 177 

§  4.    Complete  differential  equations  for  Q 178 

§  5.     Specifie  Heat  at  constant  volume  and  constant  pressure      .        .  180 

§  6.     Specific  Heats  under  other  oiroumstanees 184 

§  7.    laentropic  Variations  of  a  body 187 

§  8.     Special  form  of  the  fundamental  equations  for  an  Expanded  Eod  188 

§  9.    Alteration  of  temperature  during  the  extension  of  the  rod   .         .  190 

§  10.  Further  deductions  from  the  equations 192 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

DETEKMINATION  OF  ENERGY  AND  ENTROPY. 

i  1.     General  equations 195 

I  2.  Differential  equations  for  the  case  in  which  only  reversible 
changes  take  place,  and  in  which  the  condition  of  the  Body  is 
determined  by  two  Independent  Variables       ....     197 


CONTENTS.  Xlll 

PAGE 

§  3.    Introdnction  of  the  Temperature  as  one  of  the  Independent 

YatiaWes 200 

§  4.     Special  case  of  the  differential  equations  on  the  assumption  that 

the  only  External  Force  is  a  uniform  surface  pressure  .  .  203 
§  5.    Application  of  the  foregoing  equations  to  Homogeneous  Bodies 

and  in  particular  to  perfect  Gases 20S 

§  6.    Application  of  the  equations  to  a  body  composed  of  matter  in 

two  States  of  Aggregation 207 

§  7.    Kelation  of  the  expressions  Dxy  and  Axy 209 


CHAPTER  X. 

ON   NON-BBVEESIBLE   PKOCESSES. 

§  1.     Completion  of   the  Mathematical  Expression  for  the   Second 

Main  Principle 212 

§  2.    Magnitude  of  the  Uncompensated  Transformation        .        .        .  214 

§  3.    Expansion  of  a  Gas  unaccompanied  by  Work       ....  215 

§  4.    Expansion  of  a  Gas  doing  partial  work 218 

§  5.     Methods  of  experiment  used  by  Thomson  and  Joule     .        .        .  220 

§  6.    Deyelopment  of  the  equations  relating  to  the  above  method         .  221 
§  7.    Besults  of  the  experiments,  and  the  equations  of  Elasticity  for 

the  gases,  as  deduced  therefrom 224 

§  8.    On  the  Behaviour  of  Vapour  during  expansion  and  under  various 

circumstances 228 


CHAPTER  XL 

APPLICATION   OF  THE   THEOKT   OF  HEAT   TO   THE  STEAM-ENGINE. 

i  1.    Necessity  of  a  new  investigation  into  the  theory  of  the  Steam- 

Bngiue 234 

j2.     On  the  Action  of  the  Steam-Engine 236 

I  3.  Assumptions  for  the  purpose  of  SimpMoation  ....  238 
I  4.  Determination  of  the  Work  done  during  a  single  stroke  .  .  239 
i  5.  Special  forms  of  the  expression  fovmd  in  the  last  section  .  .  241 
\  6.  Imperfections  in  the  construction  of  the  Steam-Engine  .  .  241 
I  7.  Pambour's  Eormulse  for  the  relation  between  Volume  and  Pres- 
sure            242 

J  8.    Pambour's  Determination  of  the  Work  done  during  a  single 

stroke 244 

)  9.    Pambour's  Value  for  the  Work  done  per  unit- weight  of  steam      .  247 
i  10.  Changes  in  the  Steam  during  its  passage  from  the  Boiler  into 

the  Cylinder 248 


XIV  CONTENTS, 

PAOE 

§  11.  Divergence  of  the  Eesnlts  obtained  from  Pambour's  Assumption  251 
§  12.    Determination  of  the  work  done  during  one  stroke,  taking  iato 

consideration  the  imperfections  abeady  noticed       .        .        »  252 

§  13.    Pressure  of  Steam  in  the  Cylinder  during  the  different  Stages  , 
of  the  Process   and   corresponding   Simplifications    of  the 

Equations 255 

§  14.     Substitution  of  the  Vohune  for  the  corresponding  Tempera- 
ture in  certain  cases         .        . 257 

§  15.    Work  per  Unit-weight  of  Steam 259 

§  16.    Treatment  of  the  Equations 259 

§  17.    Determination  of  -^  and  of  the  product  Tg  ....  260 

§  18.    Introduction  of  other  measures  of  Pressure  and  Heat         .         .  261 

§  19.    Determination  of  the  temperatures  T^  and  Ta     .        .        .         .  262 

§  20.    Determination  of  c  and  r    .        .        .     ' 264 

§  21.     Special  Form  of  Equation  (32)  for  an  Engine  working  without 

expansion 265 

§  22.    Numerical  values  of  the  constants 267 

§  23.    The  least  possible  value  of  V  and  the  corresponding  amount  of 

Work 268 

§  24.    Calculation  of  the  work  for  other  values  of  F     .        .        .         .  269 

§  25.    Work  done  for  a  given  value  of  V  by  an  engine  with  expansion  .  271 

§  26.     Summary  of  various  cases  relating  to  the  working  of  the  engine  273 

§  27.    Work  done  per  unit  of  heat  delivered  from  the  Source  of  Heat  .  274 

§  28.    Friction       . 275 

§  29.     General  investigation  of  the  action  of  Thermo-Dynamio  Engines 

and  of  its  relation  to  a  Cyclical  Process 276 

§  30.  Equations  for  the  work  done  during  any  cychoal  process  .  .  279 
§  31.    AppHoation  of  the  above  equations  to  the  limiting  case  in  which 

the  Cyclical  Process  in  a  Steam-Engine  is  reversible        .        .  281 

§  32.    Another  form  of  the  last  expression 282 

§  33.    Influence  of  the  temperature  of  the  Source  of  Heat     .        .        .  284 

§  34.    Example  of  the  application  of  the  Method  of  Subtraction  .        .  286 


CHAPTEE  XII. 

ON  THE  CONCENTRATION  OP   EATS   OF   LIGHT   AND  HEAT,   AND   ON 
THE   LIMITS    OF    ITS    ACTION. 

§  1.     Object  of  the  investigation 293 

I.    Beasons  why  the  ordinary  method  of  determining  the  mutual 
radiation  of  two  surfaces  does  not  extend  to  the  present 

case 296 

g  2.    Limitation  of  the  treatment  to  perfectly  black  bodies   and  to 

homogeneous  and  unpolarized  rays  of  heat      ....     296 
§  3.    Kirchhoff's  Formula  for  the  mutual  radiation  of  two  Elements  of 

surface 297 

§  4.    Indetermiuateness  of  the  Formula  in  the  case  of  the  Concen- 
tration of  rays 300 


CONTENTS.  XV 

PAGE 

II.  Determination  of  corresponding  points  and  corresponding 

Elements  of  Surface  in  three  planes  cut  by  the  rays  .  301 
§  5.    Equations  between  the  co-ordinates  of  the  points  in  which  a  ray 

cuts  three  given  planes 301 

§  6.  The  relation  of  corresponding  elements  of  surface  .  .  .  304 
§  7.    Various  fractions  formed  out  of  six  quantities  to  express  the 

Eolations  between  Corresponding  Elements    ....     .SC9 

III.  Determination  of  the  mutual  radiation  when  there  is  no 

concentration  of  rays         .......     310 

§  8.     Magnitude  of  the  element  of  surface  corresponding  to  ds^  on  a 

plane  in  a  particular  position  .......    310 

§  9.    Expressions  for  the  quantities  of  heat  which  da,  and  ds,  radiate 

to  each  other 812 

§  10.  Eadiation  as  dependent  on  the  surrounding  medium    .        .        .     314 

IV.  Determination  of  the  mutual  radiation  of  two  Elements  of 

Surface  In  the  case  when  one  is  the  Optical  Image  of  the 

other 316 

§  11.  Relations  between  B,D,F,a.ndiE 316 

§  12.  Application  of  A  and  C  to  determine  the  relation  between  the 

elements  of  surface 318 

§  18.  Eelation   between   the  quantities  of  Heat  which  ds,  and  ds^ 

radiate  to  each  other 319 

V.  Eelation  between  the  Increment  of  Area  and  the  Eatio  of 

the  two  solid  angles  of  an  Elementaiy  Pencil  of  Bays  .  321 
§  14.  Statement  of  the  proportions  for  this  case 321 

VI.  General  determination  of  the  mutual  radiation  of  two  sur- 

faces in  the  case  where  any  concentration  whatever  may 

take  place 324 

§  15.  General  view  of  the  concentration  of  rays 324 

§  16.  Mutual  radiation  of  an  element  of  surface  and  of  a  finite  surface 

through  an  element  of  an  intermediate  plane  .        .        .        .  3r  5 

§  17.  Mutual  radiation  of  entire  surfaces 3'.  8 

§  18.  Consideration  of  various  collateral  circumstances          .        .        .  329 

§  19.  Summary  of  results 330 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

DISCUSSIONS    ON   THE   MECHANICAL   THEORY   OF   HEAT   AS   HEKE 
DEVELOPED   AND   ON    ITS   FOUNDATIONS. 

j  1.     Different  views  of  the  relation  between  Heat  and  Work       .        .  332 

i  2.    Papers  on  the  subject  by  Thomson  and  the  author       .        .        .  3S3 

i  3.    On  Eankine's  Paper  and  Thomson's  Second  Paper       .        .        .  3i?4 

i  4.     Holtzmaan's  Objections 337 

i  5.    Decher's  Objections 339 

i  6.    Fundamental  principle  on  which  the  author's  proof  of  the  second 

main  principle  rests         . 340 

i  7,    Zeuner's  first  treatment  of  the  subject 341 

i  8.    Zeuner's  second  treatment  of  the  subject 342 


XVI  CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

§  9.    Eankine's  treatment  of  the  subject 345 

§  10.  Him's  Objections ...  348 

§  11.  Wand's  Objections        .        .  ...  353 

§  12.  Tait'a  Objeetions 860 


Appenhix  I.      Thermo-elastie  Properties  of  Solids       ....    363 

II.     CapiUarity 369 

„        III.  Continuity  of  the  Liquid  and  Gaseous  states .        .        .    373 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OP  HEAT. 


MATHEMATICAL  INTRODUCTION. 

ON    MECHANICAL    WORK,    ON    ENEHGT,    AND    ON    THE 

TREATMENT  OF  NON-INTEGRABLE  DIFFERENTIAL 

EQUATIONS. 

§  1.    JOefinition  and  Measurement  of  Mechanical  Work. 

Every  force  tends  to  give  fiiotion  to  the  body  on  which 
it  acts;  but  it  may  be  prevented  from  doing  so  by  other 
opposing  forces,  so  that  equilibrium  results,  and  the  body 
reniains  at  rest.  In  this  case  "the  force  performs  no  work. 
But  as  soon  as  the  body  moves  under  the  influence  of  the 
force,  Work  is  performed. 

In  order  to  investigate  the  subject  of  Work  under  the 
simplest  possible  conditions,  we  may  assume  that  instead 
of  an  extended  body  the  force  acts  upon  a  single  material 
point.  If  this  point,  which  we  may  call  p,  travels  in  the 
same  straight  line  in  which  the  force  tends  to  move  it, 
then  the  product  of  the  force  and  the  distance  moved 
through  is  the  mechanical  work  which  the  force  performs 
during  the  motion."  If  on  the  other  hand  the  motion  of 
the:point  is  in  any  other  direction  than  the  line  of  action 
of  the  force,  then  ibhe  work  performed  is  represented  by 
the  product  of  the  distance  moved  through,  and  the  com- 
ponent of  the  force  resolved  in  the  direction  of  motion, 

This  component  of  force  in  the  line  of  motion  may  be 

piopitive  or  negative  in  sign,  according  as  it  tends  in  th§ 

c.  1        ' 


2        ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

same  direction  in  which  the  motion  actually  takes  place, 
or  in  the  opposite.  The  work  likewise  will  be  positive  in 
the  first  case,  negative  in  the  second.  To  express  the 
difference  in  words,  which  is  for  many  reasons  convenient, 
recourse  may  be  had  to  a  terminology  proposed  by  the 
writer  in  a  former  treatise,  and  the  force  may  be  said  to 
do  or  perform  work  in  the  former  case,  and  to  destroy  work 
in  the  latter. 

From  the  foregoing  it  is  obvious  that,  to  express  quan- 
tities of  work  numerically,  we  should  take  as  unit  that 
quantity  of  work  which  is  performed  by  an  unit  of  force 
acting  through  an  unit  of  distance.  In  order  to  obtain  a 
scale  of  measurement  easy  of  application,  we  must  choose, 
as  our  normal  or  standard  force,  some  force'  which  is 
thoroughly  known  and  easy  of  measurement.  The  force 
usually  chosen  for  this  purpose  is  that  of  gravity. 

Gravity  acts  on  a  given  body  as  a  force  always  tending 
downwards,  and  which  for  places  not  too  far  apart  may  be 
taken  as  absolutely  constant.  If  now  we  wish  to  lift  a 
weight  upwards  by  means  of  any  force  at  our  disposal, 
we  must  in  doing  so  overcojjae  the  force  of-gravity;  and 
gravity  thus  gives  a  measure  of  the  force  which  we  must 
exert  for  any  slow  lifting  action.  Hence  we  take  as  our 
unit  of  work  that  which  must  be  performed  in  order  to 
lift  a  unit  of  weight  through  a  unit  of  length.  The  units  of 
weight  and  length  to  be.  chosen  are  of  course  matter  of  indif- 
ference ;  in  applied  mechanics  they  are  generally  the  kilo- 
gram and  the  metre  respectively,  and  then  the  unit  of  work 
is  called  a  kilogram  metre.  Thus  to  raise  a  weight  of  a 
kilograms  through  a  height  of  b  metres  ab  kilogrammetres 
of  work  are  required ;  and  other  quantities  of  work,  in  cases 
where  gi;avity  does  not  come  directly  into  play,  can  also  be 
expressed  in  kilogrammetres,  by  comparing  the  forces  em- 
ployed with  the  standard  force  of  gravity. 

§  2.  Mathematical  determination  of  the  Work  done  hy 
variable  components  of  Force. 

In  the  foregoing  explanation  it  has  been  tacitly  assumed 
that  the  active  component   of  force   has  a  constant  value; 
throughout  the  whole  of  the  distance  traversed.     In  reality' 
this  is  not  usually  true  for  a  distance  of  finite  length.     On 


MATHEMATICAL  INTRODUCTION.  3 

the  one  hand  the  force  need  not  itself  he  the  same  at  diffe- 
rent points  of  space ;  and  on  the  other,  although  the  force 
may  remain  constant  throughout,  yet,  if  the  path  be  not 
straight  but  curved,  the  component  of  force  in  the  direction 
of  motion  will  still  vary.  For  this  reason  it  is  allowable  to  ex- 
press work  done  by  a  simple  product,  only  when  the  distance 
traversed  is  indefinitely  small,  i.e.  for  an  element  of  space. 

Let  ds  be  an  element  of  space,  and  S  the  component  in 
the  direction  of  ds  of  the  force  acting  on  the  point  p.  We 
have  then  the  following  equation  to  obtain  dW,  the  work 
done  during  the  movement  through  the  indefinitely  small 
space  ds : 

dW=Sds (1). 

If  P  be  the  total  resultant  force  acting  on  the  point  p,  and 
^  the  angle  which  the  direction  of  this  resultant  makes  with 
the  direction  of  motion  at  the  point  under  consideration, 
then 

S  =  P  cos  <f), 

whence  we  have,  by  (1), 

dW  =  P  cos  ^ds (2). 

It  is  convenient  for  calculation  to  employ  a  system  of 
rectangular  co-ordinates,  and  to  consider  the  projections  of 
the  element  of  space  upon  the  axes  of  co-ordinates,  and  the 
components  of  force  as  resolved  parallel  to  those  axes. 

For  the  sake  of  simplicity  we  will  assume  that  the  motion 
takes  place  in  a  plane  in  which  both  the  initial  direction  of 
motion  and  the  line  of  force  are  situated.  We  will  employ 
rectangular  axes  of  co-ordinates  lying  in  this  plane,  and  will 
call  X  and  y  the  co-ordinates  of  the  moving  point  ^  at  a 
given  time.  If  the  point  moves  from  this  position  in  the 
plane  of  co-ordinates  through  an  indefinitely  small  space  ds, 
the  projections  of  this  motion  on  the  axes  will  be  called  cfe 
and  dy,  and  will  be  positive  or  negative,  according  as  the 
co-ordinates  x  and  y  are  increased  or  diminished  by  the 
motion.  The  components  of  the  force  F,  resolved  in  the 
directions  of  the  axes,  will  be  called  X  and  Y.  Then,  if  a 
and  b  are  the  cosines  of  the  angles  which  the  line  of  force 
makes  with  the  axes  of  a;  and  y  respectively,  we  have 
x'=aP;     Y=bP. 

1—2 


4        ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 

Again,  if  a  and  y3  are  the  cosines  of  the  angles  wliich  the 
element  of  space  ds  makes  with  the  axes,  we  have 

dx  =  ads ;    dy  =  ^ds. 

¥rom  these  equations  we  obtain 

Xdx  +  Ydy  =  {aa.  +  &/3)  Pds. 

JBut  by  Analytical  Geometry  we  know  that 

aa  +  i^  =  cos  ^, 

where  ^  is  the  angle  between  the  line  of  force,  and  the 
element . of  space  :  hence 

Xdx  +  Ydy  =  cos  ^  Pds, 

.and  therefore  by  equation  (2), 

dW=Xdx+  Ydy (3). 

This  being  the  equation  for  the  work  done  during  an  indefi- 
nitely small  motion,  we  must  integrate  it  to  determine  the 
work  done  during  a  motion  of  finite  extent. 

§  3.  Integration  of  the  Differential  Equation  for  Work- 
done. ' 

In  the  integration  of  a  differential  equation  of  the  form 
given  in  equation  (3),  in  which  X  and  Y  are  functions  of  x 
and  y,  and  which  may  therefore  be  written  in  the  form 

dW=<f>(!^)dx  +  y{r(a^\dy (3a), 

a  distinction  has  to  be  drawn,  which  is  of  great  importance, 
not  only  for  this  particular  case,  but  also  for  the  equations 
which  occur  later  on  in  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat  j  and 
which  will  therefore  be  examined  here  at  .some  length,  so 
that  in  future  it  will  be  sufficient  simply  to  refer  back  to  the 
present  passage.  ■;■ 

According  to  the  nature  of  the  functions  ^  (my)  and 
■\fr  (o^),  differential  equations  of  the  form  (3)  fall-iSto  two 
classes,  which  differ  widely  both  as  to  the  treatment  which 
they  require,  and  the  results  to  which  they  lead.    To  the 


ilATHEMATICAI/  INTRODUCllOU.  5 

first  class  belong  the  cases,  in  which,  the  fiinctions  X  and  Y 
fulfil  the  following  condition : 

dy      dx  '"" ""^  '' 

The  second  class  comprises  all  cases,  in  which  this  condition 
is  not  fulfilled. 

If  the  condition  (4)  is  fulfilled,  the  expression  on  the 
right-hand  side  of  equation  (3)  or  (3a)  becomes  immediately 
integrable ;  for  it  is  the  complete  differential  of  some  func- 
tion of  X  and  y,  in  which  these  may  be  treated  as  indepen- 
dent variables,  and  which  is  formed  from  the  equations 

dx    ,       '        dy 

Thus  we  obtain  at  once  an  equation  of  the  form 

w  =  F  {xy)  +  const (5). 

If  condition  (4)  is  not  fulfilled,  the  right-hand  side  of  the 
equation  is  not  integrable ;  and  it  follows  that  W  cannot  be 
expressed  as  a  function  of  x  and  y,  considered  as  independent 
variables.    For,  if  we  could  put  W=  Fiacy),  we  should  have 

^^dW^dF{xy) 
dib         dx     ' 

Y^dW^dFjxy) 
dy  dy     ' 

whence  it  follows  that 

dX  ^d'Fjxy) 
dy        dxdy    ' 

dY^d^Fjxy), 
dx        dydx 

But  since  with  a  function  of  two  independent  variables  the 
oxdisr  of  differentiation  is  immaterial,  we  may  put 

dxdy  dydx    ' 


6        ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

whence  it  follows  that-y-  =-5— j  «'e-  condition  (4)  is  fulfilled 

for  the  functions  X  and  Y;  which  is  contrary  to  the  assump- 
tion. 

In  this  case  then  the  integration  is  impossible,  so  long  as 
x  and  y  are  considered  as  independent  variables.  If  however 
we  assume  any  fixed  relation  to  hold  between  these  two 
quantities,  so  that  one  may  be  expressed  as  a  function  of  the 
other,  the  integration  again  becomes  possible.  For  if  we 
put 

/(^2/)  =  0 (6), 

in  which  f  expresses  any  function  whatever,  then  by  means 
of  this  equation  we  can  eliminate  one  of  the  variables  and 
its  differential  from  the  differential  equation.  (The  general 
form  in  which  equation  (6)  is  given  of  course  comprises  the 
special  case  in  which  one  of  the  variables  is  taken  as 
constant ;  its  differential  then  becomes  zero,  and  the  variable 
itSBlf  only  appears  as  part  of  the  constant  coefficient).  Sup- 
posing y  to  be  the  variable  eliminated,  the  equation  (.3) 
takes  the  form  dW=<^{x)  dx,  which  is  a  simple  differential 
equation,  and  gives  on  integration  an  equation  of  the  form 

w  =  F  {x)  ■\- comi (7). 

The  two  equations  (6)  and  (7)  may  thus  be  treated  as  form- 
ing together  a  solution  of  the  differential  equation.  As  the 
form  of  the  function  fixy)  may  be  anything  whatever,  it  is 
clear  that  the  number  of  solutions  thus  to  be  obtained  is 
infinite. 

The  form  of  equation  (7)  may  of  course  be  modified. 
Thus  if  we  had  expressed  x  in  terms  of  y  by  means  of  equa- 
tion (6);  and  then  eliminated  x  and  dx  from  the  differential 
equation,  this  latter  would  then  have  taken  the  form 

dW  =  <^,{y)dy, 

and  on  integrating  we  should  have  had  an  equation 

''^=■^1(2')+ const (7a3. 

This  same  equation  can  be  obtained  from  equation  (7)  by 
substituting  y  for  x  in  that  equation  by  means  of  equation  (6). 
Or,  instead  of  completely  eliminating  x  from  (7),  we  may 


MATHEMATICAL '  INTRODUCTION.  7 

prefer  a  partial  elimination.  For  if  the  function  F  (cc)  con- 
tains X  several  times  over  in  different  teriiis,  (and  if  this  does 
not  hold  in  the  original  form  of  the  equation,  it  can  be  easily 
introduced  into  it  by  writing  instead  of  x  an  expression  such 

as  (l  —  a)x  +  ax,  —^,  &c.)  then  it  is  possible  to  substitute 

y  for  X  in  some  of  these  expressions,  and  to  let  x  remain  in 
others.     The  equation  then  takes  the  form 

W=^F^Ilx,y)  + const (76), 

which  is  a  more  general  form,  embracing  the  other  two  as 
special  cases.  It  is  of  course  understood  that  the  three  equa^ 
tions  (7),  (7a),  (76),  each  of  which  has  no  meaning  except 
when  combined  with  equation  (6),  are  not  different  solutions, 
but  different  expressions  for  one  and  the  same  solution  of 
the  differential  equation. 

Instead  of  equation  (6),  we  may  also  employ,  to  integrate 
the  differential  equation  (3),  another  equation  of  less  simple 
form,  which  in  addition  to  the  two  variables  x  and  y  also, 
contains  W,  and  which  may  itself  be  a  differential  equation ; 
the  simpler  form  however  suffices  for  our  present  purpose, 
and  with  this  restriction  we  may  sum  up  the  results  of  this 
section  as  follows. 

When  the  condition  of  immediate  integrability,  expressed 
by  equation  (4),  is  fulfilled,  then  we  can  obtain  directly  an 
integral  equation  of  the  form : 

W=F{x,y)  + const (A). 

When  this  condition  is  not  fulfilled,  we  must  first  assume 
some  relation  between  the  variables,  in  order  to  make  inte- 
^ation  possible;  and  we  shall  thereby  obtain  a  system  of 
two  equations  of  the  following  form : 

/(*,2/)  =  0,                1  ,gv 

W=F{a;.,y)  + const.  \ ^^^' 

in  which  the  form  of  the  function  F  depends  not  only  on 
that  of  the  original  differential  equation,  but  also  on  that  of 
the  function/,  which  may  be  assumed  at  pleasure. 


8       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

§  i.  Geometrical  interpretation  of  the  foregoing  results, 
and  observations  on  partial  differential  coefficients. 

The  important  difference  between  the  results  in  the  two 
cases  mentioned  above  is  rendered  more  clear  by  treating 
them  geometrically.  In  so  doing  we  shall  for  the  sake  of 
simplicity  assume  that  the  function  F  {x,  y)  in  equation  (A) 
is  such  that  it  has  only  a  single  value  for  any  one  point  in 
the  plane  of  co-ordinates.  We  shall  also  assume  that  in  the 
movement  of  the  point  p  its  original  and  final  positions  are 
known,  and  given  by  the  co-ordinates  x^,  y^,  and  a;,,  y^  respec- 
tively. Then  in  the  first  case  we  can  find  an  expression  for 
the  work  done  by  the  effective  force  during  the  motion,: 
without  needing  to  know  the  actual  path  traversed.  For  it 
is  clear,  that  this  work  will  be  expressed,  according  to  con- 
dition {A)i  by  the  difference  F(x^p^  —  F(x„y„).  Thus,  while 
the  moving  point  may  pass  from  one  position  to  the  other 
by  very  different  paths,  the  amount  of  work  done  by  the.  force 
is  wholly  independent  of  these,  and  is  completely  known  aS 
soon  as  the  original  and  final  positions  are  given. 

In  the  second  case  it  is  otherwise.  In  the  system  of 
equations  (B),  which '  belongs  to  this  case,  the  first  equation 
must  be  treated  as  the  equation  to  a  curve ;  and  (since  the 
form  of  the  second  depends  upon  it)  the  relation  between 
them  may  be  geometrically  expressed  by  saying  that  the 
work  done  by  the  effective  force  during  the  motion  of  the 
point  p  can  only  be  determinedj  when  the  whole  of  the 
curve,  on  which  the  point  moves,  is  known.  If  the  original 
and  final  positions  are  given,  the  first  equation  must  indeed  • 
be  so  chosen,  that  the  curve  which  corresponds  to  it  may  pass 
through  those  two  points ;  but  the  number  of  such  possible 
curves  is  infinite,  and  accordingly,  in  spite  of  their  coinci- 
dence at  theii:  extremities,  they  will  give  an  infinite  number 
of  possible  quantities  of  "work  done  during  the  motion. 

If  we  assume  that  the  point  p  describes  a  closed  curve,  so 
that  the  final  and  initial  positions  coincide,  and  thus  the  co- 
ordinates x^,  y^  have  the  same  value  as  x„,  y^,  then  in  the 
first  case  the  total  work  done  is  equal  to  zero:  in  the  second 
case,  on  the  Other  hand,  it  need  not  equal  zero,  but  may  have 
any  value  positive  or  negative. 

The  case  here  examined  also  illustrates  the  fact  that  a 


.(8). 


MATHEMATICAL  INTBOBUCTION.  9^. 

quantity,  which  cannot  be  expressed  as  a  function  of  x  and  y 
(so  long  as  these  are  taken  as  independent  variables),,  may 
yet  have  partial  differential  coefficients  according  to  x  and  y, 
which  are  expressed  by  determinate-  functions  of  those  vari- 
ables. For  it  is  manifest  that,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the 
words,  the  components  X  and  Y  must  be  termed  the  partial 
differential  coefficients  of  the  work  W  according  to  x  and  y : 
smce,  when  x  increases  by  dx,  y  remaining  constant,  the, 
work  increases  by  Xdx ;  and  when  y  increases  by  dy,  x  re- 
maining constant,  the  work  increases  by  Ydy.  Now  whether 
TF  be  a  quantity  generally  expressible  as  a  function  of  x  and . 
y,  or  one  which  can  only  be  determined  on  knowing  the  path 
described  by  the  inoving  point,  we  may  always  employ  the 
ordinary  notation  for  the  partial  differential  coefficients  of  W, 
and  write 

Using  this  notation  we  may  also  write  the  condition  (4),  the 
fulfilment  or  non-fulfilment  of  which  causes  the  distinction 
between  the  two  modes  of  treating  the  differential  equation, 
in  the  following  form: 

d  fdW\  _  d  rdW\  ,g. 

dy\dx)     dx\dy  ) 

Thus  we  may  say  that  the  distinction  which  has  to  be' 
drawn  in  reference  to  the  quantity  W  depends  on  whether 

the  difference  t-(-t- I  —  -r-  (—7— I  is  dqual  to  zpro>  or  has 
dy\dx  J     dx\dy  J 

a  finite  value.  ,      - 

§  5.    Extension  of  the  above  to  three  dimensions. 

If  the  point  p  be  not  restricted  in  its  movement  to  one 
plane,  but  left  free  in  space,  we  then  obtain  for  the  element 
of  work  an  expression  very  similar  to  that  given  in  equation 
(3).  Let  a,  b,  c  be  the  cosines  of  the  angles  which  the  direc- 
tion of  the  force  P>  acting  on  ..the,  point,  makes  with  three 


10       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

rectangular  axes  of  co-ordinates ;  then  the  three  components 
X,  Y,  Z  of  this  force  will  be  given  by  the  equations 

X=aF,     Y=hP,    Z=.cP. 

Again,  let  a,  A  7  be  the  cosines  of  the  angles,  which  the 
element  of  space  ds  makes  with  the  axes ;  then  the  three, 
projections  dx,  dy,  dz  of  this  element  on  those  axes  are  given 
by  the  equations 

dx  =  ads,    dy  =  ^ds,    ds  =  'yds. 

Hence  we  have 

Xdx  +  Ydy  +  Zdz  =  {pa.  +  &/3  +  cy)  Fds. 

But  if  ^  be  the  angle  between  the  direction  of  P  and  ds^ 
then 

aai  +  &;8  +  cy  =  cos  ^: 

hence  Xdx  +  Ydry  +  Zdz  =  cos(j>x  Pds. 

Comparing  this  with  equation  (2),  we  obtain 

dW  =  Xdx+Ydy  +  Zdz (10). 

This  is  the  differential  equation  for  determining  the  work 
done.  The  quantities  X,  Y,  Z  may  be  any  functions  what- 
ever of  the  co-ordinates  oc,y,z;  since  whatever  may  be  the 
values  of  these  three  components  at  different  points  in  space, 
a  resultant  force  P  may  always  be  derived  from  them. 

In  treating  this  equation,  we  must  first  consider  the  fol- 
lowing three  conditions : 

dX^dY     dY^dZ     dZ^dX 

dy      dx  ^     dz      dy '     dx     dz ^    '^' 

and  must  enquire  whether  or  not  the  functions  X,   Y,  Z 
satisfy  them. 

If  these  three  conditions  are  satisfied,  then  the  expression 
on  the  right-hand  side  of  (11)  is  the  complete  differential  of 
a  function  of  x,  y,  z,  in  which  these  may  all  be  treated  as 
independent  variables.  The  integration  may  therefore  be  at 
once  effected,  and  we  obtain  an  equation  of  the  form 

TF  =  P(a!^s)  + const (12). 


MATHEMATICAL  INTEOBUCTION.  11 

If  we  now  conceive  the  point  j>  to  move  from  a  given 
initial  position  (x^,  y^,  z^  to  a  given  final  position  (ajj,  y^,  z^ 
the  work  done  by  the  force  during  the  motion  will  be  repre- 
sented by 

If  then  we  suppose  F{x,  y,  z)  to  be  such  that  it  has  only  a 
single  value  for  any  one  point  in  space,  the  work  will  be 
completely  determined  by  the  original  and  final  positions; 
and  it  follows  that  the  work  done  by  the  force  is  always  the 
same,  whatever  path  may  have  been  followed  by  the  point 
in  passing  from  one  position  to  the  other. 

If  the  three  conditions  (1)  are  not  satisfied,  the  integra- 
tion cannot  be  effected  in  the  same  general  manner.  If, 
however,  the  path  be  known  in  which  the  motion  takes  place, 
the  integration  becomes  thereby  possible.  If  in  this  case 
two  points  are  given  as  the  original  and  final  positions,  and 
various  curves  are  conceived  as  drawn  between  these  points, 
along  any  of  which  the  point  p  may  move,  then  for  each  of 
these  paths  we  may  obtain  a  determinate  value  for  the  work 
dpne;  but  the  values  corresponding  to  these  different  paths 
need  not  be  equal,  as  in  the  first  case,  but  on  the  contrary 
are  in  general,  different. 

§  6.     OniheErgal. 

In  those  cases  in  which  equation  (12)  holds,  or  the  work 
done  can  be  simply  expressed  as  a  function  of  the  co-ordirtates, 
this  function  plays  a  very  important  part  in  our  calculations. 
Hamilton  gave  to  it  the  special  name  of  "force  function";  a 
name  applicable  also  to  the  more  general  case  where,  instead 
of  a  single  moving  point,  any  number  of  such  points  are 
considered,  and  where  the  condition  is  fulfilled  that  the  work 
done  depends  only  on  the  position  of  the  points.  In  the 
later  and  more  extended  investigations  with  regard  to  the 
quantities  which  are  expressed  by  this  function,  it  has  become 
needful  to  introduce  a  special  name  for  the  negative  value  of 
the  function,  or  in  other  words  for  that  quantity,  the  svh- 
traction  of  which  gives  the  work  performed;  and  Rankine 
proposed  for  this  the  term  'potential  energy.'  This  name 
sets  forth  very  clearly  the  character  of  the  quantity ;  but  it 


1'2      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OF  HEAT. 

is  somewliat  long,  and  the  author  has  ventured  to  propose 
in  its  place  the  term  "  Ergal."  * 

Among  the  cases  in  which  the  force  acting  on  a  point  has 
an  Ergal,  the  most  prominent  is  that  in  which  the  force 
originates  in  attractions  or  repulsions^  exerted  on  the  moving 
point  from  fixed  points,  and  the  value  of  which  depends  only 
on  the  distance ;  in  other  words  the  case  ia  which  the  force 
may  be  classed  as  a  central  force.  Let  us  take  as  centre  of 
force  a  fixed,  point  it,  with  co-ordinates  ^,  vj,  §",  and  let  p  be 
its  distance  from  the  moving  point  p,  so  that 

p=J{^-'cr+{v-yr+{^-^r- as)- 

Let  us  express  the  force  which  tt  exerts  on  p  by  <^'  {p),  in 
which  a  positive  value  of  the  function  expresses  attraction, 
and  a  negative  value  repulsion ;  we  then  have  for  the  com- 
ponents of  the  force  the  expressions . 

^=fW^;   F=.^'(p)^.  ^=^'(p)i:rf. 

r  r  r 

But  by  (13)  ^  =  -  ^-^^ :  hence  X <i>' (p)%,  and  simi- 
larly for  the  other  two  axes.  If  ^  (p)  be  a  function  such 
that 

<l>(p)=j<}>'{p)dp.... .(14). 

we  may  write  the  last  equation  thus : 

j-_     dj>{p)dp  _     (i4>{p) . 

dp     dx  dx     ^    '' 

and  similarly        F  =  -^,   ^=-^ (15a).    [ 

Hence  we  have 

.Xdx+Ydy  +  Zd,  =  -]^^dx  +  '^dy  +  ^ds']. 

But,  since  in  the  expression  for  p  given  in  equation  (13)  the 
quantities  x,  y,  z  are  the  only  variables,  and  ^  (p)  may  there- 
fore be  treated  as  a  function  of  those  three  quantities,  the 


ItitHEMATlOAt  INTRODUCTION,'  1'3 

expression  in  brackets  forms  a  perJFect  differential,  and  we 
may  write : 

Xdx+Ydy  +  Zdz  =  -d<f>{p) (16). 

The  element  of  work  is  thus  given  by  the  negative  differen- 
tial of  ^  (p) ;  whence  it  follows  that  6  (p)  is  in  this  case  the 
£rgal. 

Again,  instead  of  a  single  fixed  point,  we  may  have  any 
number  of  fixed  points  tTj,  tt^,  w„  &c.,  the  distances  of  which 
from  p^  are  p^,  p^,  p^.  Sec,  and  which  exert  on  it  forces 
^'(P»)>  ^'W.  0'(Pj).  &c.  Then  if,  as  in  equation  (14),  we  as- 
sume^j(jo),  <^^{p),  4)^(p),  &c,  to  be  the  integrals  of  the  above 
Junctions,  we  obtain,  exactly  as  in  equation  (15), 

x^.    <^'^i(pi)    ^M    #.,(p») 

dx  doa  dsB 

^— ^S^W (17). 

Similarly    r=-|2^(p),  Z=-^^t^{p) (I7a), 

whence  Xdx  +  Ydy  +  Zdz  =  -  d%  <^  {p) (18). 

Thus  the  sum  S  ^{p)  is  here  the  Ergal. 

§  7.     General  Extension  of  the  foregoing. 

Hitherto  we  have  only  considered  a  single  moving  point ; 
we  will  now  extend  the  method  to  comprise  a  system  com- 
posed of  any  number  of  moving  points,  which  are  in  part 
acted  on  by  external  forces,  and  in  part  act  mutually  on  each 
other. 

If  this  whole  system  makes  an  indefinitely  small  move- 
ment, the  forces  acting  on  any  One  point,  which  forces  we 
may  conceive  as  combined  into  a  single  resultant,  will  per- 
form a  quantity  of  work  which  may  be  represented  by  the 
expression  {Xdx  +  Ydy  +  Zdz),    Hence  the  sum  of  all  the 


14      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 

work  done  by  all  the  forces  acting  in  the  system  may  be 
represented  by  an  expression  of  the  form 

t{Xdx-^  Ydy  +  Zdz), 

in  which  the  summation  extends  to  all  the  moving  points. 
This  complex  expression,  like  the  simpler  one  treated 
above,  may  have  under  certain  circumstances  the  important 
peculiarity  that  it  is  the  complete  differential  of  some  func- 
tion of  the  co-ordinates  of  all  the  moving  points ;  in  which 
case  we  call  this  function,  taken  negatively,  the  Ergal  of  the 
whole  system.  It  follows  from  this  that  in  a  finite  move- 
ment of  the  system  the  total  work  done  is  simply  equal  to 
the  difference  between  the  initial  and  final  values  of  the 
Ergal;  and  therefore  (assuming  that  the  function  which, 
represents  the  Ergal  is  such  as  to  have  only  one  value  for  one 
position  of  the  points)  the  work  done  is  completely  deter- 
mined by  the  initial  and  final  positions  of  the  points,  without 
its  being  needful  to  know  the  paths,  by  which  these  have 
moved  from  one  position  to  the  other. 

This  state  of  things,  which,  it  is  obvious,  simplifies  greatly 
the  determination  of  the  work  done,  occurs  when  all  the 
forces  acting  in  the  system  are  central  forces,  which  either 
act  upon  the  moving  points  from  fixed  points,  or  are  actions 
between  the  moving  points  themselves. 

First,  as  regards  central  forces  acting  from  fixed  points, 
we  have  already  discussed  their  effect  for  a  single  moving 
point ;  and  this  discussion  will  extend  also  to  the  motion  of 
the  whole  system  of  points,  since  the  quantity  of  work  done 
in  the  motion  of  a  number  of  points  is  simply  equal  to  the 
sum  of  the  quantities  of  work  done  in  the  motion  of  each 
several  point.  We  can  therefore  express  the  part  of  the 
Ergal  relating  to  the  action  of  the  fixed  points,  as  before,  by 
2  (^  (p),  if  we  only  give  such  an  extension  to  the  summation, 
that  it  shall  comprise  not  only  as  many  terms  as  there  are 
fixed  points,  but  as  many  terms  as  there  are  combinations  of 
one  fixed  and  one  moving  point. 

Next  as  regards  the  forces  acting  between  the  moving 
points  themselves,  we  will  for  the  present  consider  only  two 
points  p  and  p\  ■w^Hh  co-ordinates  co,  y,  z,  and  x,  y',  z\ 


MATHEMATICAL  INTKODXJCTION,  15 

respectively.  If  r  be  tlie  distance  between  these  points,  we 
have 

r  =  J{x'-a=y  +  (y'-yr+[,'-zy (19). 

We  may  denote  the  force  which  the  points  exert  on  each 
other  by/'(r),  a  positive  value  being  used  for  attraction,  and 
a  negative  for  repulsion. 

Then  the  components  of  the  force  which  the  point  p 
exerts  in  this  mutual  action  are 


/W^,   /'«^,   fir) 


and  the  components  of  the  opposite  force  exerted  by  p'  are 
/'W^',    /'W^'.    /'(r)i^'. 

But  by  (19),  differentiating 

dr  _     x'  —  X  ^   dr  _     x  —  x^ 

dx  r     '   dx'  r     ' 

so  that  the  components  of  force  in  the  direction  of  x  may 
also  be  written 

and  if /(r)  be  a  function  such  that 

f(r)=jf'{r)dr (20), 

the  foregoing  may  also  be  written 

-dfjr),   -df(r)^ 
dx     '       dd 

Similarly  the  components  in  the  direction  of  y  may  be 
written 

-t?f(r).  :^/(r). 

dy     '       dy'     ' 
and  those  in  the  direction  of  z 

-df{r)^  -df(r) 


16       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 

That  part  of  the  total  work  done  in  the  indefinitely  small 
motion  of  the  two  points,  which  is  due  to  the  two  opposite 
foTcea  arising  from  their  mutual  ^,ction,  may  therefore  be 
expressed  as  follows : 

dz         J 

But  as  r  depends  only  on  the  six  quantities  x^  ,y,  z,  oc',  y,  z, 
and  f{r)  can  therefore  be  a  function  of  these  six  quantities 
only,  the  expression  in  brackets  is  a  perfect  differential,  and 
the  work  done,  as  far  as  concerns  the  mutual  action  between 
the  two  points,  may  be  simply  expressed  by  tl)e  function 

In  the  same  way  may  be  expressed  the  work  due  to  the" 
mutual  action  of  every  other  pair  of  points ;  and  the  total 
work  done  by  all  the  forces  which  the  points  exert  among 
themselves  is  expressed  by  the  algebraical  suni 

-rf/(r)-J/(/)-d/(0-...; 

or  as  it  may  be  otherwise  written, 

-<^[/W+/(^')+/(0  +  -]  or  -dS/W; 
in  which  the  summation  must  comprise  as  many  terms  as 
there  are  combinations  of  moving  points,  two  and  two.     This 
sum  S/(r)  is  then  the  part  of  the  Ergal  relating  to  the 
mutual  and  opposite  actions  of  all  the  moving  points. 

If  we  now  finally  add  the  two  kinds  of  forces  together, 
we  obtain,  for  the  .to.tal  work  done  in  the  indefinitely  small 
motion  of  the  system  of  points,  the  equation 

2  {Xdx  +  Ydy + Zdz)  =-dt(]>(p)^  dtfir) 

=  ^d[tcl>{p)+-ZAr)] (21), 

whence  it  foUows  that  the  quantity  %<f>{p)  +  '^f{r)  is  the 
Ergal  of  the  whole  of  the  forces. acting  together  in  ^he  systeni,. 
The  assumption  lying  at  the  root  of  the  foregoing  analy- 
sis, viz.  that  central  forces  are  the  only  ones  acting,  is  of 
course  only  one  among  all  .the  assumptions  mathematically 


MATHEMATICAL  INTEODUCTION.  17 

possible  as  to  the  forces;  but  it  forms  a  case  of  peculiar 
importance,  inasmuch  as  all  the  forces  which  occur  in  nature 
may  apparently  be  classed  as  central  forces. 

§  8.    Relation  between  Work  and  Vis  Viva. 

Hitherto  we  have  only  considered  the  forces  which  act  on 
the  points,  and  the  change  in  position  of  the  points  them- 
selves ;  their  masses  and  their  velocities  have  been  left  out 
of  account.     We  wiU  now  take  these  also  into  consideration. 

The  equations  of  motion  for  a  freely  moving  point  of 
mass  m  are  well  known  to  be  as  follows : 

If  we  multiply  these  equations  respectively  by 

dx  7,    dy  ,^   dz  ,  • 
dt^''  dt^''  It^'' 

and  then  add,  we  obtain 

The  left-hand  side  of  this  equatioii  may  be  transformed 
into 

m  d 


2dt 


m  <%'<%' 


dt. 


or,  if  V  be  the  velocity  of  the  point, 

^i(p.dt=%ldt=d(^v^ 

2    dt  dt  V2    y 

and  the  equation  becomes 

■  <'(f«')=(^S+4!+4)* '^')- 

If,  instead  of  a  single  freely  moving  point,  a  whole  system 
of  freely  moving  points  is  considered,  we  shall  have  for  every 
n  2 


18       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

point  a  similar  equation  to,  the  above;   and  by  summation 
we  shall  obtain  the  following:- 

<ffi5^.2(x|+7|+43i. <^«- 

Now  the  quantity  2  n-t)'  is*  the  vis  viva  of  the  whole  system 

of  points.    If  we  take  a  simple  expression  for  the  vis  viva, 
and  put 

T=-Z''^v' (26), 

then  the  equation  becomes 

..r=2(z|  +  r|+zg)c^* (27). 

But  the  right-hand  side  of  this  equation  is  the  expression 
for  the  work  done  during  the  time  dt.  Integrate  the  equa- 
tion from  an  initial  time  i„  to  a  time  t,  and  call  T^  the  vis 
viva  at  time  t^:  then  the  resulting  equation  is 

''-^•-/>(^S+4!+^S)* (^«'' 

the  meaning  of  which  may  be  expressed  as  follows: 

The  Wo^h  done  during  any  time  hy  the  forces  acting  upon 
a  system  is  equal  to  the  increase  of  the  Yis  Viva  of  the  system 
during  the  same  time. 

In  this  expression  a  diminution  of  Vis  Viva  is  of  course 
treated  as  a  negative  increase. 

It  was  assumed  at  the  commencement  that  all  the  points 
were  moving  freely.  It  may,  however,  happen  that  the  poihts 
are  subjected  to  certain  constraints  in  reference  to  their 
motion.  They  may  be  so  connected  with  each  other  that 
the  motion  of  one  point  shall  in  part  determine  the  .motion 
of  others ;  or  there  may  be  external  constraints,  as  for  in- 
stance, if  one  of  the  points  is  compelled  to  move  in  a  given 
fixed  plane,  or  on  a  given  fixed  curve,  whence  it  will  natur- 

*  Translator's  Note.  The  vis  viva  of  a  particle  is  here  defined  as  half 
the  mass  multiplied  by  the  square  of  the  velocity,  and  not  the  whole  mass, 
as  was  formerly  the  custom. 


MATHEMATICAL  INTEODUCTION.  19 

ally  follow  that  all  those  points,  which  are  in  any  connection 
with  it,  will  also  be  to  some  extent  constrained  in  their 
motion. 

If  these  conditions  of  constraint  can  be  expressed  by 
equations  which  contain  only  the  co-ordinates  of  the  points, 
it  may  be  proved,  by  methods  which  we  will  not  here  con- 
sider more  closely,  that  the  reactions,  which  are  implicitly 
comprised  in  these  conditions,  perform  no  work  whatever 
during  the  motion  of  the  points ;  and  therefore  the  principle 
given  above,  as  expressing  the  relation  between  Vis  Viva  and 
Work  done,  is  true  for  constrained,  as  well  as  for  free  motion. 
It  is  called  the  Principle  of  the  Equivalence  of  Work  and 
Vis  Viva. 


I'M- 


§  9.     On  Energy. 

In  equation  (28),  the  work  done  in  the  time  from  t^  to  t 
is  expressed  by 

in  which  t  is  considered  as  the  only  independent  variable, 
and  the  co-ordinates  of  the  points  and  the  components  of  the 
forces  are  taken  as  functions  of  time  only.  If  these  functions 
are  known  (for  which  it  is-requisite  that  we  should  know  the 
whole  course  of  the  motion  of  all  the  points),  then  the  inte- 
gration is  always  possible,  and  the  work  done  can  also  be 
determined  as  a  function  of  the  time. 

Cases  however  occur,  as  we  have  seen  above,  in  which  it 
is  not  necessary  to  express  all  the  quantities  as  functions  of 
one  variable,  but  where  the  integration  may  still  be  effected, 
by  writing  the  differential  in  the  form  S  (Xdx  +  l^y  -t-  Zdz), 
and  considering  the  co-ordinates  therein  as  independent  vari- 
ables. For  this  it  is  necessary  that  this  expression  should 
be  a  perfect  differential  of  some  function  of  the  co-ordinates, 
or  in  other  words  the  forces  acting  on  the  system  must  have 
an  Ergal.  This  Efgal,  which  is  the  negative  value  of  the 
above,  function,  we  will  denote  by  a  single  letter.  The  letter 
U  is  generally  chosen  for  this  purpose  in  works  on  Me- 
chanics: but  in  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat  that  letter 
is  needed  to  express  another  quantity,  which  will  enter  as 

2—2 


20  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  iHEAT. 

largely  into  the  discussion;   we  will  therefore  denote  the 
Ergal  by  J.     Hence  we  put: 

%(X.Ax^Ydy-^Ziz)  =  -dJ...... (29), 

whence  if  J^  be  the  value  of  the  Ergal  at  time  f„i  we  have: 


'0 


/, 


^{Xdx^Ydy^Zdz)=J,-J. (30), 

which  expresses  that  the  work  done  in  any  time  is  equal  to 
the  decrease  in  the  Ergal, 

If  we  substitute  J^  —  J  for  the  integral  in  equation  (28), 
we  have: 

T-T,  =  J,-Jov  T+J=T,  +  J, (31); 

whence  we  have  the  following  principle:  The  sum  of  the  Vis 
Viva  arid  of  the  Ergal  remains  constant  during  the  motion. 
This  sum,  which  we  will  denote  by  the  letter  TJ,  so  that 

U=T  +  J. (32), 

is  called  tbe  Energy  of  the  system ;  so  that  the  above  prin- 
ciple may  be.  more  shortly  expressed  by  saying:  The  Energy 
remains  constant  during  the  motion.  This  principle,  which  in 
recent  times  has  received  a  much  more  extended  application 
than  formerly,  and  now  forms  one  of  the  chief  foundations  of 
the  whole  structure  of  physical  philosophy,  is  known  by  the 
name  of  The  Principle  of  the  Conservation  of  Energy. 


(21) 


CHAPTER  I. 

FIEST    MAIX    PRINCIPLE    OF   THE    MECHANICAL    THEORY    OF 

HEAT,   OR    PRINCIPLE    OF   THE    EQUIVALENCE  OF  HEAT 

AND  WORK. 

■  §  1,    Nature  of  Heat. 

Until  recently  it  M'as  the  generally  accepted  view  that 
Heat  was  a  special  substance,  which  was  present  in  bodies  in 
greater  or  less  quantity,  and  which  produced  thereby  their 
higher  or  lower  temperature;  which  was  also  sent  forth 
from  bodies,  and  in  that  case  passed  with  immense  speed 
through  empty  space  and  through  such  cavities  as  ponder- 
able bodies  contain,  in  the  form  of  what  is  called  radiant 
heat.  In  later  days  has  arisen  the  other  view  that  Heat  is 
in  reality  a  mode  of  motion.  According  to  this  view,  the 
heat  found  in  bodies  and  determining  their  temperature  is 
treated  as  being  a  motion  of  their  ponderable  atoms,  in 
which  motion  the  ether  existing  within  the  bodies  may  also 
participate ;  and  radiant  heat  is  looked  upon  as  an  undulatory 
motion  propagated  in  that  ether. 

It  is  not  proposed  here  to  set  forth  the  facts,  experiments, 
and  inferences,  through  which  men  have  been  brought  to 
this  altered  view  on  the  subject ;  this  would  entail  a  refer- 
ence here  to  much  which  may  be  better  described  in  its  own 
place  during  the  course  of  the  book.  The  conformity  with 
experience  of  the  results  deduced  from  this  new  theory  will 
probably  serve  better  than  anything  else  to  establish  the 
foundations  of  the  theory  itself 

We  will  therefore  start  with  the  assumption  that  Heat 
consists  in  a  motion  of  the  ultimate  particles  of  bodies  and 
of  ether,  and  that  the  quantity  of  heat  is  a  measure  of  the 
Vis  Viva  of  this  motion.    The  nature  of  this  motion  we 


22  ox  t:he  mechanical  theoey  of  heat. 

shall  not  attempt  to  determine,  but  shall  merely  apply  to 
Heat  the  principle  of  the  equivalence  of  Vis  Viva  and  Work, 
■which  applies  to  motion  of  every  kind ;  and  thus  establish 
a  principle  which  may  be  called  the  first  main  Principle  of 
the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat. 

§  2.    Positive  and  negative  values  of  Mechanical  Work. 

In  §  1  of  the  Introduction  the  meOhanical  work  done  in 
the  movement  of  a  point  under  the  action  of.  a  force  was 
defined  to  be  The  product  of  the  distance  moved  through  and 
of  the  component  of  the  force  resolved  in  the  direction  of 
motion.  The  work  is  thus  positive  if  the  component  of 
force  in  the  line  of  motion  lies  on  the  same  side  of  the 
initial  point  as  the  element  of  motion,  and  negative  if  it  falls 
on  the  opposite  side.  From  this  definition  of  the  positive 
sign  of  mechanical  work  follows  the  principle  of  the  equiva- 
lence of  Vis  Viva  and  Work,  viz.  The  increase  in  the  Vis 
Viya  is  equal  to  the  work  done,  or  equal  to  the  increase  in 
total  work. 

The  question  may  also  be  looked  at  from  another  point 
of  view.  If  a  material  point  has  once  been  set  in  motion,  it 
can  continue  this  movement,  on  account  of  its  momentum, 
even  if  the  force  acting  on  it  tends  in  a  direction  opposite  to 
that  of  the  motion;  though  its  velocity,  and  therewith  its 
Vis  Viva,  will  of  course  be  diminishing  all-  the  time.  A 
material  point  acted  on  by  gravity  for  example,  if  it  has 
received  an  upward  impulse,  can  continue  to  move  against 
the  force  of  gravity,  although  the  latter  is  continually 
diminishing  the  velocity  given  by  the  impulse.  In  such  a 
case  the  work,  if  considered  as  work  done  by  the  force,  is 
negative.  Conversely  however ,  we  may  reckon  work  as 
positive  in  cases  where  a  force  is  overcome  by  the  momen* 
tum  of  a  previously  acquired  motion,  as  negative  in  cases 
where  the  point  follows  the  direction  of  the  force.  Applying 
the  form  of  expression  introduced  in  §  1  of  the  Introduction, 
in  which  the  distinction  between  the  two  opposite  directions 
of  the  component  of  force  is  indicated  by  different  words,  we 
may  express  the  foregoing  more  simply  as  follows  :  we  may 
determine  that  not  the  work  done,  but  the  work  destroyed, 
by  a  force  shall  be  reckoned  as  positive. 

On  this  method  of  denoting  work  done,  the  principle  of 


EQUIVALENCE  OF  HEAT  AND  WORK.  23 

the  equivalence  of  Vis  Viva  and  Work  takes  the  following 
form :  The  decrease  in  ike  Vis  Viva  is  equal  to  the  increase  in 
the  Work  done,  or  The  sum  of  the  Vis  Viva  and  Work  done  is 
constant.  This  latter  form  will  be  found. very  convenient  in 
what  follows. 

In  the  case  of  such  forces  as  have  an  Ergal,  the  meaning 
of  that  quantity  was  defined  (in  §  6  of  the  Introdi^oiiqg)  in 
such  a  manner  that  we  must  say,  '  The  Work  d^e^is  'equal 
to  the  decrease  in  the  Ergal.'  If  we  use  the  method  of  denot- 
ing work  JMt  ^described,  we  must  say  on  the  contrary,  'The 
work  dop?^is  equal  to  the  increase  in  the  Ergal;'-  and  if  the 
constant  occurring  as  one  term  of  the  Ergal  be  determined 
in  a  particular  way,  we  may  then  regard  the  Ergal  as  simply 
an  expression  for.  the  work  done. 

§  3.     Expression  for  the  first  Fundamental  Principle. 

Having  fixed  as  above  what  is  to  be  the  positive  sign  for 
work  done,  we  may  now  state  as  follows  the  first  main 
Principle  of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat. 

In  all  cases  where  work  is  produced  by  heat,  a  quantity  of 
heat  is  consumed  proportional  to  the  work  done;  and  inversely, 
by  the  expenditure  of  the  same  amount  of  work  tfte  same 
quantity  of  heat  m,ay  be  produced. 

This  follows,  on  the  mechanical  conception  of  heat,  from 
the  equivalence  of  Vis  Viva  and  Work,  and  is  named  The 
Principle  of  the  Equivalence  of  Heat  and  Work. 

If  heat  is  consumed,  and  work  thereby  produced,  we  may 
say  that  heat  has  transformed  itself  into  work ;  and  con- 
versely, if  work  is  expended  and  heat  thereby  produced,  we 
may  say  that  work  has  transformed  itself  into  heat.  Using 
this  mode  of  expression,  the  foregoing  principle  takes  the 
following  form :  Work  may  transform  itself  into  heat,  and  heat 
conversely  into  work,  the  quantity  of  the  one  bearing  always  a 
fixed  proportion  to  that  of  the  other. 

This  principle  is  established  by  means  of  many  pheno-' 
mena  which  have  been  long  recognized,  and  of  late  years 
has  been  confirmed  by  so  many  experiments  of  different 
kinds,  that  we  may  accept  it,  apart  from  the  circumstance  of 
its  forming  a  special  case  of  the  general  mechanical  principle 
of  the  Conservation  of  Energy,  as  being  a  principle  directly 
derived  from  experience  and,  observation. 


24       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

§  '4.    Numerical  Relation  between  Heat  and  Work. 

While  the  mechanicd,!  principle  asserts  that  the  changes 
in  the  Vis  Viva  and  in  the  corresponding  Work  done  are 
actually  equal  to  each  other,  the  principle  which  expresses 
the  relation  between  Heat  and  Work  is  one  of  Proportion 
only.  The  reason  is  that  heat  and  work  are  not  measured 
on  the  same  scale.  Work  is  measured  by  the  mechanical 
imit  of  the  kilogramme tre,  whilst  the  unit  of  heat,  chosen 
for  convenience  of  measurement,  is  That  amount  of  heat 
which  is  required  to  raise  one  kilogram  of  water  from  0°  to 
1"  (Centigrade).  Hence  the  relation , existing  between  heat 
and  work  can  be  one  of  proportion  only,  and  the  numerical 
value  must  be  specially  determined. 

If  this  numerical  value  is  so  chosen  as  to  give  the  work 
corresponding  to  an  unit  of  heat,  it  is  called  the  Mechanical 
Equivalent  of  Heat ;  if  on  the  contrary  it  gives  the  heat 
corresponding,  to  an  unit  of  work,  it  is  called  the  Thermal 
Equivalent  of  Work.     We  shall  denote  the  former  by  E,  and 

the  latter  by  -^ . 

The  determination  of  this  numerical  value  is  effected  in 
different  ways.  It  has  sometimes  been  deduced  from  already 
existing  data,  as  was  first  done  on  correct  principles  by 
.  Mayer  (whose  method  will  be  further  explained  hereafter), 
although,  from  the  imperfection  of  the  then  existing  data,  his 
result  must  be  admitted  Hot  to  have  been  very  exact.  At 
other  times  it  has  been  sought  to  determine  the  number  by 
experiments  specially  made  with  that  view.  To  the  dis- 
tinguished English  physicist  Joule  must  be  assigned  the 
credit  cf  having  established  this  value  with  the  greatest  cir- 
cumspection and  care.  Some  of  his  experiments,  as  well  as 
•determinations  carried  out  at  a  later  date  by  others,  will 
more  properly  find  their  place  after  the  development  of  the 
theory ;  and  we  will  here  confine  ourselves  to  stating  those  of 
Joule's  experiments  which  are  the  most  readily  understood, 
and  at  the  same  time  the  most  certain  as  to  their  results. 

Joule  measured,  under  various  circumstances,  the  heat 
generated  by  friction,  and  compared  it  with  the  work  con- 
sumed in  producing  the  friction,  for  which  purpose  he 
employed  descending  weights.     As  accounts  of  these  experi- 


EQUIVALENCE  OP  HEAT  AND  WORK.  25 

ments  are  given  in  many  books,  they  need  not  here  be 
described ;  and  it  will  suffice  to  state  the  results  as  given  in 
his  paper,  published  in  the  Phil.  Trans.,  for  1850. 

In  the  first  series  of  experiments,  a  very  extensive  one, 
water  was  agitated  in  a  vessel  by  means  of  a  revolving  paddle 
wheel,  which  was  so  arranged  that  the  whole  quantity  of 
water  could  not  be  brought  into  an  equal  state  of  rotation 
throughout,  but  the  water,  after  being  set  in  motion,  was 
continually  checked  by  striking  against  fixed  blades,  which 
occasioned  numerous  eddies,  and  so  produced  a  large  amount 
of  friction.  The  result,  expressed  in  English  measures^  is 
that  in  order  to  produce  an  amount  of  heat  which  will  raise 
1  pound  of  water  through  1  degree  Fahrenheit,  an  amount 
of  work  equal  to  772'695  foot-pounds  must  be  consumed. 
In  two  other  series  of  experiments  quicksilver  was  agitated 
in  the  same  way,  and  gave  a  result  of  774'083  foot-pounds. 
Lastly,  in  two  series  of  experiments  pieces  of  cast  iron  were 
rubbed  against  each  other  under  quicksilver,  by  which  the 
heat  given  out  was  absorbed.  The  result  was  774'987  foot-* 
pounds. 

Of  all  his  results  Joule  considered  those  given  by  water 
as  the  most  accurate;  and  as  he  thought  that  even  this 
figure  should  be  slightly  reduced,  to  allow  for  the  sound  pro- 
duced by  the  motion,  he  finally  gave  772.  foot-pounds  as  the 
most  probable  value  for  the  number  sought. 

Transforming  this  to  French  measures  we  obtain  the 
result  that.  To  produce  the  quantity  of  heat  required  to  raise  1 
kiiogramme  of  water  through  1  degree  Centigrade,  work  must  be 
consumed  to  the  amount  o/'4!23'55  kilogrammetres.  This  appears 
to  be  the  most  trustworthy  value  among  those  hitherto 
determined,  and  accordingly  we  shall  henceforward  use  it  as 
the  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat,  and  write 

J5=423-55 (1). 

In  most  of  our  calculations  it  will  be  sufficiently  accurate 
to  use  the  even  number  424. 

§  5.     The  Mechanical  Unit  of  Heat. 

Having  established  the  principle  of  the  equivalence  of 
Heat  and  Work,  in  consequence  of  which  these  two  may  be 


26       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

opposed  to  each  other  in  the  same  expression,  we  are  often 
in  the  position  of  having  to  sum  up  quantities,  in  which 
heat  and  work  enter  as  terms  to  be  added  together.  As, 
however,  heat  and  work  are  measured  in  different  ways,  we 
cannot  in  such  a  case  say  simply  that  the  quantity  is  the 
sum  of  the  work  and  the  heat,  but  either  that  it  is  the  sum 
of  the  heat  and  of  the  heat-equivalent  of  the  work,  or  the  sum 
of  the  work  and  of  the  work^equivalent  of  the  heat.  On 
account  of  this  inconvenience  Rankine  proposed  to  employ  a 
different  unit  for  heat,  viz.  that  amount  of  heat  which  is 
equivalent  to  an  unit  of  work.  This  unit  may  be  called  simply 
the  Mechanical  Unit  of  Heat.  There  is  an  obstacle  to  its 
general  introduction  in  the  circumstance  that  the  unit  of 
heat  hitherto  used  is  a  quantity  which  is  closely  connected 
with  the  ordinary  calorimetric  methods  (which  mainly 
depend  on  the  heating  of  water),  so  that  the  reductions 
required  are  slight,  and  rest  on  measurements  of  the  most 
reliable  character ;  while  the  mechanical  unit,  besides  need- 
ing the  same  reductions,  also  requires  the  mechanical 
equivalent  of  heat  to  be  known,  a  requirement  as  yet  only 
approximately  fulfilled.  At  the  same  time,  in  the  theoretical 
development  of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat,  in  which  the 
relation  between  heat  and  work  often  occurs,  the  method  of 
expressing  heat  in  mechanical  units  effects  siich  important 
simplifications,  that  the  author  has  felt  himself  bound  to 
drop  his  former  objections  to  this  method,  on  the  occasion  of 
the  present  more  connected  exposition  of  that  theory.  Thus 
in  what  follows,  unless  the  contrary  is  expressly  stated,  it  will 
be  always  understood  that  heat  is  expressed  in  mechanical 
units. 

On  this  system  of  measurement  the  above  mentioned 
first  main  Principle  of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat  takes 
a  yet  more  precise  form,  since  we  may  say  that  heat  and  its 
corresponding  work  'are  not  merely  proportional,  but  equal  to 
each  other. 

If  later  on  it  is  desired  to  convert  a  quantity  of  heat 
expressed  in  mechanical  units  back  again  to  ordinary  heat 
units,  all  that  wUl  be  necessary  is  to  divide  the  number 
given  in  mechanical  units  by  H,  the  mechanical  equivalent  of 
heat. 


EQUIVALENCE  OF  HEAT  AND  WOEK.        27 

§  6.    Develc^ment  of  the  Jtrst  main  Principle. 

Let  any  body  whatever  be  given,  and  let  its,  condition  as 
to  temperature,  volume,  &c.  be  assumed  to  be  known.  If  an 
indefinitely  small  quantity  of  heat  dQ  is  imparted  to  this  body, 
the  question  arises  what  becomes  of  it,  and  what  effect  it 
produces.  It  may  in  part  serve  to  increase  the  amount  of 
heat  actually  existing  in  the  body ;  in  part  also,  if  in  conse- 
quence of  the  imparting  of  this  heat  the  body  changes  its 
condition,  and  that  change  includes  the  overcoming  of  some 
force,  it  may  be  absorbed  in  the  work  done  thereby.  If  we 
denote  the  total  heat  existing  in  the  body,  or  more  briefly 
the  Quantity  of  Heat  of  the  body,  by  H,  and  the  indefinitely 
small  increment  of  this  quantity  by  dR,  and  if  we  put  dL 
for  the  indefinitely  small  quantity  of  work  done,  then  we  can 
write : 

dQ  =  dH-\-dL (I). 

The  forces  against  which  the  work  is  done  may  be 
divided  into  two  classes:  (1)  those  which  the  molecules  of 
the  body  exert  among  themselves,  and  which  are  therefore 
dependent  on  the  nature  of  the  body  itself,  and  (2)  those 
which  arise  from  external  influences,  to  which  the  body  is 
subjected.  According  to  these  two  classes  of  forces,  which 
have  to  be  overcome,  the  work  done  is  divided  into  internal 
and  external  work.  If  we  denote  these  two  quantities  by 
dJ  and  d  W,  we  may  put 

dL  =  dJ+dW (2), 

and  then  the  foregoing  equation  becomes 

dQ  =  dH+dJ+dW (II). 

§  7.    Different  conditions  of  the  Quantities  J,  W,  and  H. 

The  internal  and  external  work  obey  widely  different 
laws.  As  regards  the  internal  work  it  is  easy  to  see  that  if 
a  body,  starting  from  any  initial  condition  whatever,  goes 
through  a  cycle  of  changes,  and  finally  returns  to  its  original 
condition  again,  then  the  internal  work  done  in  the  whole 
process  must  cancel  itself  exactly.  For  if  any  definite 
amount,  positive  or  negative,  of  internal  work  remained  over 
at  the  end,  there  must  have  been  produced  thereby  either  an  ■ 


28  ON  THE  MECHANICAIi  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

equivalent  quantity  of  external  work  or  a  change  in  the 
body's  quantity  of  heat ;  and  as  the  same  process  might  be 
repeated  any  number  of  times  it  would  in  the  positive  case 
be  possible  to  create  work  or  heat  out  of  nothing,  and  in  the 
negative  case  to  get  rid  of  work  or  heat  without  obtaining 
any  equivalent  for  it ;  both  of  which  results  will  be  at  once 
admitted  to  be  impossible.  If  then  at  every  return  of  the 
body  to  its  original  condition  the  internal  work  done  becomes 
zero,  it  follows  further  that  in  any  alteration  whatever  of  the 
body's  condition  the  internal  work  done  can  be  determined 
from  its  initial  and  final  conditions,  without  needing  to  know 
the  way  in  which  it  has  passed  from  one  to  the  other.  For 
if  we  suppose  the  body  to  be  brought  successively  from  the 
first  condition  to  the  second  in  several  difierent  ways,  but 
always  to  be  brought  back  to  its  first  condition  in  exactly 
the  same  way,  then  the  various  quantities  of  internal- work 
done  in  difierent  ways  in  the  first  set  of  changes  must  all  be 
equivalent  to  one  and  the  same  quantity  of  internal  work  done 
in  the  second  or  return  set  of  changes,  which  cannot  be  true 
unless  they  are  all  equal  to  each  other. 

We  must  therefore  assume  that  the  internal  forces  have  an 
Ergal,  which  is  a  quantity  fully  determined  by  the  existing 
condition  of  the  body  at  any  time,  without  its  being  requisite 
for  us  to  know  how  it  arrived  at  that  condition.  Thus  the 
internal  work  done  is  ascertained  by  the  increment  of  the 
Ergal,  which  we  will  call  J;  and  for  an  indefinitely  small 
change  of  the  body  the  differential  dJ  of  the  Ergal  forms  the 
expression  for  the  internal  work,  which  agrees  with  the  nota- 
tion employed  in  equations  2  and  II. 

If  we  now  turn  to  the  external  work,  we  find  the  state  of 
things  wholly  difi^erent.  Even  when  the  initial  and  final 
conditions  of  the  body  are  given,  the  external  work  can  take 
very  different  forms.  To  show  this  by  an  example,  let  us 
choose  for  our  body  a  Gas,  whose  condition  is  determined  by 
its  temperature  t  and  volume  v,  and  let  us  denote  the  initial' 
values  of  these  by  t^,v^,  and  the  final  values  by  %,v^;  let  us 
also  assume  that  t^>t^,  and  v^>  v^.  Now  if  the  change  is 
carried  out  in  the  following  way,  viz.  that  the  gas  is  first  ex- 
panded, at  the  temperature  \,  from  v^  to  v^,  and  then  is 
heated,  at  the  volume  v^,  from  <j  to  t^,  then  the  external 
work  will  consist  in  overcoming  the  external  pressure  which 


EQUIVALElfCE  OF  HEAT  AND  WORK.  29 

corresponds  to  the  temperature  f, .  On  the  other  hand,  if  the 
change  is  can-ied  out  in  the  following  way,  viz.  that  the  gas 
is  first  heated,  at  the  volume  Vj,  from  t^  to  t^,  and  is  then  ex- 
panded, at  the  temperature  t^,  from  v^  to  v^,  then  the  ex- 
ternal work  will  consist  in  overcoming  the  external  pressure 
which  corresponds  to  the  temperature  t^.  Since  the  latter 
pressure  is  greater  than  the  former,  the  external  work  is 
greater  in  the  second  case  than  in  the  first;  Lastly,  if  we 
suppose  expansion  and  heating  to  succeed  each  other  in 
stages  of  any  kind,  or  to  take  place  together  according  to  any 
law,  we  continually  obtain  fresh  pressures,  and  therewith  an 
endless  variety  in  the  quantities  of  work  done  with  the  same 
initial  and  final  conditions. 

Another  simple  example  is  as  follows.  Let  us  take  a 
given  quantity  of  a  liquid  at  temperature  t,  and  transform  it 
into  saturated  vapour  of  the  higher  temperature  t^.  This 
change  can  be  carried  out  either  by  heating  the  liquid,  as  a 
liquid,  to  t^,  and  then  vaporizing  it;  or  by  vaporizing  it  at  i, 
and  then  heating  the  vapour  to  t^,  compressing  it  at  the 
same  time  sufficiently  to  keep  it  saturated  at  temperature  t^; 
or  finally  by  allowing  the  vaporization  to  take  place  at  any 
intermediate  temperature.  The  external  work,  which  again 
shows  itself  in  overcoming  the  external  pressure  during  the 
alteration  of  volume,  has  different  values  in  all  these  different 
cases. 

The  difference  in  the  mode  of  alteration  which,  by  way 
of  example,  has  been  thus  described  for  two  special  classes 
of  bodies,  may  be  generally  expressed  by  saying  that  the 
body  can  pass  6y  different  paths  from  one  condition  to  the 
other. 

Another  difference,  besides  this,  may  come  into  play.  If  a 
body  in  changing  its  condition  overcomes  an  external  resist- 
ance, the  latter  may  either  be  so  great  that  the  full  force  of 
the  body  is  required  to  overcome  it,  or  it  may  be  less  than  this 
amount.  Let  us  again  take  as  example  a  given  quantity  of 
a  gas,  which  at  a  given  temperature  and  volume  possesses 
a  certain  expansive  force.  If  this  gas  expands,  the  external 
resistance  which  it  has  to  overcome  in  so  doing  must  clearly 
be  smaller  than  the  expansive  force,  or  it  would  not  over- 
come it ;  but  the  difference  between  them  may  be  as  small  as 
we  please,  and  as  a  limiting  case  we  may  assume  them  to  be 


80      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 

equal.  These  may  also  however  be  cases  in  which  this  differ- 
ence is  a  finite  quantity  more  or  less  considerable.  If  e.g. 
the  vessel,  in  which  the  gas  is  at  first  confined  with  a  given 
force  of  expansion,  is  suddenly  put  in  communication  with 
some  space  in  which  a  smaller  pressure  exists,  or  with  a 
vessel  which  is  entirely  empty,  then  the  gas  in  its  expansion 
overcomes  a  less  external  resistance  than  it  has  the  power  of 
overcomipg,  or  in  the  second  case  no  external  resistance  at 
all ;  and  it  performs  in  so  doing  a  smaller  amount  of  external 
work  than  it  might  perform,  or  in  the  second  case  no  external 
work  whatsoever. 

In  the  original  case,  where  pressure  and  reaction  are  at 
each  instant  equal,  the  gas  may  be  compressed  back  again  by 
exactly  the  same  force  which  it  has  overcome  in  expanding. 
If  however  the  resistance  overcome  is  less  than  the  force  of 
expansion,  the  gas  cannot  be  compressed  back  again  by  the 
same  amount  of  force.  The  distinction  may  be  expressed  by 
saying  that  the  expansion  is  reversible  in  the  first  case,  and 
not  reversible  in  the  second. 

This  mode  of  expression  may  be  employed  in  other  cases, 
where  changes  of  condition  take  place  in  the  overcoming  of 
aiiy  kind  of  resistance,  and  the  distinction  just  mentioned  in 
relation  to  the  external  work  may  be  generally  described  as 
follows:  with  a  given  change  of  condition  the  external  work 
may  differ  in  amount,  according  as  the  change  takes  place  in 
a  reversible  or  a  non-reversible  manner. 

§  8.    Energy  of  the  Body. 

In  addition  to  the  two  differentials  dJ  and  dW,  which 
depend  on  the  work  done,  we  have  on  the  right-hand  side  of 
equation  (II)  a  third,  which  is  the  differential  of  H,  the  total 
heat  actually  existing  in  the  body,  or  its  quantity  of  Heat. 
This  quantity  H  has  clearly  the  property,  also  mentioned  as 
belonging  to  J,  that  it  is  known  as  soon  as  the  condition  of 
the  body  is  given,  without  needing  to  know  the  way  in  which 
the  body  has  arrived  at  that  condition. 

Since  the  heat  existing  in  the  body  and  the  internal 
work  are  on  the  same  footing  as  regards  the  above  most 
important  property,  and  since  further,  on  account  of  our 
ignorance  as  to  the  internal  work,  we  generally  do  not  know 
the  several  amounts  of  these  two  quantities  but  only  their 


EQUIVALENCE  OF  HEAT  AND  WORK.  31 

sum,  the  author,  in  his  first  Paper  on  Heat,  published  in 
1850,  combined  the  two  under  one  designation.  Following 
the  same  system,  we  will  put 

U=H+J. (3), 

which  changes  equation  (II)  into 

dQ  =  dU+I)W (III). 

The  function  U,  first  introduced  by  the  author  in  the  above- 
mentioned  paper,  has  been  since  adopted  by  other  writers 
on  Heat,  and  as  the  definition  given  by  him — that  starting 
from  any  given  initial  condition  it  expresses  the  sum  of  the 
increment  of  the  heat  actually  existing  and  of  the  heat  con- 
sumed in  internal  work — is  somewhat  long,  various  attempts 
have  been  made  at.  a  shorter  designation.  Thomson,  in  his 
paper  of  1851*,  called  it  the  mechanical  energy  of  a  body  in 
a  given  state:  Kirchoff  has  given  it  the  name  '  Function  of 
Activity'  (Wirkungsfunction)-!":  lastly Zeuner,  in  his  'Grund- 
zuge  des  mechanischen  Warmetheorie,'  published  1860,  has 
called  the  quantity  U,  when  multiplied  by  the  heat-equi- 
valent of  work,  the  '  Interior  Heat '  of  the  body. 

This  last  name  (as  remarked  in  the  author's  former  work 
of  1864)  does  not  seem  quite  to  correspond  with  the  meaning 
of  U;  since  only  one  part  of  this  quaptity  stands  for  heat 
actually  existing  in  the  body,  i.e.  for  vis  viva  of  its  molecular 
motion,  while  the  other  part  consists  of  heat  which  has  been 
consumed  in  doing  internal  work,  and  therefore  exists  as 
heat  no  longer.  In  his  second  edition,  published  1866,  Zeu- 
ner has  made  the  alteration  of  calling  tl  the  Internal  Work  of 
the  body.  The  author  however  is  unable  to  accept  this  name 
any  more  than  the  other,  inasmuch  as  it  appears  to  be  just 
as  objectionably  limited  on  the  other  side.  Of  the  other 
two  names,  that  of  Energy,  employed  by  Thomson,  appears 
very  appropriate,  since  the  quantity  under  consideration  cor- 
responds exactly  with  that  which  is  denoted  by  the  same 
word  in  Mechanics.  In  what  follows  the  quantity  tT  will 
therefore  be  called  the  Energy  of  the  body. 

There  still  remains  one  special  remark  to  be  made  with 
reference  to  the  complete  determination  of  the  Ergal,  and  of 

*  Tram.  Royal  Soc.  of  Edinburgh,  Vol.  xx.,  p.  475. 
t  Pogg.  Amk  Vol.  cm.,  p.  177. 


32       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OP  HEAT. 

the  Energy  which  comprises  the  Ergal.  Since  the  Ergal 
expresses  the  work  which  the  internal  forces  must  have  per- 
formed, while  the  body  was  passing  from  any  initial  condition, 
taken  as  the  starting  point,  to  its  condition  at  the  moment 
under  consideration,  we  can  only  determine  completely,  the 
value  of  the  Ergal  for  the  present  condition  of  the  body, 
when  we  have  previously  ascertained  once  for  all  its  initial 
condition.  If  this  has  not  been  done,  we  must  conceive 
the  function  which  expresses  the  Ergal  as  still  contain- 
ing an  indeterminate  constant,  which  depends  on  the  initial 
condition.  It  will  be  obvious  that  it  is  not  always  necessary 
actually  to  write  down  this  constant,  but  that  we  may  con- 
ceive it  as  included  in  the  function,  so  long  as  this  latter  is 
designated  by  a  general  symbol.  Similarly  we  must  conceive 
another  such  indeterminate  constant  as  included  in  the  other 
symbol  which  expresses  the  Energy  of  the  body. 

§  9.  Equations  for  Finite  changes  of  condition- — Cyclical 
processes. 

If  we  conceive  the  equation  (III),  which  relates  to  an 
indefinitely  small  change  of  condition,  to  be  integrated  for 
any  given  finite  change,  or  for  a  series  of  successive  finite 
changes,  the  integral  of  one  term  can  be  determined,  at  once. 
Eor  the  energy  U,  as  mentioned  above,  depends  only  on  the 
condition  of  the  body  at  the  moment,  and  not  on  the  way  in 
which  it  has  arrived  at  that  condition.  If  then  we  put  U^ 
and  CTjj  for  the  initial  and  final  values  of  U,  we  may  write 


/ 


dU=U„-U,. 


Hence  the  equation  obtained  by  integrating  (III)  may  be 
written : 

jdQ=  U^-  U^+jdTV. (4); 

or  if  we  denote  by  Q  and  TTthe  two  integrals  j  dQ  and  idW 

which  occur  in  this  equation,  and  which  represent  respects 
ively  the  total  heat  imparted  tp  the  body  during,  the  change, 
or  series  of  changes,  and  the  external  work  done,  then  the 
equation  will  be 

Q=  U,-  U^+W. (4a). 


EQUIVALENCE  OF  HEAT  ANB_  WORK.  33 

As  a  special  case,  we  may  assume  that  the  body  under- 
goes a  series  of  changes  such  that  it  is  finally  brought  round 
to  its  initial  condition.  To  such  a  series  the  author  gave  the 
name  of  cyclical  process.  As  in  this  case  the  initial  and 
final  conditions  of  the  body  are  the  same,  U^  becomes  equal 
to  Z7j,  and  their  difference  to  zero.  Hence  for  a  cyclical  pro- 
cess equations  (4)  and  (4a)  become: 


jdQ  =  f 


dW. (5), 

Q=^W (5a). 

Thus  in  a  cyclical  process  the  total  heat  imparted  to  the 
body  (i.e.  the  algebraical  sum  of  all  the  several  quantities  of 
heat  imparted  in  the  course  of  the  cyx;le,  which  quantities 
may  be  partly  positive,  partly  negative)  is  simply  equal  to 
the  total  amount  of  external  work  performed. 

§  10.     Total  Heat — Latent  and  Specific  Heat. 

In  former  times,  when  heat  was  considered  to  be  a  sub- 
stance, and  when  it  was  assumed  that  this  substance  might 
exist  in  two  different  forms,  which  were  distinguished  by  the 
.terms  free  and  latent,  a  conception  was  introduced  which  was 
often  made  use  of  in  calculations,  and  which  was  called  the 
total  heat  of  the  body.  By  this  was  understood  that  quantity 
of  heat  which  a  body  must  have  taken  up  in  order  to  pass 
from  a  given  initial  condition  into  its  present  condition,  and 
which  is  now  contained  in  it,  partly  as  free,  partly  as  latent 
heat.  It  was  supposed  that  this  quantity  of  heat,  if  the 
initial  condition  of  the  body  was  known,  could  be  completely 
determined  from  its  present  condition,  without  taking  into 
account  the  way  in  which  that  condition  had  been  reached. 

Since,  however,  we  have  obtained  in  equation  (4a)  an 
expression  for  the  quantity  of  heat  received  by  the  body  in 
passing  from  its  initial  to  its  final  condition,  which  expression 
contains  the  external  work  W,  we  must  conclude  that  this 
quantity  of  heat,  like  the  external  work,  depends  not  only  on 
the  initial  and  final  conditionSj  but  also  on  the  way  in  which 
the  body  has  passed  from  the  one  to  the  other.  The  conception 
of  the  total  heat  as  a  quantity  depending  only  on  the  present 
c.  3 


34       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

condition  of  the  body  is  therefore,  under  the  new  theory,  no 
longer  allowable. 

The  disappearance  of  heat  during  certain  special  changes 
of  condition,  e.g.  fusion  and  vaporization,  was  formerly  ex- 
plained, as  indicated  above,  by  supposing  this  heat  to  pass 
into  a  special  form,  in  which  it  was  no  longer  sensible  to  our 
touch  or  to  the  thermometer,  and  in  which  it  was  therefore 
called  Latent  Heat.  This  mode  of  explanation  has  also  been 
opposed  by  the  author,  who  has  laid  down  the  principle  that 
all  heat  existing  in  a  body  is  appreciable  by  the  touch  and 
by  the  thermometer ;  that  the  heat  which  disappears  under 
the  above  changes  of  condition  exists  no  longer  as  heat,  but 
has  been  converted  into  work ;  and  that  the  heat  which 
makes  its  appearance  under  the  opposite  changes  (e,g.  solidi- 
fication and  condensation)  does  not  come  from  any  concealed 
source,  but  is  newly  produced  by  work  done  on  the  body. 
Accordingly  he.  has  proposed  the  term  Work-heat  as  a  sub- 
stitute for  Latent  heat  in  general  cases. 

This  work,  into  which  the  heat  is  converted,  and  which 
in  the  opposite  class  of  changes  produces  heat,  may  be  of  two 
kinds,  internal  or  external.  If  e.g.  a  liquid  is  vaporized,  the 
cohesion  of  its  molecules  must  be  overcome,  and,  since  the 
vapour  occupies  a  larger  space  than  the  liquid,  the  external 
pressure  must  be  overcome  also.  In  accordance  with  these 
two  divisions  of  the  work  we  also  may  divide  the  total  work- 
heat,  and  call  the  divisions  the  internal  and  external  work- 
heat  respectively. 

That  quantity  of  heat  which  must  be  imparted  to  a  body 
in  order  to  heat  it  simply,  without  making  any  change  in  its 
density,  was  formerly  known  under  the  general  name  of  free 
heat,  or  more  properly,  of  heat  actually  existing  in  the  body ; 
a  great  part  of  this,  however,  falls  into  the  same  category  as 
that  which  was  formerly  called  latent  heat,  and  for  which  the 
term  work-Jieat  has  been  proposed.  For  the  heating  of  a  body 
involves  as  a  general  rule  a  change  in  the  arrangement  of  its 
molecules,  which  change  produces  in  general  an  externally 
^perceptible  alteration  of  volume,  but  still  may  take  place 
apart  from  such  alteration.  This  change  of  arrangement 
requires  a  certain  amount  of  work,  which  may  be  partly 
internal,  partly  external;  and  in  doing  this,  work-heat  is 
again  consumed.     The  heat  applied  to  the  body  thus  serves 


EQUIVALENCE  OF  HEAT  AND  WORK.        35 

in  part  only  to  increase  the  heat  actually  existing,  tHe  other 
part  serving  as  work-heat. 

On  these  principles  the  author  attempted  to  explain  (by 
way  of  example)  the  unusually  great  specific  heat  of  water, 
which  is  much  beyond  that  either  of  ice  or  of  steam*:  the 
assujnption  being  that  of  the  quantity  of  heat,  which  each 
receives  from  without  in  the  process  of  heating,  a  larger 
portion  is  consumed  in  the  case  of  water  in  diminishing  the 
cohesion  of  the  particles,  and  thus  serves  as  work-heat. 

From  the  foregoing  it  is  seen  to  be  necessary  that,  in 
addition' to  the  various  specific  heats,  which  shew  how  much 
heat  must  be  imparted  to  one  unit-weight  of  a  body  in  order 
to  warm  it  through  one  degree  under  different  circumstances 
(e.g.  the  specific  heat  of  a  solid  or  liquid  body  under  ordinary 
atmospheric  pressure,  and  the  specific  heat  of  a  gas  at  con- 
stant volume  or  at  constant  pressure),  we  must  also  take  into 
consideration  another  quantity  which  shews  hy  how  much  the 
heat  actually  existing  in  one  unit-weight  of  a  substance  (i.e. 
the  vis  viva  of  the  motion  of  its  ultimate  pojrticles)  is  increased 
when  the  substance  is  heated  through  one  degree  of  temperature. 
This  quantity  we  will  name  the  body's  true  heat-capacity. 

It  would  be. advantageous  to  confine  this  term  'heat-capa- 
city '  (even  if  the  word  '  true '  be  not  prefixed)  strictly  to  the 
heat  actually  existing  in  the  body ;  whereas  for  the  total  heat 
which  must  be  imparted  for  the  purpose  of  heating  it  under 
any  given  circumstances,  and  of  which  work-heat  forms  a 
part,  the  expression  'specific  heat'  might  be  always  em- 
ployed. As  however  the  term  'heat-capacity'  has  hitherto 
been  usually  taken  to  have  the  same  signification  as  '  specific 
heat'  it  is  still  necessary,  in  order  to  affix  to  it  the  above 
simplified  meaning,  to  add  the  epithet '  true,' 

§  11,  Expression  for  the  External  Work  in  a  particular 
case.  ' 

'  In  equation  (III)  the  external  work  is  denoted  generally  by 
$W.  No  special  assumption  is  thereby  made  as  to  the  nature 
of  the  external  forces  which  act  on  the  body,  and  on  which 
the  external  work  depends.  It  is,  however,  wprth  while  to 
consider  one  special  case  which  occurs  frequently  in  practice, 

•  Pogg.  Ann,  Vol.  lxxix.,  p.  375,  and  Collection  of  Memoiri,  Vol.  l.,  p.  23. 

3—2 


36 


OIT  THE  MECHANICAl  THEOEY  OF  HEAT. 


and  which  leads  to  a  very  simple  determination  of  the  external 
work,  viz.  the  case  where  the  only  external  force  acting  on  the 
body,  or  at  least  the  only  force  which  needs  to  be  referred  to 
in  the  determination  of  the  work,  is  a  pressure  acting  on  the 
exterior  surface  of  the  body ;  and  in  which  this  pressure  (as 
is  always  the  case  with  liquid  and  gaseous  bodies,  provided 
no  other  forces  are  acting,  and  "which  may  be  the  case  even 
with  solid  bodies)  is  the  same  at  all  points  of  the  surface, 
and  everywhere  normal  to  it.  In  this  case  there  is  no  need, 
in  order  to  determine  the  external  work,  that  we  should 
consider  the  body's  alterations  in  form  and  its  expansion  in 
particular  directions,  but  only  its  total  alteration  in  volume. 

As  an  illustrative  case,  let  us  take  a  cylinder,  as  shewn 
in  Fig.  1,  closed  by  an  easily  moving  piston  P,  and  containing 
some  expansible  substance,  e.g.  a  gas,  under  a  . 

pressure  per  unit-area  represented  by  p.  The 
section  of  the  cylinder,  or  the  area  of  the  piston, 
■we  may  call  a.  Then  the  total  pressure  which 
acts  on  the  piston,  and  which  must  be  overcome 
in  raising  it,  is  pa.  Now  if  the  piston  stands 
originally  at  a  height  h  above  the  bottom  of 
the  cylinder,  and  is  then  lifted  through  an 
indefinitely  small  distance  dh,  the  external  work 
performed  in  the  lifting  will  be  expressed  by 
the  equation 

dW=padh. 

But  if  V  be  the  volume  of  the  gas  we  have 

V  =  ah,  and  therefore  dv  =  adh ;  whence  the  above  equation 

becomes 

dW=pdv (6), 

This  same  simple  form  is  assumed  by  the  differential  of  the 
external  work  for  any  form 
of  the  body,  and  any  kind 
of  expansion  whatever,  as 
may  be  easily  shewn  as  fol- 
lows. Let  the  full  line  in 
Fig.  2  represent  the  surface 
of  the  body  in  its  original 
condition,  and  the  dotted  line 
its   surface   after  an  indefi-  Fig.  2. 


Kg.  1. 


EQUIVALENCK  OF  SEAT  AND  WORK.  S7 

nitely  small  change  of  form  and  volume.  Let  us  consider 
Siny  element  dca  of  the  original  surface  at  the  point  A. 
Let  a  normal  drawn  to  this  element  of  surface  cut  the 
second .  surface  at  a  distance  du  from  the  first,  where  du 
is  taken  as  positive  if  "the  position  of  the  second,  surface 
is  outside  the  space  contained  within  the  original  surface, 
and  negative  if  it  is  inside.  Now  let  us  suppose  an  inde- 
finite number  of  such  normals  to  be  drawn  through  every 
point  in  the  perimeter  of  the  surface-element  dm  to  the 
second  surface ;  there  will  then  be  marked  out  an  indefi- 
nitely small  prismatic  space,  which,  has  deo  as  its  base,  and 
du  as  its  height,  and  whose  volume  is  therefore  expressed  by 
dadu.  This  indefinitely  small  volume  forms  the  part  of  the 
increase  of  volume  of  the  body  corresponding  to  the  element 
of  surface  da.  If  then  we  integrate  the  expression  dcodu  all 
over  the  surface  of  the  body,  we  shall  obtain  the  whole 
increase  in  volume,  dv,  of  the  body,  and  if  we  agree  to 
express  integration  over  the  surface  by  an  integral  sign  with 
suffix  CO,  we  may  write 


dv- 


■■  I   dudm  (7). 

J  ta 


Now  if,  as  before,  we  denote  the  pressure  per  unit  of 
surface  by  p,  the  pressure  on  the  element  dtu  will  be  pdm. 
Therefore  the  part  of  the  external  work,  which  corresponds 
to  the  element  dw,  and  is  described  by  saying  that  the 
element  under  the  action  of  the  external  force  pdm  is  pushed 
outwards  at  right  angles  through  the  distance  du,  will  be 
expressed  by  the  i^rodact  pdm  du.  Integrating  this  over  the 
whole  surface,  we  obtain  for  the  total  external  work, 


dW 


=  I  pdudm. 

J  ia' 


As  p  is  equal  over  the  whole  surface,  the  equation  may  be 
written : 

dW=p\  dudm, 

J  ta 

or,  by  equation  (7), 

dW=pdv, 

which  is  the  same  as  equation  (6)  given  above. 


38  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OF  HEAT, 

Adopting  this  equation,  we  may  give  to  equation  (III)» 
for  the  case  in  which  the  only  external  force  is  a  uniform 
pressure  normal  to  the  surface,  the  following  form : 

dQ  =  dU+pdv (IV). 

This  last  equation,  which  forms  the  mathematical  expres- 
sion most  in  use  for  the  first  main  principle  of  the  Mechanical 
Theory  of  Heat,  we  will  in  the  next  place  apply  to  a  class  of 
bodies,  which  are  distinguished  for  the  simplicity  of  their 
laws,  and  for  which  the  equation  takes  accordingly  a  pecu- 
liarly simple  form,  so  that  the  required  calculations  can  be 
easily  performed. 


(39) 


CHAPTER  II. 

ON  PEBFECT   GASES. 

§  1.     The  Gaseous  condition  of  bodies. 

Among  the  laws  which  characterize  bodies  in  the  gaseous 
condition  the  foremost  place  must  be  given  to  those  of 
Mariotte  and  Gay  Lussac,  which  may  be  expressed  together 
in  a  single  equation  as  follows.  Given  a  unit- weight  of  a 
gas,  which  at  freezing  temperature,  and  under  any  standard 
pressure  p^  {e.g.  that  of  the  atmosphere)  has  the  volume  «„j 
then  if  p  and  v  be  its  pressure  and  volume  at  any  tempera- 
ture t  (in  Ceritigrade  measure)  the  following  equation  will 
hold: 

pv=-p^v^{\  +  a.t) ; (1), 

wherein  the  quantity  a,  which  is  usually  termed  the  coeffi- 
cient of  expansion,  although  it  really  relates  to  the  change 
of  pressure  as  well  as  the  change  of  volume,  has  one  and  the 
same  value  for  every  kind  of  gas. 

Regnault  has  indeed  recently  proved  by  careful  experi- 
ment that  these  laws  are  not  strictly  accurate;  but  the 
deviations  are  for  permanent  gases  very  small,  and  become  of 
importance  only  for  gases  which  are  capable  of  condensation. 
It  seems  to  follow  that  the  laws  are  the  more  nearly  exact, 
the  further  a  gas  is  removed,  as  to  pressure  and  temperature,^ 
from  its  point  of  condensation.  Since  for  permanent  gases  > 
under  ordinary  conditions  the  exactness  of  the  law  is  already, 
so  great,  that  for  most  purposes  of  research  it  may  be  taken 
as  perfect,  we  may  imagine  for  every  gas  an  ultimate  condi- 
tion, in  which  the  exactness  is  really  perfect;  and  in  what 
follows  we  will  assume  this, ideal  condition  to  be  actually 


40       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

reached,  calling  for  brevity's  sake  all  gases,  in  which  this  is 
assumed  to  hold,  Perfect  Gases. 

As  however  the  quantity  a,  according  to  Eegnault's  deter- 
minations, is  not  absolutely  the  same  for  all  the  gases  which 
have  been  examined,  and  has  also  somewhat  different  values 
for  one  and  the  same  gas  under  different  conditions,  the 
question  arises,  what  value  we  are  to  assign  to  a  in  the  case 
of  perfect  gases,  in  which  such  differences  can  no  longer 
appear.  Here  we  must  refer  to  the  values  of  a  which  have 
been  found  to  be  correct  for  various  permanent  gases.  By 
experiments  made  on  the  system  of  increasing  the  pressure 
while  keeping  the  volume  constant,  Regnault  found  the  fol- 
lowing numbers  to  be  correct  for  various  permanent  gases : 

Atmospheric  Air 0003665. 

Hydrogen 0003667. 

Nitrogen 0003668. 

Carbonic  Oxide    '  0-003667. 

The  differences  here  are  so  small,  that  it  is  of  little  im- 
portance what  choice  we  make ;  but  as  it  was  with  atmo- 
spheric air  that  Regnault  made  the  greatest  number  of 
experiments,  and  as  Magnus  was  led  in  •  his  researches  to  a 
precisely  similar  result,  it  appears  most  fitting  to  select  the 
number  0003665. 

Regnault,  however,  by  experiments  made  on  the  other 
system  of  keeping  the  pressure  constant  and  increasing  the 
volume,  has  obtaitied  a  somewhat  different  value  for  a  in  the 
case  of  atmospheric,  air,  viz.  0'003670.  He  has  further 
observed  that  rarefied  air  gives  a  somewhat  smaller,  and  com- 
pressed air  a  somewhat  larger,  coefficient  of  expansion  than 
air  of  ordinary  density.  This  latter  circumstance  has  led 
some  physicists  to  the  conclusion  that,  as  rarefied  air  is  nearer 
to  the  perfect  gaseous  condition  than  air  of  ordinary  density, 
we  ought  to  assume  for  perfect  gases  a  smaller  value  than 
0003665.  Against  this  it  may  be  urged,  that  Regnault 
observed  no  such  dependence  of  the  coefficient  of  expansion 
on  the  density  in  the  case  of  hydrogen,  but  after  increasing 
the  density  threefold  obtained  exactly  the  same  value  as 
before ;  and  that  he  also  fou©d  that  hydrogen,  in  its  devia- 
tion from  the  laws  of  Mariotte  and  Gay  Lussac,  acts  altogether 
differently,  and  ior  the,  most 'part  in  exactly  the  opposite 


ON  PERFECT  GASES.  41 

way,  from  atmospheric  air.  In.  these '  circumstances  the 
author  considers  that  additional  weight  is  given  to  the  re- 
sult taken  above  from  the  figure  for  atmospheric  air; 
since  it  will  hardly  be  questioned  that  hydrogen  is  at  least 
as  near  as  atmospheric  air  to  the  condition  of  a  perfect  gas, 
and  therefore  in  drawing  conclusions  relative  to  that  condi- 
tion the  behaviour  of  the  one  is  as  much  to  be  noted  as  that 
of  the  other. 

It  appears  therefore  to  be  the  best  course  (so  long  as 
fresh  observations  have  not  furnished>a  more  satisfactory  start- 
ing point  for  wider  conclusions)  to  adhere  to  the  figure  which, 
under  the  pressure  of  one  atmosphere,  has  been  found  to 
agree  almost  exactly  for  atmospheric  air  and  for  hydrogen ; 
and  thus  to  write : 

a  =  0003665  =3j^ (2). 

he  : 
equation  thus ; 


If  we  denote  the  reciprocal  -  by  a  we  may  also  write  the 


pv  =  Pf{a^-t) (3). 

And  if  for  brevity  we  put : 

i?=^5!!o (4) 

T=a+t .........(5), 

we  then  obtain  the  equation  in  the  form 

pv  =  RT (6). 

.B  is  here  a  constant  which  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  gas 
and  is  inversely  proportional  to  its  specific  gravity*.  T 
represents  the  temperature,  provided  this  is  measured  not 
from  the  freezing  point,  but  from  a  zero  point  lying  a  degrees 
lower..  The  temperature  thus  measured  from  —a  we  shall 
term  the  Absolute  Temperature,  a  name  which  will  be  more 

*  For  S  is  proportional  to  the  volume  of  a  unit  of  weight  of  the  gas  at 
standard  pressure  and  temperature ;  and  is  therefore  inyersely  proportional 
to  the  wgight  of  a  unit  of  -volume,  i.e,  to  the  specific  gravity.   [Translator^) 


42  ox  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT, 

fully  explained  further  on.    I'aking  the  value  of  a  given 
in  equation  (2)  we  obtain 

<^  =  l  =  M (7). 

T=273  +  t] 

§  2.  Approadmate  Principle  as  to  Heat  absorbed  ly  Gases. 

In  an  experiment  of  Gay  Lussac's,  a  vessel  filled  with  air 
was  put  in  communication  with  an  exhausted  receiver  of 
equal  size,  so  that  half  the  air  from  the  one  passed  over  into 
the  other.  On  measuring  the  temperature  of  each  half,  and 
comparing  it  with  the  original  temperature,  he  found  that 
the  air  which  had  passed  over  had  become  heated,  and  the 
air  which  remained  behind  had  become  cooled,  to  exactly  the 
same  degree;  so  that  the  mean  temperature  was  the  same 
after  the  expansion  as  before.  He  thus  proved  that  in  this 
kind  of  expansion,  in  which  no  external  work  was  done,  no 
loss  of  heat  took  place.  Joule,  and  after  him  Regnault, 
carried  out  similar  experiments  with  greater  care,  and  both 
were  led  to  the  same  result. 

The  principle  here  involved  may  also  be  deduced,  without 
reference  to  special  experiments,  from  certain  properties  of 
gases  otherwise  ascertained,  and  its  accuracy  may  thus  be 
checked.  Gases  shew  so  marked  a  regularity  in  their  beha- 
viour (especially  in  the  relation  between  volume,  pressure, 
and  temperature,  expressed  by  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay 
Lussac),  that  we  are  thereby  led  to  the  supposition  that 
the  mutual  action  between  the  molecules,  which  goes  on  in, 
the  interior  of  solid  and  liquid  bodies,  is  absent  in  the  case 
of  gases ;  so  that  heat,  which  in  the  former  cases  has  to  over- 
come the  internal  resistances,  as  well  as  the  external  pressure, 
in  order  to  produce  expansion,  in  the  case  of  gases  has  to  do 
with  external  pressure  alone.  If  this  be  so,  then,  if  a  gas 
expands  at  constant  temperature,  only  so  much  heat  can 
thereby  be  absorbed  as  is  required  for  doing  the  external 
work.  Again,  we  cannot  suppose  that  the  total  amount  of 
heat  actually  existing  in  the  body  is  greater  after  it  has 
expanded  at  constant  temperature  than  before.  On  these 
assumptions  we  obtain  the  following  principle ;  a  permanent 
gas,  if  it  expands  at  a  constant  temperature,  absorbs  only 


ON  PEEFECT  GASES.  43 

SO  much  heat  as  is  required  for  the  eootemal  work  which  it 
performs  in  so  doing. 

We  cannot  of  course  give  to  this  principle  any  greater 
validity  than  that  of  the  principles  from  which  it  springs, 
but  must  rather  suppose  that  for  any  given  gas  it  is  true  to 
the  same  extent  only  in  which  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay 
Lussac  is  true.  It  is  only  for  perfect  gases  that  its  absolute 
accuracy  may  be  assumed.  It  is  on  this  understanding  that 
the  author  brought  this  principle  into  application,  combined 
it  as  an  approximate  assumption  with  the  two  main  princi- 
ples of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat,  and  used  it  for 
establishing  more  extended  conclusions. 

More  recently  Mr,  now  Sir  William  Thomson,  who  at  first 
did  not  agree  with  one  of  the  conclusions  so  deduced,  under- 
took in  conjunction  with  Joule  to  test  experimentally  the 
accuracy  of  the  principle*;  and  for  this  purpose  instituted 
with  great  care  a  series  of  skilfully  conceived  experiments, 
whichj  on  account  of  their  importance,  will  be  more  fully  and 
exactly  discussed  further  on.  These  have  completely  con- 
firmed the  truth  not  only  of  the  general  principle,  but  also  of 
the  remark  added  by  the  author  as  to  its  degree  of  exactness. 
In  the  permanent  gases  on  which  they  experimented,  viz. 
aianospheric  air  and  hydrogen,  the  principle  was  found  so 
nearly  exact  that  the  deviations  might  for  the  purpose  of 
most  calculations  be  neglected;  while  in  the  non-permanent 
gas  selected  for  experiment  (Carbonic  Acid)  somewhat  greater 
deviations  were  observed,  exactly  as  might  have  been  ex- 
pected from  the  behaviour  of  that  gas  in  other  respects. 

After  this  we  may  with  the  less  scruple  apply  the  princi- 
ple, as  being  exact  for  actually  existing  gases  in  the  same 
degree  as  the  law  .of  Mariotte  and  Gay  Lussac,  and  absolutely 
exact  in  the  case  of  perf6ct  gases. 

§  3.  On  the  Form  which  the  Equation  expressing  the 
first  main  Principle  assumes,  in  the  case  of  perfect  gases. 

We  now  return  to  equation  (IV),  viz. : 

dQ  =  dU+pdv, 

in  order  to  apply  it  to  the  case  of  a  perfect  gas,  of  which  we 
assume  as  before  one  unit  of  weight  to  be  given. 

»  Phil.  Trans.  1863,  1854,  1862. 


44  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

The  condition  of  the  gas  is  completely  determined,  when 
its  temperature  and  volume  are  known ;  or  it  may  be  deter- 
mined by  its  temperature  and  pressure,  or  by  its  volume  and 
pressure.  We  will  at  present  choose  the  first-named  quan- 
tities, temperature  and  volume,  to  determine  the  condition, 
and  accordingly  treat  T  and  v  as  the  independent  variables, 
on  which  all  other  quantities  relating  to  the  condition  of  the 
gas  depend.  If  then  we  regard  the  energy  U  of  the  gas  as 
being  also  a  function  of  these  two  variables,  we  may  write 

dr  dv 

■v^hence  equation  (IV)  becomes 

dU  ,^.  fdU 


^^-^'^-^if^^y^ («)■ 


This  equation,  which  in  the  above  form  holds  not  only 
for  a  gas,  but  for  any  body  whose  condition  is  determined' 
by  its  temperature  and  volume,  may  be  considerably  simpli- 
fied for  gaseous  bodies,  on  account  of  their  peculiar  proper- 
ties. 

The  quantity  of  heat,  which  a  gas  must  absorb  in  ex- 
panding at  constant  temperature  through  a  volume  dv,  is 

generally  denoted  by  -r^  dv.  As  by  the  approximate  assump- 
tion of  the  last  Section  this  heat  is  equal  to  the  work  done 
in  the  expansion,  which  is  expressed  by  pdv,  we  have  the 
equation : 

dQ,         .  dQ 

But  from  equation  (8) 

dQ^dV^ 
dv       dv     ^ ' 

hence  from  the  last  two  equations  we  obtain 

f-» (»)• 


ON  PERFECT  GASES.  45 

Hence  we  conclude  that  in  a  perfect  gas  the  energy  U  is 
independent  of  the  volume,  and  can  only  be  a  function  of 
the  temperature. 

77r 

If  in  equation  (8)  we  put   -5-  =  0,  and  substitute   for 

j-~,  the  symbol  C,,  it  becomes 

dQ=  C,dT+pdv (10). 

From  the  form  of  this  equation  we  see  that  C„  denotes 
the  Specific  Heat  of  the  Oas  at  constant  volwme,  since  GjiT 
expresses  the  quantity  of  heat  which  must  be  imparted  to 
the  gas  in  order  to  heat  it  from  2'  to  T+dT,  when  du  is 

equal  to  zero.  As  this  Specific  Heat  =  -tj,,  i.e.  is  the  differ- 
ential coefl&cient  with  respect  to  temperature  of  a  function  of 
the  temperature  only,  it  can  itself  also  be  only  a  function  of 
temperature. 

In  equation  (10)  all  the  three  quantities  T,  v,  and  p  are 
found ;  but  since  by  equation  (6)  pv  —  Rt,  it  is  easy  to 
eliminate  one  of  them ;  and  by  eliminating  each  in  succession 
we  obtain  three  different  forms  of  the  equation. 

Eliminating  p  we  obtain, 

dQ'=C,dT  +  -^d'B (11). 

7?  7' 

Again,  to  eliminate  v  we  put  v  =^  —  ;  whence  we  have 

dv  =  —  dT^—T-  ip. 

If  we  substitute  this  value  of  dv  in  equation  (10),  and 
then  combine  the  two  terms  of  the  equation  which  contain 
dT,  we  obtain 

dQ  =  {C,  +  B)dT-?^dp (12). 

Lastly,  to  eliminate  T,  we  obtain  from  equation  (6),  by 
differentiation, 

-,_vdp+pdii 


4G  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOTJT  OF  HEAT. 

Substituting -in  equation  (10) 

dQ=^vdp  +  ^^pdv (13). 

§  4.  Deductions  as  to  the  two  Specific  Heats,  and 
transformation  of  the  foregdi  ig  equations.    ^^"VtrfiAKfju^ 

In  the  same  way  as  We  see  from  eqiwiion  (10)  that  the 
quantity  C,,  which  appears  as  factoi/of  dT,  denotes  the 
specific  heat  at  constant  '^feempgratuje,  we  may  see  from 
equation  (12)  that  the  factorof  d!Z  in  that  equation,  viz. 
C,  +  R,  expresses  the  Specific  Heat  at  constant  pressiire.  If 
therefore  we  denote  this  Specific  Heat  by  G^  we  may  put 

(7^=a,  +  i2.... '....; (14), 

which  eqiiation  ^ves  the  relation  between  the  two  Specific 
Heats. 

Since  5  is  a  constant,  and  C„,  as  shewn  above,  is  a  func- 
tion of  temperature  only,  it  follows  from  equation  (14)  that 
Cp  also  can  only  be  a  function  of  temperature. 

When  the  author  first  drew  in  this  manner  from  the 
Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat  the  conclusion  that  the  two 
Specific  Heats  of  a  permanent  gas  must  be  independent  of 
its  density,  or  in  other  words  of  the  pressute  to  which  it  is 
subjected,  and  could  depend  only  on  its  temperature ;  and 
when  he  added  the  further  remark  that  they  were  thus  in  all 
probability  constant ;  be  found  himself  in  opposition  to  the 
then  prevailing  views  on  the  subject.  At  that  time  it  was 
considered  to  be  established  from  the  experiments  of  Suer- 
mann,  and  from  those  of  de  la  Roche  and  B^rard,  that  the 
specific  heat  of  a  gas  depended  on  the  pressure ;  and  the 
circumstance  that  the  new  theory  led  to  an  opposite  conclu- 
sion produced  mistrust  of  the  theory  itself,  and  was  used  by 
A.  von  Holtzmann  as  a  weapon  of  attack  against  it. 

Some  years  later,  however,  followed  the  first  publication 
of  the  splendid  experiments  of  Eegnault  on  the  specific 
heat  of  gases*,  in  which  the  influence  of  pressure  and  tem- 
perature on  the  specific  heat  was  made  a  subject  of  special 

*  Comptes  Bendm,  Vol.  xxxn.,   1853;   also  Relation  des  experiences 
■Vol.  II.  •  ' 


ON  PERFECT  GASES.  47 

investigation.  Regnault  tested  atmospheric  air  at  pressures 
from  1  to  12  atmospheres,  and  hydrogen  at  from  1  to  9  at- 
mospheres, but  could  detect  no  difference  in  their  specific  ' 
heats.  He  tested  them  also  at  different  temperatures,  viz. 
between  -  30°  and  + 10°,  between  0°  and  100°,  and  between 
0°  and  200° ;  and  here  also  he  found  the  specific  heatt  always 
the  same  *.  The  result  of  his  experiments  may  thus  be  ex- 
pressed by  saying  that,  within  the  limits  of  pressure  and 
temperature  to  which  his  observations  extended,  the  specific 
heat  of  permanent  gases  was  found  to  be  constant. 

It  is  true  that  these  direct  explanatory  researches  were 
confined  to  the  specific  heat  at  constant  pressure;  but  there 
will  be  little  scruple  raised  as  to  assuming  the  same  to  be 
correct  for  the  other  specific  heat,  which  by  equation  (14) 
differs  from  the  former  only  by  the  constant  B.  Accordingly 
in  what  follows  we  shall  treat  the  two, specific  heats,  at  least 
for  perfect  gases,  as  being  constant  quantities. 

By  help  of  equation  (14)  we  may  transform  the  three 
equations  (11),  (12)  and  (13),  which  express  the  first  main 
principle  of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat  as  applied  to 
gases,  in  such  a  way  that  they  rnay  contain,  instead  of  the 
Specific  Heat  at  constant  volume,  the  Specific  Heat  at  con- 
stant density ;  which  may  perhaps  appear  more  suitable,  since 
the  latter,  as  being  determined  by  direct  observation,  ought 
to  be  used  more  frequently  than  the  former.  The  resulting 
equations  are : 


.(15). 


V 

dQ  =  C,dT-^^dp 

dQ  =  ^^^vdp  +  ^pdv 

Lastly,  we  may  introduce  both  Specific  Heats  into  the 
equations,  and  eUminate  B,  by  which  means  the  resulting 

*  The  numbers  obtained  for  atmospheric  air  (Be/,  des  Exp.  Vol.  il. ,  p.  108) 
are  as  follows  in  ordiuary  heat  units : 

between  -  30»  and  +  10»       0'23771, 
„  00    „       I'OO"       0-23741, 

„  O"    „     ,  208»        0-23751, 

which  may  be  taken  as  practically  the  same. 


48  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT, 

equations  become  symmetrical  as  to^  and  v,  as  follows  : 


.(16). 


0  G 

In  the  above  equations  the  speciiic  heats  are  expressed 
in  mechanical  units.  If  we  wish  to  express  them  in  ordinary- 
heat  units,  we  have  only  to  divide  these  values  by  the 
Mechanical  Equivalent  of  Heat.  Thus  if  we  denote  the 
specific  heats,  as  expressed  in  ordinary  heat  units,  by  c,  and 
Cj,,  we  may  put 

«.=  §.      ^  =  ^ (17)- 

Applying  these  equations  to  equation  (14),  and  dividing 
by  E,  we  have 

c.  =  c,  +  |, (18). 

§  5.  Relation  between  the  two  Specific  Heats,  and  its 
application  to  calculate  the  Mechanical  Equivalent  of  Heat. 

If  a  system  of  Sound-waves  spreads  itself  through  any  gas, 
e.g.  atmospheric  air,  the  gas  becomes  in  turn  condensed  and 
rarefied;  and  the  velocity  with  which  the  sound  spreads 
depends,  as  was  seen  by  Newton,  on  the  nature  of  the  changes 
of  pressure  produced  by  these  changes  of  density.  For  very 
small  changes  of  density  and  pressure  the  relation  between 
the  two  is  expressed  by  the  differential  coefficient  of  the 
pressure  with  respect  to  the  density,  or  (if  the  density,  i.e.  the 
weight  of  a  unit  of  volume,  is  denoted  by  p)  by  the  differential 

coefficient  -y-.     Applying  this  principle  we  obtain  for  the 

velocity  of  sound,  which  we  will  call  u,  the  following  equa- 
tion 


«  =  V; 


4 <'^'' 


in  which  g  represents  the. accelerating  force  of  gravity. 


ON  PERFECT  GASES.  49' 

Now  in  order  to  determine  the  value  of  the  diffe'rential 

coefficient  -J-  Newton  used  the  law  of  Mariotte*  according  to 

which  pressure  and  density  are  proportional  to  each  other. 


pdp-pdp 


He  therefore  put  -  =  constant,  whence  by  differentiation : 


and  therefore 


whence  (19)  becomes 


.-    =»■ 


t-l m: 


«-\/«:- 


.(21). 


The  velocity  calculated  by  this  formula  did  not  however  agree 
with  experiment,  and  the  reason  of  this  divergence,  after  it 
had  been  long  sought  for  in  vain,  was  at  last  discovered  by 
Laplace. 

The  law  of  Mariotte  in  fact  holds  only  if  the  change  of 
density  takes  place  at  constant  temperature.  But  in  sound 
vibrations  this  is  not  the  case,  since  in  every  condensation 
a  heating  of  the  air  takes  place,  and  in  every  rarefaction  g, 
cooling.  Accordingly  at  each  condensation  the  pressure  is 
increased,  and  at  each  rarefaction  diminished,  to  a  greater 
extent  than  accords  with  Mariotte's  law.     The  question  now 

arises  how,  under  these  circumstances,  can  the  value  jof  -y- 

dp 

be  determined. 

Since  the  condensations  and  rarefactions  follow  each  other 

with  great  rapidity,  the  exchange  of  heat  that  can  take  place 

during  each  short  period  between  the  condensed  and  rarefied 

parts  of  the  gas  must  be  very  small.    Neglecting  this,  we 

have  to  do  with  a  change  of  density,  in  which  the  quantity  of 

gas  under  consideration  receives  no  heat  and  gives  forth  none; 

and  we  may  thus,  in  applying  to  this  case  the  differential  equa- 

*  Tkis  law  is  commonly  known  in  England  as  '  Boyle's  law,'  as  being 
originally  due  to  Boyle.    (Translator.) 

c.  4 


So       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

tions  of  the  last  section,  put  dQ  =  0,  Hence,  e.g.  from  the  last 
Qf  equations  (16),,  we  olstain: 

or  G^vdp  +  Oj,pdv  =  0. 

Now,  since  the  volume  v  of  one  unit  of  weight  18  the  re- 
ciprocal of  the  density,  we  may  put  v  =  -,  and ,  therefore 

r 

dv  =. — j^ ;  whence  the  equation  becomes 

p         p 

or  #  =  £p2  (22). 

This  value  of  the  Differential  Coefficient  -^  differs  from  that 

dp 

deduced  from  Mariotte's  law,  and  given  in  (20),  by  containing 

as  factor  the  ratio  of  the  two  Specific  Heats.    If  for  simplicity 

we  put 

^  =  1 (23), 

the  last  equation  becomes 

^  =  hP (24), 

dp        p 

Substituting  this  value  of  -^  in  equation  (19),  we  get  instead 
of  (21) 

«  =  \/%^ (25)v 

From  this  equation  the'  velocity  of  sound  u  can  be  calculated 
if  A  is  known ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  velocity  of  sound 
is  known  by  experiment,  we  can  apply  the  equation  to  calcu- 
late k,  changing  it  firs':  into  the  form 

h^"^^ (26). 

gp  ^    J 


ON  PEBFECT  GASES.  51 

The  velocity  of  sound  iu  air  has  been  several  times  deter- 
mined with  great  care  by  various  physicists,  -whose  results 
agree  with  each  other  very  closely.  According  to  the  experi- 
ments of  Bravais  and  Martens*  the  velocity  at  freezing  tem- 
perature is  332"4  m.  per  second  (10906  feet).  We  will  in- 
Siert  this  value  in  equation  (26).  We  may  also  give  g  its 
recognized  value  9'809  m.   (32-2  feet).     To  determine  the 

quotient  -  we  may  give  the  pressure  p  any  value  we  please, 

but  we  must  then  assign  to  the  density  p  the  value  corre- 
sponding to  that  pressure.  We  will  assume  p  to  be  the 
pressure  of  1  atmosphere.  This  must  be  expressed  in  the 
fonnula  by  the  amount  of  weight  supported  per  unit  of 
surface.  As'  this  weight  is  equal  to  that  of  a  column  of 
quicksilver,  whose  base  is  1  sq.  m.  and  height  760  mm.,  and 
which  therefore  has  a  volume  of  760  cubic  decimetres,  and  as, 
according  to  Regnault,  the  Specific  Weight  of  quicksilver  at 
0°,  as  compared  with  water  at  4°,  is  13"696,  we  obtain 

p  =  l  atmosphere  =  760  x  13"596  =  10333  kg.  per  sq.  metre. 

Lastly,  p  is  the  weight  of  a  cubic  metre  of  air  under  the 
assumed  pressure  of  1  atmosphere  and  at  temperature  0°, 
which,  according  to  Regnault,  is  1'2932  kg.  Substituting 
these  values  in  equation  (26)  we  obtain 

(332-4)- X  1-2932, 
*~    9-809x10333    ~*^"- 

Ha-ving  thus  determined  the  quantity  h  for  atmospheric 
air,  we  can  now  use  equation  (18)  to  calculate  the  quantity  E, 
i.e.  the  Mechanical  Equivalent  of  Heat,  as  was  first  done  by 
Mayer.     For  we  have  from  (18) 


and,  if  we  again  denote  by  k  the  quotient  -s,  which  is  the 


»  Ann.  de  Chim.  iii.,  13,  5;  and  Fogg.  Am.  Vol.  lxvi.,  p.  351. 

4—2 


52       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

C  ■  C 

same  as  -^ ,  and  accordingly  substitute  -^  for  c„  we  have 

^-of%-: '■'■^- 

Here  we  may  substitute  for  k  its  value  1"410  just  found, 
and  for  c^  its  value  as  given  by  Regnault,  02375.    It  then 

remains  to  determine  B,  or  ^-^° .    To  do  this,  let  us  agam 

take  Pn  as  the  pressure  of  1  atmosphere,  which,  as  seen  above, 
is  equal  to  10333,  and  we  then  have  for  v„  the  volume  in 
cubic  metres  of  1  kg.  of  air  under  the,  above  pressure  of 
1  atmosphere  and  at  temperature  0",  which  according  to 
Regnault  is  0'7733.  Lastly  we  have  already  assumed  the 
value  of  a  to  be  273.  The  value  of  B  for  atmospheric  air 
will  therefore  be  given  by  the  equation 

P  _  10333  X  07733  __„„ 
273 

Substituting  these  values  for  k,  c^,  and  B  in  equation  (27) 
we  obtain 

1-410  X  29-27  _ 
^  ~  0-410  X  0-2375  ~*'^'^^- 

This  figure  agrees  very  closely  with  that  determined  by 
Joule  from  the  friction  of  water,  viz.  423-55.  In  fact  it 
must  be  admitted  that  the  agreement  is  more  close  than, 
considering  the  degree  of  uncertainty  as  to  the  data  used  in 
the  calculation,  we  could  have  had  any  right  to  expect;  so 
that  chance  must  have  assisted  in  some  degree  to  produce  it. 
In  any  case,  however,  the  agreement  forms  a  striking  con- 
firmation of  the  equations  deduced  for  permanent  gases. 

§  6.     Various  Formulce  relating  to  the  Specific  Heats  of 


If  in  equation  (18),  p.  48,  we  consider  the  quantity  ^as 
known,  we  may  apply  that  equation  to  calculate  the  specific 
heat  at  constant  volume  from  that  at  constant  pressure,  which 
is  known  from  experiment.  This  application  is  of  special 
importance,  because  the  method  of  deducing  the  ratio  of  the 


ON  PERFECT  GASES.  53 

two  specific  heats  from  the  velocity  of  sound  is  only  prac- 
ticable in  the  case  of  the  very  few  gases  for  which  that 
velocity  has  been  experimentally  determined.  For  all  others, 
equation  (18)  offers  the  only  means  as  yet  discovered  of 
calculating  the  specific  heat  at  constant  volume  from  that 
at  constant  pressure. 

It  must  here  be  observed  that  equation  (18)  is  exactly 
true  only  for  perfect  gases,  although  it  gives  at  least  approxi- 
mate results  for  other  gases.  The  circumstance  has  also  to 
be  considered,  that  the  determination  of  the  specific  heat  of 
a  gas  at  constant  pressure  is  the  more  difficult,  and  therefore 
the  value  determined  the  less  reliable,  in  proportion  as  the 
gas  is  less  permanent  in  its  character,  and  thus  diverges 
more  widely  in  its  behaviour  from  the  laws  of  a  perfect  gas ; 
therefore,  as  there  is  no  need  to  seek  in  our  calculations  a 
greater  accuracy  than  the  experimental  values  themselves 
can  possibly  possess,  we  may  treat  the  mode  of  calculation 
employed  as  sufficiently  complete  for  our  purpose. 

Accordingly  we  begin  by  putting  equation  (18)  in  the  form 

o.  =  c,-§ (28). 

Here  for  E  we  shall  use  the  value  423'55.  S  is  determined 
by  equation  (4) 


It  = 


a 


where  p„v„  are  the  pressure  and  volume  at  the  temperature  of 
freezing.  Should  it  be  difficult  to  make  observations  on  the 
gas  at  this  temperature  (as  is  the  case  with  many  vapours) 
we  may  also,  by  equation  (6),  give  B  the  value 

i?=5 (29), 

where  p,  v,  and  T  are  any  three  corresponding  values  of 
pressure,  volume,  and  absolute  temperature. 

This  quantity  B,  as  already  observed,  is  only  so  far  depen- 
dent on  the  nature  of  the  gas,  that  it  is  inversely  proportional 
to  its  specific  gravity.  For  if  we  denote  by  v'  the  volume 
of. a  unit  of  weight  of  air  at  temperature  T  and  pressure  p. 


54       O'S   THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

and  by  R'  the  corresponding  value  of  R,  we  have 

■"'       ji  • 
Combining  this  with  equation  (29), 

B  =  R'^, 

V 

But  -,  is  the  ratio  of  the  volumes  of  equal  weights  of  the  two 

gases,  and  is  therefore  the  reciprocal  of  the  ratio  of  the 
weights  of  equal  volumes,  which  ratio  is  called  the  Specific 
Gravity  of  the  gas,  as  compared  with  common  air.  If  we 
call  this  specific  gravity  d,  the  last  equation  becomes 

^  =  f (^«)- 

Substituting  this  value  of  B  in  (28)  we  obtain 

'^-'^'-M (^1)- 

The  quantity  here  denoted  by  R',  i.e.  the  Value  of  R  for 
atmospheric  air,  has  been  already  determined  in  §  5  to  be 
equal  to  29-27.     Hence  further, 

whence  the  equation,  which  serves  to  determine  the  Specific 
Heat  at  constant  volume,  takes  this  simple  form  : 

0-0691 
''«  =  ". ^— (32). 

If  in  the  next  place  we  apply  this  equation  to  the  case  of  air, 
for  which  d=l,  and  for  the  sake  of  distinction  denote  by 
accented  letters  the  two  specific  heats  for  air,  we  get  the 
following  equation : 

c'  =c;- 00691  (33), 


ON  PERFECT  GASES.  55 

and  substituting  for  c'^  its  value  according  to  Kegnault, 
which  is  02375,  we  obtain  the  result 

c'.  =  0-2375 -0-0691  =  0-1684 (34.)* 

!For  the  other  gases  the  equation  may  be  given  in  the 
following  form : 

^^^^-0:0691 ^3.^^ 

which,  as  will  be  seen  later,  is  specially  convenient  for  the 
application  of  the  values  given  by  Eegnault  for  specific 
heats  at  constant  pressure. 

The  specific  heats  denoted  by  c^  and  c„  relate  to  a  unit 
of  weight  of  the  gas,  and  have  for  unit  the  ordinary  unit  of 
heat,  i.e.  the  quantity  of  heat  required  to  raise  a  unit  of 
weight  of  water  from  the  temperature  0°  to  1".  We  may 
thus  say  that  the  gas,  in  relation  to  the  heat  which  it 
requires  to  raise  its  temperature  either  at  constant  pressure 
or  constant  volume,  is  referred  as  regards  weight  to  the 
standard  of  water. 

,  With  gases  however  it  is  desirable  to  refer  to  the 
standard  of  air  as  regards  volume ;  i.e.  so  to  determine  the 
specific  heat,  as  to  compare  the  quantity  of  heat,  which 
the  gas  Requires  to  raise  its  temperature  through  1°,  with  the 
quantity  of  heat  which  an  equal  volume  of  air;  taken  at  the 
same  temperature  and  pressure,  requires  to  raise  its  tempe- 
rature to  the  same  extent.  We  may  use  this  kind  of 
comparison  in  the  case  of  both  the  specific  heats,  inasmuch 
as  we  assume  in  the  one  case  that  both  the  gas  under  con- 
sideration and  the  atmospheric  air  are  heated  at  constant 
pressure,  and  in  the  other  that  they  are  both  heated  at 
constant  volume.  The  specific  heats  thus  determined  may 
be  denoted  by  7^  and  7^. 

As  we  denote  by  v  the  volume  which  a  unit  weight  of  gas 
assumes  at  a  given  pressure  and  temperature,  the  quantity  of 
heat,  which  a  unit-volume  of  the  gas  absorbs  at  constant 

pressure  in  being  heated  through  1°,  will  be  expressed  by  -^ , 

•  It  will  be  Been  that  cj  and  e,'  fulfil  the  condition  fonnd ,  above  for 
perfect  gases;  —  =  1-410.    {Translator.) 


56       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

c 
or  iu  the  case  of  atmospheric  air  by  -f  ■     The  specific  heat 

7^  is  found  by  dividing  the  former  quantity  by  the  latter,  or, 
^^  =  ^x-^;=%x^  =  ^cZ (36). 

Similarly  %  =  ^d (37). 

c. 

In  the  first  of  these  two  equations  we  may  give  to  c'^  its 
value  as  found  by  Regnault,  0'2375 ;  the  equation  then 
becomes 

^  =  0^ (^«)- 

In  the  second  we  may  put  for  c'„,  according  to  (34)^  the 
value  0"1684<,  and  for  c,  the  expression  given  in  (35);  whence 
we  have 

c„d- 00691  ,„Q> 

§  7.  Numerical  Calculation  of  the  Specific  Heat  at  con- 
stant Volume. 

The  formulae  developed  in  the  last  section  have  been 
applied  by  the  author  to  calculate  from  the  values  which 
Eegnault  has  determined  by  his  researches  for  the  Specific 
Heat  at  constant  Pressure  of  a  large  number  of  gases  and 
vapours,  the  corresponding  values  of  the  Specific  Heat  at 
constant  Volume.  In  so  doing  he  has  in  some  sort  recal- 
culated one  of  the  two  series  of  numbers  given  by  Regnault 
himself;  who  has  expressed  the  Specific  Heat  at  constant 
Pressure  in  two  different  ways,  and  has  brought  together  the 
resulting  numbers  in  two  series,  one  of  which  is  superscribed 
'  en  poids,'  and  the  other  '  en  volume.'  The  first  series  con- 
tains the  values  which  result,  if  the  gases  in  question  are 
compared  weight  by  weight  with  water,  in  relation  to  the 
quantity  .of  heat. required  to  warm  them  through  1°;  in  other 
words,  the  values  of  the  quantities  denoted  above  by  Cp.  The 
numbers  in  the  second  series  are  simply  obtained  from  those 


ON  PERFECT  GASES.  57 

in  the  first  by  multiplying  them  by  the  corresponding  specific 
gravity,  i.  e.  they  are  the  values  of  the  product  Cpd. 

These  latter  numbers  were  no  doubt  those  most  easily 
•  calculated  from  the  observed  values  of  c^,;  but  their  signi- 
fication is  somewhat  complicated.  With  them  the  quan- 
tity of  heat  has  for  its  unit  the  ordinary  unit  of  heat,  whilst 
the  volume  to  which  they  refer  is  that  which  a  unit-weight 
of  atmospheric  air  assumes,  when  under  the  same  tempera- 
ture and  pressure  as  the  gas  under  consideration.  The  tedious- 
ness  of  the  verbal  description  thus  required  makes  the 
numbers  troublesome  to  understand  and  to  apply ;  moreover 
this  mode  of  expressing  the  Specific  Heat  of  gases  has  been 
used,  so  far  as  the  author  knows,  by  no  previous  writer.  In 
considering  gases  with  reference  to  volume,  it  has  in  all  other 
cases  been  custoinary  to  compare  the  quantity  of  heat,  which 
a  given  gas  requires  to  raise  its  temperature  through  1°,  with 
the  quantity  of  heat  which  an  equal  volume  of  atmospheric 
air  requires  under  the  same  conditions  for  the  same  purpose, 
or,  as  briefly  expressed  above,  by  comparing  the  gas,  volume 
for  volv/me,  with  air.  The  numbers  thus  obtained  are  re- 
markable for  their  simplicity,  and  allow  the  laws  which 
hold  as  to  the  specific  heats  of  the  gas  to  be  treated  with 
special  clearness. 

It  will  therefore,  the  author  believes,  be  found  an  ad- 
vantage that  he  has  calculated,  from  the  values  given  by 
Eegnault  under  the  heading  'en  volume'  for  the  product 
Gj,d,  the  values  of  the  quantity  7^,,  defined  above.  All  that 
was  required  for  this,  by  (38),  was  to  divide  the  values  of  c^d 
by  0-2375. 

He  has  further  calculated  the  values  of  c„  and  7,;  calcula- 
tions which  by  equations  (35)  and  (39)  could  be  very  simply 
performed,  by  taking  fi:om  the  values  of  the  product  c^d  the 
number  0'0691,  and  dividing  the  remainder  by  d,  or  by 
01684,  respectively. 

The  numerical  values  thus  calculated  are  brought  together 
in  the  annexed  table,  in  which  the  different  columns  have  the 
following  signification : 

Column  I.  gives  the  name  of  the  gas. 

Column  II.  gives  the  Chemical  composition,  and  this 
expressed  in  such  a  way  that  the  diminution  of  volume  pro- 


S8       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

duced  by  the  combination  can  be  immediately  observed.  For 
in  each  case  those  volumes  of  the  simple  gas  are  given,  which 
must  combine  in  order  to  give  Two  Volumes  of  the  compound 
gas.  Thus  we  assume  for  Carbon,  as  a  gas,  such  an  hypothe- 
tical volume  as  we  must  assume,  in  order  to  say  that  one 
volume  of  Carbon  unites  with  one  volume  of  Oxygen  to  make 
Carbonic  Oxide,  or,  with  two  volumes  to  make  Carbonic 
acid.  Again,  when,  e.g.  Alcohol  is  denoted  in  the  Table  by 
CjjHgO,  this  means  that  two  volumes  of  the  hypothetical  car- 
bon gas,  six  volumes  of  Hydrogen,  and  one  volume  of  Oxygen, 
make  up  together  two  volumes  of  Alcoholic  vapour.  For 
sulphur-gas  the  specific  gravity  used  to  determine  its  volume 
is  that  found  by  Sainte-Claire  Deville  and  Troost  for  very 
high  temperatures,  viz.  2"23.  In  the  five  last  combinations 
in  the  Table,  which  contain  Silicon,  Phosphorus,  Arsenic, 
Titanium,  and  Tin,  these  simple  elements  are  denoted  by 
their  ordinary  chemical  signs,  without  reference  to  their 
volumes  in  the  gaseous  condition,  because  the  gaseous, 
volumes  of  these  elements  are  partly  still  unknown,  partly 
hampered  with  certain  irregularities  not  yet  thoroughly  cleared 
up. 

Column  III.  gives  the  Density  of  the  gas,  using  the  values 
given  by  Kegnault. 

Column  IV.  gives  the  Specific  Heat  at  constant  Pressure 
as  compared,  weight  for  weight,  with  water,  or  in  other  words 
referred  to  a  unit-weight  of  the  gas  and  expressed  in  ordinary 
units  of  heat.  These  are  the  numbers  given  by  Regnault 
under  the  heading  '  en  poids.' 

Column  V.  gives  the  Specific  Heat  at  constant  Pressure 
compared,  volume  for  volume,  with  air,  calculated  by  divid- 
ing by  0'2375  the  numbers  given  by  Regnault  under  the 
heading  '  en  volume.' 

Column  VI.  gives  the  Specific  Heat  at  constant  Volume 
compared,  weight  for  weight,  with  water,  calculated  by  equa- 
tion (35). 

Column  VII.  gives  the  Specific  Heat  at  constant  Volume 
compared,  volume  for  volume,  with  air,  calculated  by  equation 
(39). 


ON  PERFECT  GASES. 


59 


Name  of  the  Gaa. 


Atmosi)]ierio  Air  

Oxygen  

Nitrogen 

Hydrogen 

Chlorine 

Bromine 

Nitric  Oxide 

CarbonicOxide 

Hydrochloric  Acid.... 

Carbonic  Acid 

Nitric  Acid 

Steam 

Sulphuric  Acid 

"  Hydro-sulphuric  Acid. 
Carbonic  di-sulphide . 
Carburetted  Hydrogen 

Chloroform 

Olefiant  Gas 

Ammonia  

Benzine 

Oil  of  Turpentine. 

Wood  Spirit 

Alcohol 

Ether 

Ethyl  Sulphide.... 
Ethyl  Chloride.... 
Ethyl  Bromide.... 

Dutch  Liquid 

Aceton 

Butyric  Acid 

Tri-ohloride  of  Silicon 
Tri-chloride  of  Phos 

phorus 

Tri-chlorideof  Arsenic 
Xetra-ohloride  of  Ti- 
tanium  , 

Tetra-chloride  of  Tin. 


n. 


Chemical 
Composi- 
tion. 


0» 

&. 

Br, 

NO 

CO 

HCl 

CO, 


SOa 

H^S     . 

OSj 

•OH4 

CHCI3 

CjH^ 

NH3 

6      fl 

CH^O 

C^HeO 

C^HioO 

C^Hju  S 

0,H,C1 

CaHsBr 

CaH^CI, 

CjHjO 

C.HsOa 

S1CI3 

PCI3 

AsCIs 

TiCI^ 

SnCl^ 


III. 


Density. 


1 

1-1056 

0-9713 

0-0692 

2-4S02 

5-4772 

1-0384 

0-9673 

1-2596 

1-5201 

1-5241 

0-6219 

2-2113 

1-1747, 

2-6258 

0-5527 

4-1244 

0-9672 

0-5894 

2'6942 

4-6978 

1-1055 

1-5890 

2-5573 

3-1101 

2-2269 

3-7058 

3-4174 

2-0036 

3-0400 

5-8833 

4-7464 

6-2667 

6-6402 

8-9654 


IV. 


Specific  heat  at  con- 
stant Pressure 


compared 
weight  for 

weight 
with 

Water. 


0-2375 

0-21751 

0-24380 

3-40900 

0-12099 

0-05552 

0-2317 

0-2450 

0-1852 

0-2169 

0-2262 

0-4805 

0-1544 

0-2432 

0-1569 

0-5939 

0-1567 

0-4040 

0-5084 

0-3754 

0-5061 

0-4380 

0-4534 

0-4797 

0-4008 

0-2738 

0-1896 

0-2293 

0-4125 

0-4008 

0-1322 

0-1347 

0-1122 

0-1290 

0-0939 


compared 

volume  for 

volume 

with  Air. 


1 

1-013 
0-997 
0-993 
1-248 
1-280 
1-013 
0-998 
0-982 
1-39 
1-45 
1-26 
1-44 
1-20 
1-74 
1'38 
2-72 
1-75 
1-26 
4-26 
10-01 
2-18 
3-03 
5-16 
5-25 
2-57 
2-96 
3-30 
3-48 
5-13 
3-27 

2-69 


3-61 
3-54 


VI. 


VII. 


Specific  heat  at  con- 
stant Volume 


compared 
weight  for 

weight 
with 

"Water. 


0-1684 

0-1551 

0-1727 

2-411 

0-0928 

0-0429 

0-1652 

0-1736 

0-1304 

0-172 

0-181 

0-370 

0-123 

0-184 

0-131 

0-468 

0-140 

0-359 

0-391 

0-350 

0-491 

0-395 

0-410 

0-453 

0-379 

0-243 

0-171 

0-209 

0-378 

0-378 

0-120 

0-120 

0-101 

0-119 

0-086 


compared 

volume  for 

volume 

with  Air, 


1 

1-018 
0-996 
0-990 
1-350 
1-395 
1-018 
0-997 
0-975 
1-55 
1-64 
1-36 
1-62 
1-29 
2-04 
1-54 
3-43 
2-06 
1-37 
5-60  • 
13-71 
2-60 
3-87 
6-87 
6-99 
3-21 
3-76 
4-24 
4-50 
6-82 
4-21 

3-39 

3-77 

4-67 

4-59' 


60       ON  THE  MECHANICA.L  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

§  8.  Integration  of  the  Differential  Equations  which  ex- 
press the  first  main  Principle  in  the  case  of  Oases. 

The  differential  equations  deduced  in  sections  3  and  4,  which 
in  various  forms  express  the  first  main  principle  of  the  Mechani- 
cal Theory  of  Heat  in  the  case  of  gases,  are  not  immediately 
integrable,  as  can  be  seen  by  inspection;  and  must  therefore 
be  treated  after  the  method  developed  in  §  3  of  the  Introduc- 
tion. In  other  words,  the  integration  becomes  possible  as 
soon  as  we  subject  the  variables  occurring  in  the  equation  to 
some  one  condition,  thus  determining  the  path  of  the  change 
of  condition  of  the  body.  We  shall  here  give  only  two  very 
simple  examples  of  the  process,  the  results  of  which  are 
important  for  our  further  investigations. 

Example  1.  The  gas  changes  its  volume  at  Constant 
Pressure,  and  the  quantity  of  heat  required  for  such  change  is 
known. 

In  this  case  we  select  from  the  above  equations  one  which 
contains  p  and  v  as  independent  variables,  e.g.  the  last  of 
Equations  (15),  which  is 

dQ  =  ^^vdp  +  ^piv. 

As  the  pressure  p  is  to  be  constant,  we  put  p=p^,  and 
dp  =  0;  the  equation  then  becomes 

dQ  =  -^p^dv, 

which  gives  on  integration  (if  we  call  v^  the  original  value 
oi  v) 

<3  =  §Fi(«-«i) (40). 

Example  2.  The  gas  changes  its  volume  at  Constant 
Temperature,  and  the  quantity  of  heat  required  for  such 
change  is  known. 

In  this  case  we  select  an  equation  which  contains  y  and  v 
as  independent  variables,  e.g.  Equation  (11),  which  is 

dQ  =  C,dT  +  —  dv. 

V 


ON  PERFECT  GASES.  61 

As  Tis  to  be  constant,  we  put  T  =  T^,  and  dT  =  0 ;  whence 
we  have 


1    V 


Integrating, 


V 


.Q  =  RT>g^ (41). 


Hence  is_  derived  the  Principle  that  if  a  Gas  changes  its 
volume  without  change  of  temperature,  the  quantities  of  heat 
absorbed  or  given  off  form  an  arithmetical  series,  while  the 
volumes  form  a  geometrical  series. 

Again,  if  we  put  for  R  its  value  ^^ ,  we  have 

Q=p,v,log^ (42). 

_  If  we  suppose  this  equation.to  refer,  not  directly  to  a  unit 
weight  of  the  gas,  but  to  a  quantity  of  it  such  that  at  pressure 
p  it  assumes  a  volume  v^,  and  then  suppose  that  this  volume 
changes  under  constant  temperature  to  v,  then  the  equation 
contains  nothing  which  depends  on  the  special  nature  of  the 
gas.  Therefore  the  quantity  of  heat  absorbed  is  independent 
of  the  nature  of  the  gas.  Further,  it  does  not  depend  on  the 
temperature,  but  only  on  the  pressure,  being  proportional  to 
the  original  pressure. 

Another  application  of  the  differential  equations  deduced 
in  sections  3  and  4  consists  in  making  some  assumption  as 
to  the  heat  to  be  imparted  to  the  gas  during  its  change 
of  condition,  and  then  enquiring  what  course  the  change  of 
condition  will  take  under  such  circumstances.  The  simplest 
and  at  the  same  time  most  important  assumption  of  this  kind 
is  that  no  heat  whatever  is  imparted  to  or  taken  from  the  gas 
during  its  change  of  condition.  For  this  purpose  we  may 
imagine  the  gas  confined  in  a  vessel  impermeable  to  heat,  or 
that  the  change  is  so  rapid  that  no  appreciable  heat  can  pass 
to  or  ffom  the  gas  in  the  time. 


62  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

On  this  assumption  we  must  put  dQ  =  0.  Let  us  do 
this  for  the  three  Equations  (16).  Then  the  first  of  these 
becomes 

C,dT+{G^-G:)^dv  =  0. 

G 

Dividing  by  T  x  (7„  and  as  before  denoting  jf  by  h,  we  have 

f+(*-i)?=o. 

Integrating, 

log  T+(k-l)logv  =  Const. 

or  Tv^^  =  Const. 

If  Tj,  Vj  are  the  original  values  of  T,  v,  we  may  eliminate  the 
Constant,  and  obtain 


.(43). 


If  this  equation  be  applied  for  example  to  atmospheric  air, 
then,  writing  k=  1"410,  we  can  easily  calculate  the  change  of 
temperature  which  corresponds  to  any  given  change  of 
volume.  If  e.g.  we  assume  a  certain  quantity  of  air  to  be 
taken  at  freezing  temperature  and  at  any  pressure  whatever, 
and  to  be  compressed,  either  in  a  vessel  impermeable  to 
heat,  or  with  great  rapidity,  to  half  its  volume,  then  Tj  =  273 

(absolute  temperature)  and  —  =  2 ;  hence  the  equation  be- 
comes 

^'=2»^'»  =  1-329, 

whence  T  =  273  x  1-329  =  363, 

or  if  t  be  the  temperature  measured  in  degrees  above  freezing 
point, 

«=  T- 273  =  90°. 

If  a  similar  calculation  is  made  for  the  compression  of  the 
gas  to  J  and  -^  of  its  original  volume,  results  are  obtained, 


ON  PEEFECT  GASES. 


^3 


■which,  combined  with  the  former,  are  presented  in  the  follow- 
ing Table. 


Value  of 
V 

1 
2 

1 

4 

1 
10 

T 
273 

1-329 

1-765 

2-570 

T 

863 

482 

702 

t 

90» 

209» 

429» 

•    Again,  if  in  the  second  of  equations  (16)  we  put  dQ  =  0, 
we  get : 

F 
This  equation  is  of  the  same  form  as  the  last,  except  that 
p  is  in  the  place  of  v,  and  that  (7^,  and  C,  have  their  places 
interchanged.     Hence   in   exactly  the   same   way  we   shall 
obtain. 


whence 


©■=(f)" 


.  (44). 


Finally  the  last  of  Equations  (16),  if  d^  be.  put  =  0,  passes 
into  the  form  already  treated  in  §  5 ; 

C  0 


which  may  be  written 
and  gives  on  integration 


P  V 


i>t     \vJ 


.(45). 


64 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  ^ OF  HEAT. 


§  9.  Determination  of  the  External  Work  done  during 
the  change  ofvolwme  of  a  gas. 

There  is  one  quantity  connected  witli  the  expansion  of  a 
gas  which  still  requires  to  be  specially  considered,  viz.  the 
External  Work  done  in  the  process.  The  element  of  this 
work,  as  determined  in  Equation  (6),  Ch.  I,  is 

d  W  =pdv. 

This  work  may  be  very  clearly  set  forth  by  a  graphic 
representation.  We  will  adopt  a  rectangular  system  of  co-or- 
dinates, in  which  the  abscissa  represents  the  volume  v,  and  the 
ordiiiate  the  pressure  p.  If  we  now  suppose  p  to  be  expressed 
as  a  function  of  v,  say  p  =f  (v),  then  this  equation  is  the 
equation  to  a  curve,  whose  ordinates  express  the  values  of  pr 
corresponding  to  the  different  values  of  v,  and  which  for 
brevity  we  will  call  the  Pressure-curve.  In  Fig.  3  let  rs  be 
this  curve,  so  that,  if  oe  repre- 
sent the  volume  v  existing  at 
a  certain  instant,  the  ordinate 
ef  drawn  at  e  will  represent 
the  pressure  at  the  same  in- 
stant. If  further  eg  represent 
an  indefinitely  small  element 
of  volume  dv,  and  the  ordinate 
gh  is  drawn  at  g,  then  we  shall 
have  an  indefinitely  small  para- 
lellogram  efhg,  whose  area  re- 
presents the  external  work 
done  in  an  indefinitely  small 
expansion  of  the  body ;  and 
which  differs  from  the  product  pdv  only  by  an  indefinitely 
small  quantity  of  the  second  order,  which  may  be  neglected. 
The  same  holds  for  any  other  indefinitely  smaU  expansion; 
and  hence  in  the  case  of  a  finite  expansion  (say  from  the 
volume  Vj,  represented  by  the  abscissa  oa,  to  that  otv^,  repre- 
sented by  the  abscissa  oc)  the  external  work,  for  which  we 
have  the  equation 


Fig.  3. 


W 


=  I  pdv , 


.(46), 


ON   PERFECT  GASES. 


Go 


IS  represented  by  the  quadrangular  figure  abdc,  which  is 
bounded  by  the  difference  of  abscissae  ac,  the  ordinates  ab 
and  cd,  and  the  portion  of  the  pressure-curve  bd. 

In  order  actually  to  perform  the  integration  in  equation 
(46)  we  must  know  the  function  of  v  which  expresses  the 
pressure  p.  On  this  point  we  will  select  as  examples  the  cases 
already  treated  in  §  8. 

First,  let  us  assume  that  the  Pressure  p  is  constant. 
Then  the  curve  of  pressure  is  a  straight  line  parallel  to-  the 
axis  of  X,  and  abdc  is  a  rectangle  (see  Fig.  4)  whose  area  is 


Fig.  4. 

equal  to  the  product  of  ac  and  ab.     In  this  case  then  we 
obtain  from  (46),  denoting  the  constant  pressure  hy  p^, 


W=p,{v^-v,) 


•(47), 


Secondly,  let  us  assume  that  the  Temperature  remains 
constant  during  the  expansion  of  the  gas.  Then  the.  law  of 
Mariotte  holds  for  the  relation  between  pressure  and  volume, 
and  is  expressed  by  the  equation 

pv=  const. 

From  the  form  of  this  equation  we  see  that  the  curve  of 
pressure  is  an  equilateral  hyperbola  (Fig.  5)  having  the  axes 
of  co-ordinates  as  asymptotes.  A  pressure- curve  of  this  kind, 
which  involves  the  special  condition  that  the  temperature  is 
constant,  is  usually  called  an  Isothermal  Curve. 

To  effect  the  integration  in  this  case  we  may  write  for  p 
c.  5 


66       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 

the  value  ■^' ,  where  'p^^  is  any  value  obtained  for  the  conr 
stant  in  the  above  equation ;  we  then  get  from  (46) : 


^=PA£''7=i'i^i^og^^ (*®)- 


We  observe  that  this  value  of  TT  coincides  with  that  given 
in  equation  (42)  for  Q ;  the  reason  for  this  being  that  the  gas, 
while  expanding  at  constant  temperature,  absorbs  only  so 
much  heat  as  is  required  for  the  external  work. 

Joule  has  employed  the  equation  (48)  in  one  of  his  deter- 
minations of  the  Mechanical  Equivalent  of  Heat.  For  this 
purpose  he  forced  atmospheric  air  into  a  strong  receiver,  up 
to  ten  or  twenty  times  its  normal  density.  The  receiver  and 
pump  were  meantime  kept  under  water,  so  that  all  the  heat 
which  was  developed  in  pumping  could  be  measured  in  the 
water.  The  apparatus  is  represented  in  Fig.  6,  in  which  H  is 
the  receiver,  and  G  the  pump.  The  vessel  G,  as  will  be 
easily  understood,  was  used  for  the  drying  of  the  air,  and  the 
vessel  with  the  spiral  tube  served  to  give  to  the  air,  before  its 
entrance  into  the  pump,  an  exactly  known  temperature. 
From  the  total  quantity  of  heat  given  in  the  calorimeter 
Joule  subtracted  the  part  due  to  the  friction  of  the  pump, 
the  amount  of  which  he  determined  by  working  the  pump 
for  exactly  the  same  length  of  time,  and  under  the  same 
mean  pressure,  but  without  allowing  the  entrance  of  air,  and 
then  observing  the  heat  produced.  The  remainder,  after  this 
was  subtracted,  he  took  as  being  the  quantity  of  heat  de- 
veloped by  the  compression  of  the  air ;  and  this  he  compared 
with  the  work  required  for  the  compression  as  given  by  equa- 
tion (48).  By  this  means  he  obtained  as  the  mean  of  two 
series  of  experiments  the  value  of  444  kilogrammetres  as  the 
Mechanical  Equivalent  of  Heat. 

This  value,  it  must  be  admitted,  does  not  agree  very  well 
with  the  value  424  obtained  by  the  friction  of  water ;  the 
reason  of  which  is  probably  to  be  found  in  the  far  larger 
sources  of  erroi:  attending  experiments  on  air.  Nevertheless 
at  that  time,  when  the  fact  that  the  work  required  for 
developing  a  given  quantity  of  heat  was  equal  under  all  cir- 
cumstances was  not  yet  placed  on  a  firm  basis,  the  agreement 


ON  PERFECT  GASES. 


67 


of- the  values  found  by  such  wholly  different  methods  was 
close  enough  to  aid  considerably  in  the  establishment  of  the 
principle. 

As  a  third  case  of  determination  of  work  done,  we  may 
assume  that  the  gas  changes  its  volume  within  an  envelope 


c  c  cy;^ 


impermeable  to  heat ;  or,  which  comes  to  the  same  thing, 
that  the  change  of  volume  takes  place  too  rapidly  to  allow  of 
the  passing  of  any  appreciable  quantity  of  heat  to  or  from  the 
body  during  the  time. 

5—2 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OP  HEAT. 


In  this  case  the  relation  between  pressure  and  volume  is 
given  by  equation  (45),  viz.: 


Pi     \vj ' 


"The  curve  of  pressure  corresponding  to  this  equation 
(Fig.  7)  falls  more  steeply  than  that  delineated  in  Fig.  5. 
ilankine  has  given  to  this 
special  class  of  pressure- 
curves,  which  correspond  to 
the  case  of  expansion  within 
an  envelope  impermeable  to 
heat,  the  name  of  Adiabatic 
curves  (from  Sia/3alveiv,  to 
pass  through).  On  the 
other  hand  Gibbs  {Trans. 
Connecticut  Academy,  vol. 
II.  p.  309)  has  proposed  to 
name  them  Isentropiccurves, 
because  in  this  kind  of  ex- 
pansion the  Entropy,  a  quan- 


Fig.  7. 


tity  which  will  be  discussed  further  on,  remains  constant.  This 
latter  form  of  nomenclature  is  the  one  which  the  author  pro- 
poses to  adopt,  since  it  is  both  usual  and  advantageous  to 
designate  curves  of  this  kind  according  to  that  quantity 
which  remains  constant  during  the  action  that  takes  place. 

To  effect  the  integration  in  this  case,  we  may  put,  accord- 
ing to  the  above  equation, 


I>=FiK 


whence  (46)  becomes 


(49). 


(69  ) 


CHAPTEE  III. 


SECOND  MAIN    PRINCIPLE    OF  THE   MECHANICAL   THEORY 
OF   HEAT. 

§  1,    Description  of  a  special  form  of  Cyclical  Process. 

In  order  to  prove  and  to  make  intelligible  the  second 
Principle  of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat,  we  shall  com- 
mence by  following  out  in  all  its  parts,  and  graphically  repre- 
senting in  the  manner  already  described,  one  special  form 
of  cyclical  process.  For  the  latter  purpose  we  will  assume 
that  the  condition  of  the  variable  body  is  determined  by  its 
volume  V  and  its  pressure  p,  and  will  employ,  as  before,  a 
rectangular  system  of  co-ordinates,  in  which  the  abscissse 
represent'volumes,  and  the  ordinates  pressures.  Any  point 
on  the  plane  of  co-ordinates  will  then  correspond  to  a  certain 
condition  of  the  body,  in  which  its  volume  and  pressure  have 
the  same  volumes  as  the  abscissa  and  ordinate  of  the  point. 
Further,  every  variation  of  the  body's  condition  will  be 
represented  by  a  line,  whose  extreme  points  determine  the 
initial  and  final  condition  of  the  body,  and  whose  form  shews 
the  way  in  which  the  pressure  and  volume  have  simul- 
taneously varied. 

In  Fig.  8  let  the  initial  condition  of  the  body,  at  which 
the  cyclical  process  commences,  be  given  by  the  point  a,  so 
that  the  abscissa  oe  =  Vi  and  the  ordinate  ea=^p^  represent 
the  initial  volume  and  pressure  respectively.  By  means  of 
these  two  quantities  the  initial  temperature,  which  we  wUl 
call  Tj,  is  also  fixed. 


70 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 


Now  let  the  body  in  the  first  place  expand,  while  retain- 
ing the  same  temperature  T,.   If  no  heat  were  imparted  to  it 


e     i    f 

Fig.  8. 


during  expansion,  it  would  necessarily  become  cooler:  we 
will  therefore  assume  that  it  is  put  in  communication  with  a 
body  K,  acting  as  a  reservoir  of  heat,  which  body  has  the 
same  temperature  T,,  and  does  not  appreciably  vary  from  this 
during  the  cyclical  process.  From  this  body  the  variable 
body  is  supposed  to  draw  during  the  expansion  just  sufficient 
heat  to  keep  itself  also  at  the  temperature  T^. 

The  curve,  which  duritig  this  expansion  expresses  the 
change  of  pressure,  is  part  of  an  isothermal  curve.  In  order 
tha,t  we  may  give  definite  forms  to  the  graphic  repre- 
sentations of  this  curve,  and  of  others  yet  to  be  described, 
we  will,  without  limiting  the  investigation  itself  to  any 
particular  bodies,  draw  the  figure  as  it  would  appear  in  the 
case  of  a  perfect  gas.  Then  the  isothermal  curve,  as  ex- 
plained above,  will  be  an  equilateral  hyperbola;  and,  if  the 
expansion  take  place  from  the  volume  oe  =  v^  to  the  volume 
o/=  Fj,  we  shall  obtain  the  part  ah  of  such  an  equilateral 
hyperbola. 

When  the  volume  V^  has  been  reached,  let  us  suppose  the 
body  K^  to  be  withdrawn,  and  let  the  variable  body  be  left 
to  continue  its  expansion  by  itself,  without  any  heat  hieing 
imparted  to  it.  The  temperature  must  then  fall,  and  we 
obtain  as  curve  of  pressure  an  iseniropio  curve,  which  descends 
more  steeply  than  the  isothermal  curve.  Let  this  expansion 
continue  till  the  volume  V^  is  reached,  giving  us  the  portion 
of  an  isentropic  curve  be.  The  lower  temperature  thus 
attained  we  may  call  T.^. 


SECOND  MAIN  PRINCIPLE.  7l 

From  henceforward  let  the  body  be  compressed,  so  as  to 
bring  it  back,  to  its  original  volume.  Let  the  compression 
first  take  place  at  the  constant  temperature  T^,  for  which 
purpose  we  may  suppose  that  the  body  is  connected  with  a 
body  K^  at  temperature  T^,  acting  as  a  reservoir  of  heat,  and 
that  it  gives  up  to  K^  just  so  much  heat  as  suffices  to  keep 
itself  also  at  temperature  T^.  The  pressure-curve  correspond- 
ing to  this  compression  is  again  an  isothermal  curve,  and  in 
the  special  case  of  a  perfect  gas  is  another  equilateral  hyper- 
bola, of  which  we  obtain  the  portion  cd  during  the  reduction 
of  volume  to  oh=v^. 

Finally,  let  the  last  compression,  which  brings  the  varia- 
ble body  back  to  its  initial  volume,  take  place  without 
the  presence  of  the  body  K^,  so  that  the  temperature  rises, 
and  the  pressure  follows  the  line  of  an  isentropic  curve. 
We  wUl  assume  that  the  volume  oh  =  v^,  up  to  which  the 
compression  went  on  according  to  the  first  mode,  is  so  chosen, 
that  the  compression  which  begins  from  this  volume  and 
continues  to  volume  oe  =  v^  is  just  sufficient  to  raise  the 
temperature  again  from  T^  to  T^.  If  then  the  initial  tem- 
perature is  thus  regained  at  the  same  time  as  the  initial 
volume,  the  pressure  must  also  return  to  its  initial  value,  and 
the  last  curve  of  pressure  must  therefore  exactly  hit  the 
point  a.  When  the  body  is  thus  brought  back  again  to  the 
original  condition,  expressed  by  the  point  a,  the  cyclical  pro- 
cess is  complete. 

§  2.    Result  of  tJie  Cyclical  Process. 

During  the  two  expansions  which  take  place  in  the  course 

<jf  the  cyclical  process  the  ex- 
ternal pressure  must  be  over- 
come, and  therefore  external 
work  must  be  performed ; 
whereas  conversely  during  the 
compressions  external  work 
is  absorbed  to  perform  them. 
These  quantities  of  work  are 
given  directly  by  the  figure, 
which  is  here  reproduced. 
°' ^'  The  work  performed  during 

the  expansion  ab  is  represented  by  the  quadrangle  eabf,  and 


72       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

that  perfortned  during  the  expansion  be  by  the  quadrangle 
fbcg.  Again,  the  ■work  absorbed  for  the  compression  cd  is 
represented  by  the  quadrangle  cfcdh,  and  that  absorbed  for 
the  compression  da  by  the  quadrangle  hdae.  The  two  latter 
quantities,  on  account  of  the  lower  temperature  which  obtains 
during  the  compression,  are  smaller  than  the  two  former; 
and,  if  we  subtract  them  from  these,  there  remains  an  over- 
plus of  external  work  performed,  which  is  represented  by  the 
quadrangle  abed,  and  which  we  will  call  W. 

To  the  external  work  thus  gained  must  correspond,  ac- 
cording to  equation  (5a)  of  Chapter  I.,  a  quantity  Q,  equal  to 
it  in  value,  which  is  required  for  its  production.  Now  the 
variable  body,  during  the  first  expansion,  expressed  by  ab, 
which  took  place  in  connection  with  the  body  if,,  received 
from  this  latter  a  certain  quantity  of  heat,  which  we  may  call 
Q, ;  and  again  during  the  first  compression,  expressed  by  cd, 
which  took  place  in  connection  with  the  body  K^,  it  im- 
parted to  this  latter  a  certain  quantity  of  heat,  which  may  be 
called  Qj.  During  the  second  expansion  6c  and  the  second 
compression  da  the  body  neither  imparted  nor  received  heat. 
Now,  since  in  the  course  of  the  whole  cyclical  process  a  certain 
quantity  of  heat  Q  is. absorbed  in  work,  it  follows  that  the 
quantity  of  heat  Q,,  received  by  the  variable  body,  is  larger 
than  the  quantity  of  heat  Q^  which  it  gives  out,  so  that  the 
difference  Q^  —  Q^  is  equal  to  Q. 

We  may  accordingly  put 

Q.  =  Q,+  Q (1), 

and  can  tben  distinguish  in  the  quantity  of  heat  Q,,  which 
the  variable  body  has  drawn  from  the  body  iT,,  two  parts,  of 
which  one  Q  is  converted  into  work,  whilst  the  other  Q,  is 
given  back  as  heat  into  the  body  K^.  Since  in  all  the  other 
relations  of  the  body  the  original  condition  is  restored  at  the 
end  of  the  cyclical  process,  and  accordingly  every  variation 
which  takes  place  at  one  part  of  the  process  is  counter- 
balanced by  an  equal  and  opposite  variation  which  takes 
place  at  some  other  part  of  the  process,  we  may  finally  de- 
scribe the  result  of  the  cyclical  process  in  the  following  terms : 
The  one  quantity  of  heat  Q,  derived  from  the  bodyK,  is  trans- 
formed into  work,  and  the  other  quantity  Q^  has  passed  over 
from  the  hotter  body  Kj  into  the  colder  K^. 


SECOXD  MAIN  PRINCIPLE.  73' 

The  whole  of  the  cyclical  process  just  described  may  also 
be  supposed  to  take  place  in  t^e  reverse  order.  If  we  again 
begin  with  the  conditions  represented  by  the  point  a,  in 
which  the  variable  body  has  the  volume  ■«,  and  the  tempera- 
ture Tj,  we  may  suppose  that  it  first  expands,  without  any 
heat  being  imparted  to  it,  to  the  volume  v^,  thus  describing 
the  curve  ad,  in  which  its  temperature  sinks  from  T^  to  T^; 
that  it  is  then  connected  with  the  body  K^,  and  expands  at 
constant  temperature  T^  from  v^  to  Fj,  describing  the  curve 
dc,  during  which  it  draws  heat  from  the  body  K^;  that  it 
then,  without  parting  with  its  heat,  is  compressed  from  V^  to 
F,,  describing  the  curve  ch,  during  which  its  temperature  rises 
from  Tjj  to  T^ ;  finally  that  it  is  connected  with  the  body  K^, 
at  the  constant  temperature  T^,  and  whilst  imparting  its  heat 
to  K^  is  again  compressed  from  Fj  to  the  initial  volume  v^, 
describing  the  ctirve  ha. 

In  this  reversed  process  the  quantities  of  work  represented 
by  the  quadrangles  eadh  and  hdcg  are  work  performed  or 
positive,  those  represented  by  gchf  and  fhae  are  work  absorbed 
or  negative.  The  latter  amount  is  larger  than  the  former,  and 
the  remainder,  as  represented  by  the  quadrangle  ahcd,  is  in 
this  case  work  absorbed. 

In  addition  the  variable  body  has  drawn  the  quantity  of 
heat  Qj  from  the  body  K^,  and  has  given  out  to  the  body  K^ 
the  quantity  of  heat  Q^=Q^+  Q-  Of  the  two  parts  of  which 
Q^  consists,  the  one  Q  corresponds  to  the  work  absorbed,  and 
is  generated  from  it,  whilst  the  other  Q^  has  passed  over  as 
heat  from  the  body  K^  to  the  body  K^.  Hence  the  result  of 
the  cyclical  process  may  here  be  described  as  follows:  the 
quantity  of  heat  Q  is  generated  out  of  work,  and  is  given  off 
to  the  body  K^,  and  the  quantity  of  heat  Q^  has  passed  over 
from  the  colder  body  K^  to  the  hotter  body  K^. 

§  3.     Cyclical  process  in  the  case  of  a  body  composed 
partly  of  liquid,  partly  of  vapour. 

In  the   foregoing  sections,  although  in  describing  the 
cyclical  process  we  made  no  assumptions  limiting  the  nature 
of  the  variable  body,  yet  the  graphic  representation  of  the 
process  was  made  to  correspond  to  the  case  of  a  perfect  gas.' 
It  is  perhaps  as  well  therefore  to  examine  the  cyclical  process. 


7i 


ox  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT, 


over  again  in  the  case  of  a  body  of  a  different  kind,  in  order  to 
see  how  its  appearance  may  vary  with  the  nature  of  the  body 
operated  on.  We  will  select  for  this  examination  a  body 
which  has  not  all  its  molecules  in  one  and  the  same  state  in 
all  its  parts,  but  consists  partly  of  liquid,  partly  of  vapour  at 
the  maximum  density. 

Let  us  suppose  a  liquid  contained  in  an  expansible  en- 
velope, but  only  filling  a  part  of  it,  and  leaving  the  remainder 
free  for  vapour  having  the  maximum  density  corresponding 
to  the  existing  temperature  T^.  The  combined  volumes  of 
liquid  and  vapour  are  represented  in  Fig.  10  by  the  abscissa 
oe,  and  the  pressure  of  the 
vapoiir  by  the  ordinate  ea. 
Now  suppose  the  envelope  to 
yield  to  the  pressure  and  en- 
large, while  at  the  same  time 
the  liquid  and  vapour  are 
connected  with  a  body  K^  of 
constant  temperature  T^.  As 
the  volume  increases,  more 
liquid  becomes  vaporised,  but 
the   heat  consumed  in   the 


a 

T> 

\ 

\, 

d 

c      h 

f     S 

Fig.  10. 


vaporisation  is  continually  replaced  from  the  body  K^,  so  that 
the  temperature,  and  with  it  the  pressure  of  the  vapour, 
remains  unaltered.  The  isothermal  curve  corresponding  to 
this  expansion  is  therefore  a  straight  line  parallel  to  the 
abscissa.  When  the  combined  volume  has  increased  in  this 
way  from  ■oe  to  of,  a  quantity  of  external  work  has  been 
thereby  performed,  which  is  represented  by  the  rectangle 
eabf.  Now  withdraw  the  body  iT,,  and  let  the  envelope 
enlarge  still  further,  withotit  any  passage  of  heat  inwards  or 
outwards.  Then  there  will  be  partly  an  expansion  of  the 
vapour  already  existing,  partly  a  generation  of  new  vapour ; 
in  consequence  the  temperature  will  fall,  and  the  pressure 
with  it.  Let  this  go  on  until  the  temperature  has  changed 
from  Tj  to  T^,  at  which  time  the  volume  og  has  been 
attained.  The  fall  of  pressure,  which  has  taken  place  during 
this  expansion,  will  be  represented  by  the  isentropic  curve 
be,  and  the  external  work  performed  by  fbrg. 

Now  let  the  envelope  be  compressed,  so  as  to  bring  the 
liquid   and  vapour  back  again  to  their  original  combined 


SECOND  MAIN  PRINCIPLE.  7o 

volume  oe ;  and  let  this  compression  take  place-,  partly  in  con- 
nection with  the  body  K^,  of  constant  temperature  T^,  to  which 
all  the  heat  produced  by  condensation  of  vapour  passes  over, 
so  that  the  temperature  T^  remains  unaltered :  partly  apart 
from  this  body,  so  that  the  temperature  rises.  Let  it  also  be 
arranged,  that  the  first  compression  shall  extend  only  so  far 
(to  oh)  as  that  the  decrease  of  volume  he  then  remaining  may 
be  just  sufficient  to  raise  the  temperature  again  from  T^  to  T^. 
During  this  first  compression  the  pressure  remains  unaltered, 
at  the  value  gc ;  the  external  work  thus  absorbed  is  therefore 
represented  by  the  rectangle  gcdh.  During  the  last  compres- 
sion the  pressure  increases,  and  is  represented  by  the 
isentropic  curve  da,  which  must  end  exactly  at  the  point  a, 
since  with  the  original  temperature  T^  we  must  also  have  the 
original  pressure  ea.  The  external  work  absorbed  in  this 
last  operation  is  represented  by  hdae. 

At  the  end  of  the  operation  the  liquid  and  vapour  are 
again  in  their  original  condition,  and  the  cyclical  process  is 
complete.  The  surplus  of  the  positive  ^bove  the  negative 
external  work,  or  the  external  work  W  which  has  been  gained 
on  the  whole  in  the  course  of  the  process,  is  represented  as 
before  by  the  quadrangle  abed.  To  this  work  must  correspond 
the  absorption  of  an  equivalent  quantity  of  heat  Q ;  and  if  we 
denote  by  Q^  the  heat  imparted  during  the  expansion,  and  by 
Qj  the  heat  given  out  during  the  contraction,  we  may  put 
Qj  =  Q+^j,  and  the  final  result  of  the  cyclical  process  is 
again  expressed  by  saying,  that  the  quantity  of  heat  Q  is 
converted  into  work,  and  the  quantity  Q.^  has  passed  over  fi;om 
the  hotter  body  K^  to  the  colder  ^j.  ■ 

This  cyclical  process  may  also  be  carried  out  in  the  reverse 
direction,  and  then  the  quantity  of  heat  Q  will  be  generated  out 
of  work,  and  given  off  to  the  body  K^,  while  the  quantity  Q^ 
will  pass  over  from  the  colder  body  /C,  to  the  hotter  K^. 

In  a  similar  manner  cyclical  processes  of  this  kind  may 
be  carried  out  with  other  variable  bodies,  and  graphically 
represented  by  two  isothermal  and  two  isentropic  lines ;  in 
which  cases,  while  the  form  of  the  curves  depends  on  the 
nature  of  the  body,  the  result  of  the  process  is  always  of  the 
same  kind,  viz.  that  one  quantity  of  heat  is  converted  into 
work,  or  generated  out  of  work,  and  that  another  quantity 
passes  over  from  a  hotter  to  a  colder  body,  or  vice  versa. 


76  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

The  question  now  arises.  Whether  the  quantity  of  heat 
converted  into  work,  or  generated  out  of  work,  stands  in  a 
generally  constant  proportion  to  the  quantity  which  passes  over 
from  the  hotter  to  the  colder  body,  or  vice  versd;  or  whether 
the  proportion  existing  between  them  varies  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  variable  body,  which  is  the  medium  of  the 
transfer. 

§  4.  Carnot's  view  as  to  the  work  performed  during  a 
Cyclical  Process. 

Camot,  who  was  the  first  to  remark  that  in  the  produc- 
tion of  mechanical  work  heat  passes  from'  a  hotter  into  a 
colder  body,  and  that  conversely  in  the  consumption  of 
mechanical  work  heat  can  be  brought  from  a  colder  into  a 
hotter  body,  and  who  also  conceived  the  simple  cyclical  process 
above  described  (which  was  first  represented  graphically  by 
Clapeyron),  took  a  special  view  of  his  own  as  to  the  funda- 
mental connection  of  these  processes  *- 

In  his  time  the  doctrine  was  still  generally  prevalent  that 
heat  was  a  special  kind  of  matter,  which  might  exist  within 
a  body  in  greater  or  lesser  quantity,  and  thereby  occasion 
differences  of  temperature.  In  accordance  with  this  doctrine 
it  was  supposed  that  heat  might  change  the  character  of  its 
distribution,  in  passing  from  one  body  into  another,  and 
further  that  it  could  exist  in  different  conditions,  which  were 
denominated  respectively  'free'  and  'latent';  but  that  the 
whole  quantity  of  heat  existing  in  the  universe  could  neither 
be  increased  nor  diminished,  inasmuch  as  matter  can  neither 
be  created  nor  destroyed. 

Camot  shared  these  views,  and  accordingly  treated  it  as 
self-evident  that  the  quantities  of  heat,  which  the  variable 
body  in  the  course  of  the  cyclical  process  receives  from  and 
gives  out  to  the  surrounding  space,  are  equal  to  each  other, 
and  consequently  cancel  each  other.  He  lays  this  down  very 
distinctly  in  §  27  of  his  work,  where  he  says :  "  we  shall 
assume  that  the  quantities  of  heat  absorbed  and  emitted  in 
these  different  transformations  compensate  each  other  exactly. 
This  fact  has  never  been  held  in  doubt ;  admitted  at  first  with- 
out reflection,  it  has  since  been  verified  in  many  instances  by 

•  Bejlexions  lur  la  puissance  motriee  du  feu.    Paris,  1824. 


"      "'     SECOND  MAIN  PfllNCIPLK  77 

experiments  with  the  calorimeter.  To  deny  it  would  be  to  sub- 
Vert  the  whole  theory  of  heat,  which  rests  on  it  as  its  basis." 

Now  since  on  this  assumption  the  quantity  of  heat  exist- 
ing in  the  body  was  the  same  after  the  cyclical  process  as 
before  it,  and  yet  a  certain  amount  of  work  had  been  achieved, 
Carnot  sought  to  explain  this  latter  fact  from  the  circum- 
stance of  the  heat  falling  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  tempera- 
ture. He  drew  a  comparison  between  this  descending  passage 
of  heat  (which  is  especially  striking  in  the  steam-engine, 
where  the  fire  gives  off  heat  to  the  boiler,  and  conversely  the 
cold  water  of  the  condenser  absorbs  heat)  and  the  falling  of 
water  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  level,  by  means  of  which  a 
machine  can  be  set  in  motion,  and  work  done.  Accordingly 
in  §  28,  after  making  use  of  the  expression  '  fall  of  water,'  he 
applies  the  corresponding  expression  '  fall  of  caloric'  to  the 
sinking  of  heat  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  temperature. 

Starting  from  these  premises,  he  laid  down  the  principle 
that  the  quantity  of  work  done  must  bear  a  certain  constant 
relation  to  the  'passage  of  heat,'  i.e.  the  quantity  of  heat 
passing  over  at  the  time,  and  to  the  temperature  of  the  bodies 
between  which  it  passes ;  and  that  this  relation  is  indepen- 
dent of  the  nature  of  the  substance  which  serves  as  a 
medium  for  the  performance  of  work  and  passage  of  heat. 
His  proof  of  the  necessary  existence  of  this  constant  relation 
rests  on  the  principle  "  That  it  is  impossible  to  create  moving 
force  out  of  nothing,"  or  in  other  words,  "  That  perpetual 
motion  is  an  impossibility." 

This  mode  of  dealing  with  the  question  does  not  accord 
with  our  present  views,  inasmuch  as  we  rather  assume  that 
in  the  production  of  work  a  corresponding  quantity  of  heat 
is  consumed,  and  that  in  consequence  the  quantity  of  heat 
given  out  to  the  surrounding  space  during  the  cyclical  process 
is  less  than  that  received  from  it.  Now  if  for  the  production 
of  work  heat  is  consumed,  then,  whether  at  the  same  time 
with  this  consumption  of  heat  there  takes  place  the  passage 
of  another  quantity  of  heat  from  a  hotter  to  a  colder  body, 
or  not,  at  least  there  is  no  ground  whatever  for  saying  that 
the  work  is  created  out  of  nothing.  Accordingly  not  only 
must  the  principle  enunciated  by  Carnot  receive  some  modifi- 
cation, but  a  different  basis  of  proof  from  that  used  by  him 
must  be  discovered. 


78  ON  THK  'MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

§  5.     New  Fundamental  Principle  concerning  Heat. 

Various  considerations  as  to  the  conditions  and  nature  of 
heat  had  led  the  author  to  the  conviction  that  the  tendency 
of  heat  to  pass  from  a  warmer  to  a  colder  body,  and  thereby 
equalize  existing  differences  of  temperature  (as  prominently 
shewn  in  the  phenomena  of  conduction  and  ordinary  radia- 
tion), was  so  intimately  Tsound  up  with  its  whole  constitution 
that  it  must  have  a  predominant  influence  under  all  conceiv- 
able circumstances.  He  thereupon  propounded  the  following 
as  a  fundamental  principle :  "  Heat  cannot,  of  itself,  pass  from 
a  colder  to  a  hotter  body." 

The  words  '  of  itself,'  here  used  for  the  sake  of  brevity, 
require,  in  order  to  be  completely  understood,  a  further  ex- 
planation, as  given  in  various  parts  of  the  author's  papers. 
In  the  first  place  they  express  the  fact  that  heat  can  never, 
through  conduction  or  radiation,  accumulate  itself  in  the 
warmer  body  at  the  cost  of  the  colder.  This,  which  was 
already  known  as  respects  direct  radiation,  must  thus  be 
further  extended  to  cases  in  which  by  refraction  or  reflection 
the  course  of  the  ray  is  diverted  and  a  concentration  of  rays 
thereby  produced.  In  the  second  place  the  principle  must 
be  applicable  to  processes  which  are  a  combination  of  several 
different  steps,  such  as  e.g.  cyclical  processes  of  the  kind 
described  above.  It  is  true  that  by  such  a  process  (as  we 
have  seen  by  going  through  the  original  cycle  in  the  reverse 
direction)  heat  may  be  carried  over  from  a  colder  into  a 
hotter  body :  our  principle  however  declares  that  simul- 
taneously with  this  passage  of  heat  from  a  colder  to  a  hotter 
body  there  must  either  take  place  an  opposite  passage  of  heat 
from  a  hotter  to  a  colder  body,  or  else  some  change  or  other 
which  has  the  special  property  that  it  is  not  reversible,  except 
under  the  condition  that  it  occasions,  whether  directly  or 
indirectly,  such  an  opposite  passage  of  heat.  This  simul- 
taneous passage  of  heat  ia  the  opposite  direction,  or  this 
special  change  entaUing  an. opposite  passage  of  heat,  is  then 
to  be  treated  as  a  compensation  for  the  passage  of  heat  from 
the  colder  to  the  warmer  body ;  and  if  we  apply  this  concep- 
tion we  may  replace' ^ihe  words  "  of  itself"  by  "  without  com- 
pensation," and  then  enunciate  the  principle  as  follows : 

"  A  passage  of  heat  from  a  colder  to  a  hotter  body  cannot 
take  place  without  compensation." 


SECOND  MAIN  peincipm:.  79 

This  proposition,  laid  down  as  a  Fundamental  Principle 
by  the  author,  has  met  with  much  opposition ;  but,  having 
repeatedly  had  occasion  to  defend  it,  he  has  always  been  able 
to  shew  that  the  objections  raised  were  due  to  the  fact  that 
the  phenomena,  in  which  it  was  believed  that  an  uncompen- 
sated passage  of  heat  from  a  colder  to  a  hotter  body  was  to 
be  found,  had  not  been  correctly  understood.  To  state  these 
objections  and  their  answers  at  this  place  would  interrupt  too 
seriously  the  course  of  the  present  treatise.  In  the  discus- 
sions which  follow,  the  principle,  which,  as  the  author  believes, 
is  acknowledged  at  present  by  most  physicists  as  being  correct, 
will  be  simply  used  as  a  fundamental  principle ;  but  the 
author  proposes  to  retixm  to  it  further  on,  and  then  to  consider 
more  closely  the  points  of  discussion  which  have  been  raised 
upon  it. 

§  6.  Proof  that  the  relation  between  the  quantity  of  heat 
carried  over,  and  that  converted  into  work,  is  independent  of 
the  nature  of  the  matter  which  forms  the  medium  of  the 
change. 

Assuming  the  foregoing  principle  to  be  correct,  it  may  be 
proved  that  between  the  quantity  of  heat  Q,  which  in  a  cyclical 
process  of  the  kind  described  above  is  transformed  into  work 
(or,  where  the  process  is  in  the  reverse  order,  generated  by 
work),  and  the  quantity  of  heat  Q^,  which  is  transferred  at  the 
same  time  from  a  hotter  to  a  colder  body  (or  vice  versS,),  there 
exists  a  relation  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  variable 
body  which  acts  as  the  medium  of  the  transformation  and 
transfer ;  and  thus  that,  if  several  cyclical  processes  are  per- 
formed, with  the  same  reservoirs  of  heat  K^  and  K^^,  but  with 

different  variable  bodies,  the  ratio  j-  will  be  the  same  for 

all.  If  we  suppose  the  processes  so  arranged,  according  to 
their  magnitude,  that  the  quantity  of  heat  Q,  which  is  trans- 
formed into  work,  has  in  all  of  them  a  constant  value,  then 
we  have  only  to  consider  the  nmgnitude  of  the  quantity  of 
heat  Qj  which  is  transferred,  and  the  principle  which  is  to  be 
proved  takes  the  following  form :  "  If  ^here  two  different 
variable  bodies  are  used,  the  quantity  of  heat  Q  transformed 
into  work  is  the  same,  then  the  quantity  of  heat  Q^,  which 
is  transferred,  will  also  be  the  same." 


80      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

Let  there,  if  possible,  be  two  bodies  G  and  C  (e.g.  the 
perfect  gas  and  the  combined  mass  of  liquid  and  vapour, 
described  above)  for  which  the  values  of  Q  are  equal,  but 
those  of  the  transferred  quantities  of  heat  are  different,  and 
let  these  different  values  he  called  Q^  and  Q\  respectively : 
(y^  being  the  greater  of  the  two.  Now  let  us  in  the  first 
place  subject  the  body  (7  to  a  cyclical  process,  such  that  the 
quantity  of  heat  Q  is  transformed  into  work,  and  the  quantity 
Qjj  is  transferred  from  K^  to  K^.  Next  let  us  subject  C  to  a 
cyclical  process  of  the  reverse  description,  so  that  the  quantity 
of  heat  Q  is  generated  out  of  work,  and  the  quantity  Q'^  is 
transferred  from  K^  to  K^.  Then  the  above  two  changes, 
from  heat  into  work,  and  work  into  heat,  will  cancel  each 
other ;  since  we  may  suppose  that  when  in  the  first  process 
the  heat  Q  has  been  taken  from  the  body  K^  and  transformed 
into  work,  this  same  work  is  expended  in  the  second  process  in 
producing  the  heat  Q,  which  is  then  returned  to  the  same  body 
K^.  In  all  other  respects  also  the  bodies  will  have  returned, 
at  the  end  of  the  two  operations,  to  their  original  condition, 
with  one  exception  only.  The  quantity  of  heat  Q\,  trans- 
ferred from  K^  to  K^,  has  been  assumed  to  be  greater  than 
the  quantity  Q^  transferred  from  K^  to  K^.  Hence  these  two 
do  not  cancel  each  other,  but  there  remains  at  the  end  a 
quantity  of  heat,  represented  by  the  difference  Q\  —  Q^,  which 
has  passed  over  from  K^  to  K^.  Hence  a  passage  of  heat  will 
have  taken  place  from  a  colder  to  a  warmer  body  without  any 
other  compensating  change.  But  this  contradicts  the  funda- 
mental principle.  Hence  the  assumption  that  Q\  is  greater 
than  Qj  must  be  false. 

Again,  if  we  make  the  opposite  assumption,  that  Q^  is 
less  than  Q^,  we  may  suppose  the  body  C  to  undergo  the 
cyclical  process  in  the  first,  and  G  in  the  reverse  direction. 
We  then  arrive  similarly  at  the  result  that  a  quantity  of  heat 
Q^  —  Q\  has  passed  from  the  colder  body  K,  to  the  hotter  K^, 
which  is  again  contrary  to  the  principle. 

Since  then  Q^  can  be  neither  greater  nor  less  than  Q^  it 
must  be  equal  to  Q^;  which  was  to  be  proved. 

We  will  now  give  to  the  result  thus  obtained  the  mathe- 
matical form  most  convenient  for  bur  subsequent  reasoning. 

Since  the  quotient  ^  is  independent  of  the  nature  of  the 


SECOND  MAIN  PRINCIPLE.  81 

variable  body,  it  can  only  depend  on  the  temperature  of  the 
two  bodies  JT^  and  ^j,  which  act  as  heat  reservoirs.  The 
same  will  of  course  be  true  of  the  sum 

This  last  ratio,  which  is  that  between  the  whole  heat  received 
and  the  heat  transferred,  we  shall  select  for  further  considera- 
tion ;  and  shall  express  the  result  obtained  in  this  section  as 

follows :  "  the  ratio  -^  can  only  depend  on  the  temperatures 

Tj  and  T^"     This  leads  to  the  equation : 

I^'^c^'.t;) (2), 

in  which  <^  {T^T^  is  some  function  of  the  two  temperatures, 
which  is  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  variable  body. 

§  7.  Determination  of  the  Function  <f>  (T^T^. 
The  circumstance  that  the  function  given  in  equation  (2) 
is  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  variable  body,  offers  a 
ready  means  of  determining  this  function,  since  as  soon  as  we 
have  found  its  form  foi;  any  single  body  it  is  known  for  all 
bodies  whatsoever. 

Of  all  classes  of  bodies  the  perfect  gases  are  best  adapted 
for  such  a  deterniination,  since  their  laws  are  the  most  accu- 
rately known.  We  will  therefore  consider  the  case  of  a  per- 
fect gas  subjected  to  a  cyclical  process,  similar  to  that  graphi- 
cally expressed  in  Fig.  8,  §  1 ;  which  figure  may  be  here  repro- 
duced (Fig.  11),  inasmuch  as  a  perfect  gas  was  there  taken  as 

an  example  of  the  variable 
body.  In  this  process  the 
gas  takes  up  a  quantity  of 
heat  Q  during  its  expansion 
ah,  and  gives  out  a  quantity 
of  heat  Qj  during  its  com- 
pression cd.  These  quanti- 
ties we  shall  calculate,  and 

l — f g  ■'  then    compare    with    each 

other. 

For  this  purpose  we  must 
first  turn  our  attention  to  the  volumes  represented  by  the 
c.  6 


Fig.  11. 


82       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

aBscissse  oe,  oh,  of,  off,  and  denoted  by  v^,  v^,  F,,  F,,  in  order 
that  we  may  ascesrtain  the  relation  between  them.  Now  the 
volumes  v^v^  (represented  by  oe,  oh)  form  the  limits  of  that 
change  of  volume  to  which  the  isentropic  curve  ad  refers, 
and  which  may  be  considered  at  pleasure  as  an  expansion  or 
a  compression.  Such  a  change  of  volume,  during  which  the 
gas  neither  takes  in  nor  gives  out  any  heat,  has  been  treated 
of  in  §  8  of  the  last  chapter,  in  which  we  arrived  at  the  fol- 
lowing equation  (43),  p.  62 : 


2;   \v)  '  c„ 


where  T  and  v  are  the  temperature  and  volume  at  any  point 
in  the  curve.  Substituting  for  these  in  the  present  case  the 
final  values  T„  and  v,,  we  have : 


"2' 


S.ft\ 


!=© (=^ 


In  exactly  the  same  way  we  obtain  for  the  change  of  volume 
represented  by  the  isentropic  curve  be  (of  which  the  initial 
and  final  temperatures  are  also  T^T^ ; 


T      /F\*^ 

fW  (* 


Combining  these  two  equations  we  obtain : 

T^  =  -,  or  — '=— ? (o). 

We  must  now  turn  to  the  change  of  volume  represented 
by  the  isothermal  curve  ab,  which  takes  place  at  the  constant 
temperature  T^,  and  between  the  limits  of  volume  v^  and  Fj. 
The  quantity  of  heat  received  or  given  off  during  such  a 
change  of  volume  has  been  determined  in  §  8  of  the  last 
chapter,  and  by  the  equation  (41)  there  given,  p.  61,  we 
may  put  in  the  present  case : 

Q,  =  ET,log'^K (6). 


SECOND  MAIN  PRINCIPLE.  83 

Similarly  for  the  change  of  volume  represented  by  the  iso- 
thermal curve  do,  which  takes  place  at  temperature  T^  between 
the  limits  of  volume  v^  and  V^,  we  have : 

Q,  =  i?T,logJ' (7). 

From  these  two  equations  we  obtain  by  division : 

^  =  ^  (8) 

V      V 

smcebyfS)  —'  =  —*. 

The  function  occurring  in  equation  (2)  is  now  determined, 
since  to  bring  this  equation  into  unison  with  the  last  equation 
(8)  we  must  have : 

<^(2;rj  =  -JJ (9). 

■'a 

We  can  now  use  in  place  of  equation  (2)  the  more  deter- 
minate equation  (8),  which  may  also  be  written  as  follows  : 

&-^^  =  0 (10). 

,  The  form  of  this  equation  may  be  yet  further  changed,  by 
affixing  positive  and  negative  signs  to  Q^,  Q^.  Hitherto  these 
have  been  treated  as  absolute  quantities,  and  the  distinction 
that  the  one  represents  heat  taken  in,  the  other  heat  given 
out,  has  been  always  expressed  in  words.  Let  us  now  for 
convenience  agre6  to  speak  of  heat  taken  in  only,  and  to 
treat  heat  given  out  as  a  negative  quantity  of  heat  taken  in. 
If  accordingly  we  say  that  the  variable  body  has  taken  in 
during  the  cyclical  process  the  quantities  of  heat  Qj  and  Q,, 
we  must  here  conceive  Q^  as  a  negative  quantity,  i.e.  the  same 
quantity  which  has  hitherto  been  expressed  by  —Q^.  On 
this  supposition  equation  (10)  becomes : 

%  +  %'  =  0 (11>, 


84 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 


§  8,     Cyclical  processes  of  a  more  complicated  character. 

Hitherto  we  have  confined  ourselves  to  cyclical  processes 
in  which  the  taking  in  of  quantities  of  heat,  positive  or 
negative,  takes  place  at  two  temperatures  only.  Such  pro- 
cesses we  shall  in  future  call  for  brevity's  sake  Simple 
Cyclical  Processes.  But  it  is  now  time  to  treat  of  cyclical 
processes,  in  which  the  taking  in  of  positive  and  negative 
quantities  of  heat  takes  place  at  more  than  two  tempera- 
tures. 

We  may  first  consider  a  cyclical  process  with  heat  taken 
in  at  three  temperatures.  This  is  represented  graphically  by 
the  figure  abcdefa  (Fig.  12),  which,  as  in  the  former  cases, 
consists  of  isentropic  and  isothermal  curves  only.  These 
curves  are  again  drawn,  by  way  of  example,  in  the  form 
which  they  would  take  in  the  case  of  a  perfect  gas,  but  this. 


g  ^-^e 


Fig.  12. 

is  not  essential.  The  curve  ab  represents  an  expansion  at. 
constant  temperature  T^;  be  an  expansion  without  taking  in 
heat,  during  which  the  temperature  falls  from  T,  to  T^;  cd 
an  expansion  at  constant  temperature  T^ ;  de  an  expansion 
without  taking  in  heat,  during  which  the  temperature  falls 
from  jTj  to  Tg ;  ef  a,  compression  at  constant  temperature  T^ ; 
and  lastly  fa  a  compression  withoiit  taking  in  heat,  during 
which  the  temperature  rises  from  T^  to  T^,  and  which  brings 
back  the  variable  body  to  its  exact  original  volume.     In  thp 


SECOND  MAIN  PRINCIPLE.  85 

expansions  ab  and  cd  the  variable  body  takes  in  positive 
quantities  of  beat  Q,  and  Q,,  and  in  the  compression  ef  the 
negative  quantity  of  heat  Q^.  It  now  remains  to  find  a  rela- 
tion between  these  three  quantities. 

For  this  purpose  let  us  suppose  the  isentropic  curve  6c 
produced  in  the  dotted  line  eg.  The  whole  process  is  thereby 
divided  into  two  Simple  Processes  abgfa  and  cdegc.  In  the 
first  the  body  starts  from  the  condition  a  and  returns  to  the 
same  again.  In  the  second  we  may  suppose  a  body  of  the 
same  nature  to  start  from  the  condition  e,  and  to  r6tum  to 
the  same  again.  The  negative  quantity  of  heat  Q^,  which  is 
taken  in  during  the  compression  ef,  we  may  suppose  divided 
into  two  parts  q^  and  g,',  of  which  the  first  is  taken  in  during 
the  compression  gf,  and  the  second  during  the  compression 
eg.  We  can  now  form  the  two  equations,  corresponding  to 
equation  (11),  which  will  hold  for  the  two  simple  processes. 
These  equations  are,  for  the  process  abgfa, 

^+53  =  0 
'p  ~  fp        ' 

and  for  the  process  cdego 

-tj        ■'■3 

Adding  these  equations  we  obtain 

-'i       ■'■i  ■'■a 

or,  since  93+9a=Qa' 


.(12). 


In  exactly  the  same  way  we  may  treat  a  process  in  which 
heat  is  taken  in  at  four  temperatures,  as  represented  by  the 
annexed  figure  abcdefgha.  Fig.  13,  which  again  consists  solely 
of  isentropic  and  isothermal  lines.  The  expansions  ab  and  cd, 
and  the  compressions  ef  and  gh,  take  place  at  temperatures 
Tj,  Tjj,  Tj,  T^,  and  during  these  times  the  quantities  of  heat 
Qi>Qi>  Qi>  Qi  ^^®  taken  inrespectively ;  the  two  former  being 


86 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OF  HEAT. 


positive,  and  the  two  latter  negative.  Ptoduce  the  isentropic 
curves  6c  and  fg  in  the  dotted  lines  ci  and  gk  respectively. 
Then  the  whole  process  is  subdivided  into  three  Simple  Pro- 
cesses akghja,  hUfk,  and  cdeic,  which  may  be  supposed  to  be 


1^ — ^e 


Fig.  13. 

carried  out  with  three  exactly  similar  bodies.  We  may  sup- 
pose the  quantity  of  heat  Q^,  taken  in  during  the  expansion  ah, 
to  be  divided  into  two  parts  q^  and  q^,  corresponding  to  ex- 
pansions ak  and  kh ;  and  the  negative  quantity  Q^,  taken  ia 
during  the  compression  ef,  to  be  likewise  divided  into  q^  and 
q^,  corresponding  to  compressions  if  and  ci.  Then  we  can 
form  the  followiag  equations  for  the  three  simple  processes  : 
First,  for  akgha 


Secondly,  for  Icbifk 


Thirdly,  for  cdeic 


2>-  +  «5  =  0 


■'a       ■'■a 


SECOND  MAIN  PRINCIPLE. 


87 


Adding,  we  obtaan 


or 


rp  ~  rp  ^  rr     "^  m>      " 


■^1         -^H         -^S        -^4 


.(13). 


In  exactly  the  same  way  any  other  cyclical  process,  which 
can  be  represented  by  a  figure  consisting  solely  of  isentropic 
and  isothermal  lines,  and  which  has  any  given  number  of 
temperatures  at  which  heat  is  taken  in,  may  be  made  to  yield 
an  equation  of  the  same  form,  viz. 


or  generally 


•^l  -^2  -^3  -^4 


4-0. 


.(11). 


§  9.  Cyclical  Processes,  in  which  taking  m  of  Heat  and 
change  of  Temperatv/re  take  place  simultameously. 

We  have  lastly  to  consider  such  cyclical  processes  as  are 
represented  by  figures  not  consisting  solely  of  isentropic  and 
isothermal  lines,  but  altogether  general  in  form. 

The  mode  of  treatment  is  as  foUows.     Let  point  a  in 


Fig.  14. 


Fig.  14  represent  any  given  condition  of  the  variable  body  ; 
let  pq  be  an  arc  of  the  isothermal  curve  which  passes  through 


88 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 


a,  rs  an  arc  of  the  isentropic  curve  wliicli  passes  througt  thfe 
same  point.  Now  let  the  body  un4ergo  a  variation  which  is 
expressed  by  a  pressure-curve  not  coinciding  with  either  of 
the  above,  but  taking  some  other  course  such  as  be  or  de. 
Then  we  may  consider. such  a  variation  as  made  up  of  a  very 
grSat  number  dfvery  small  variations,  in  which  we  have 
alternately  change  of  temperature  without  taking  in  of  heat, 
and  taking  in  of  heat  without  chahge  of  temperature.  This 
series  of  successive  variations  wiU  be  represented  by  a  dis- 
continuous line,  made  up  of  alternate  elements  of  isothermal 
and  isentropic  curves,  as  drawn  in  Fig.  15,  along  the  course  of 


Fig.  15. 

be  and  de.  The  smaller  the  elements  of  which  the  dis- 
continuous curve  is  made  up,  the  more  closely  will  it  coincide 
with  the  continuous  line,  and  if  these  are  indefinitely  small 
the  coincidence  wiU  be  indefinitely  close.  In  this  case  it  can 
only  make  an  indefinitely  small  difference,  in  relation  to  the 
quantities  of  heat  taken  in  and  their  temperatures,  if  we 
substitute  for  the  variation  reprpsented  by  the  continuous  line 
the  indefinitely  large  number  of  alternating  variations,  which 
are  represented  by  the  discontinuous  line. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  consider  a  complete  cyclical 
process,  in  which  the  taking  in  of  heat  is  simultaneous  with 
changes  of  temperature,  and  which  may  be  represented 
graphically  by  curves  of  any  form  whatever,  or  merely  by  a 
'single  continuoTls  and  closed  curve,  such  as  is  drawn  in 
Fig.  16.     The  area  of  this  closed  curve  represents  the  ex- 


SECOND  MAIN   PRINCIPLE.  89 

ternal  work  consumed.  Let  it  be  divided  into  indefinitely 
thin  strips  by  means  of  adjacent  isentropical  curves,  as  shewn 
by  the  dotted  lines  in  Fig,  16.  Let  us  suppose  these  curves 
joined  at  the  top  and  bottom  by  indefinitely  small  elements 


Fig.  16. 

of  isothermal  lines,  which  cut  the  given  curve,  so  that 
throughout  its  length  we  have  a  broken  line,  which  is  every- 
where in  indefinitely  close  coincidence  with  it.  By  the  above 
reasoning  we  may  substitute  for  the  process  represented  by 
the  continuous  line  the  other  process  represented  by  the 
broken  line,  without  producing  any  perceptible  alteration  in 
the  quantities  of  heat  taken  in,  or  in  their  temperatures.  Fur- 
ther, we  may  again  substitute  for  the  process  represented  by 
the  broken  fine  an  indefinitely  great  number  of  Simple  Pro- 
cesses, which  will  be  represented  by  the  indefinitely  small 
quadrangular  strips,  made  up  each  of  two  adjacent  isentropic 
curves,  and  two  indefinitely  smaU  elements  of  isothermal 
curves.  If  then  for  each  one  of  these  last  processes  we  form 
an  equation  similar  to  (11),  in  which  the  two  quantities 
of  heat  are  indefinitely  small,  and  can  therefore  be  denoted  by 
differentials  of  Q ;  and  if  all  these  equations  be  finally  added 
together ;  we  shall  then  obtain  an  equation  of  the  same  form 
as  (14),  but  in  which  the  sign  of  summation  is  replaced  by  the 
sign  of  Integration,  thus  : 

-f     ^ ^^^^- 


I'- 


90  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

This  equation,  which  was  first  published  by  the  author  in 
1854  (Pogg.  Ann.  vol.  93,  p.  500),  forms  a  very  convenient 
expression  for  the  second  main  Principle  of  the  Mechanical 
Theory  of  Heat,  as  far  as  it  relates  to  reversible  processes. 
This  Principle  may  be  expressed  in  words  as  follows :  If  in  a 
reversible  Cyclical  Process  every  element  of  heat  taken  in 
{positive  or  negative)  he  divided  by  the  absolute  temperatwre 
at  which  it  is  taken  in,  and  the  differential  so  formed  be  inte- 
grated for  the  whole  cov/rse  of  the  process,  the  integral  so  ob- 
tained is  equal  to  zero. 

If  the  integral  l-m-j  corresponding  to  any  given  succession 

of  variations  of  a  body,  be  always  equal  to  zero  provided  the 
body  returns  finally  to  its  original  condition,  whatever  the 
intervening  conditions  may  be,  then  it  follows  that  the  ex- 
pression under  the  integral  sign,  viz.  -^ ,  must  be  the  perfect 

differential  of  a  quantity,  which  depends  only  on  the  present 
condition  of  the  body,  and  is  altogether  independent  of  the 
way  in  which  it  has  been  brought  into  that  condition.  If  we 
denote  this  quantity  by  8,  we  may  put 

or  dQ  =  Td8..., (VI),  . 

an  equation  which  forms  another  expression,  very  convenient 
in  the  case  of  certain  investigations,  for  the  second  main 
principle  of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat. 


(91) 


CHAPTER  IV. 


THE  SECOND  MAIN  PRINCIPLE    UNDER   ANOTHER  FORM,   OR 
PRINCIPLE   OF  THE  EQUIVALENCE   OF  TRANSFORMATIONS. 

§  1.     On  the  two  different  hinds  of  Transformations. 

In  the  last  chapter  it  was  shewn  that  in  a  Simple  Cyclical 
Process  two  variations  in  respect  to  heat  take  place,  viz.  that 
a  certain  quantity  of  heat  is  converted  into  work  (or  generated 
out  of  work),  and  another  quantity  of  heat  passes  from  a 
hotter  into  a  colder  body  (or  vice  versS,).  It  was  found  fur- 
ther that  between  the  quantity  of  heat  transformed  into 
work  (or  generated  out  of  work)  and  the  quantity  of  heat 
transferred,  there  must  be  a  definite  relation,  which  is 
independent  of  the  nature  of  the  variable  body,  and  therefore 
can  only  depend  on  the  temperatures  of  the  two  bodies  which 
serve  as  reservoirs  of  heat. 

For  the  former  of  these  two  variations  we  have  already 
employed  the  word  "transformation,"  inasmuch  as  we  said, 
when  work  was  expended  and  heat  thereby  produced,  or 
conversely  when  heat  was  expended  and  work  thereby  pro- 
duced, that  the  one  had  been  "  transformed  "  into  the  other. 
We  may  use  the  word  "  transformation  "  to  express  the  second 
variation  also  (which  consists  in  the  passage  of  heat  from  one 
body  into  another,  which  may  be  colder  or  hotter  than 
the  first),  inasmuch  as  we  may  say  that  heat  of  one  tem- 
perature "  transforms  "  itself  into  heat  of  another  tempera- 
ture. 

On  this  principle  we  may  describe  the  result  of  a  simple 
cyclical  process  in  the  following  terms  :  Two  transformations 
are  produced,  a  transformation  from  heat  into  work  (or  vice 
versS,)  and  a  transformation  from  heat  of  a  higher  tempera- 


92       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

ture  to  heat  of  a  lower  (or  vice  versS.).  The  relation  between 
these  two  transformations  is  therefore  that  which  is  to  be  ex- 
pressed by  the  second  Main  Principle. 

Now,  in  the  first  place,  as  concerns  the  transformation  of 
heat  at  one  temperature  to  heat  at  another,  it  is  evident  at 
once  that  the  two  temperatures,  between  which  the  trans- 
formation takes  place,  must  come  under  consideration.  But 
the  further  question  now  arises,  whether  in  the  trans- 
formation from  work  into  heat,  or  from  heat  into  work,  the 
temperature  of  the  particular  quantity  of  heat  concerned 
plays  an  essential  part,  or  whether  in  this  transformation  the 
particular  temperature  is  matter  of  indifference. 

If  we  seek  to  deduce  the  answer  to  this  question  from  the 
consideration  of  a  Simple  Cyclical  Process,  as  described  above, 
we  find  that  it  is  too  limited  for  our  purpose.  For  since  in 
this  process  there  are  only  two  bodies  which  act  as  heat, 
reservoirs,  it  is  tacitly  assumed  that  the  heat  which  is  trans- 
formed into  work  is  derived  from  (or  conversely  the  heat 
generated  out  of  work  is  taken  in  by)  one  or  other  of  these 
same  two  bodies,  between  which  the  transference  of  heat  also 
takes  place.  Hence  a  definite  assumption  is  made  from  the 
beginning  as  to  the  temperature  of  the  heat  transformed  into 
work  (or  conversely  generated  out  of  work),  viz.  that  it 
coincides  with  one  of  the  two  temperatures  at  which  the 
transference  of  heat  takes  place  ;  and  this  limitation  prevents 
us  from  learning  what  influence  it  would  have  on  the  relation 
between  the  two  transformations  if  the  first-mentioned  tem- 
perature were  to  alter,  while  the  two  latter  remained  un- 
altered. 

To  ascertain  this  influence,  we  may  revert  to  those 
more  complicated  cyclical  processes,  which  have  also  been 
described  in  the  last  chapter,  §  8,  and  to  the  equations 
derived  from  them.  But  in  order  to  give  a  clearer  and  simpler 
view  of  the  question  it  is  better  to  consider  a  single  process 
specially  chosen  for  this  investigation,  and  by  its  help  to 
bring  out  the  second  Main  Principle  anew  in  an  altered 
form. 

§  2.     On  a  Cyclical  Process  of  special  form. 

Let  us  again  take  a  variable  body,  whose  condition  is 
completely .  determined  by  its  volume  and  pressure,  so  that 


THE  EQUIVALENCE  OF  TRANSFORMATIONS.      93 

we  can  represent  its  variations  graphically  in  the  manner 
already  described.  We  will  once  more  by  way  of  example 
construct  the  figure  in  the  form  it  assumes  for  a  perfect  gas, 
but  without  making  in  the  investigation  itself  any  limiting 
assumption  whatever  as  to  the  nature  of  the  body. 

Let  the  body  be  first  taken  in  the  condition  defined  by 
the  point  a  in  Fig.  17,  its  volume  being  given  by  the  abscissa 


Fig.  17. 

oh,  and  its  pressure  by  the 'ordinate  ha.  Let  T  be  the  tem- 
perature corresponding  to  these  two  quantities,  and  deter- 
mined by  them.  We  will  now  subject  the  body  to  the  follow- 
ing successive  variations : 

(1)  The  temperature  T  of  the  gas  is  change.d  to  T^ , 
which  we  will  suppose  less  than  T.  This  may  be  done  by 
enclosing  the  gas  within  a  non-conducting  envelope,  so  that 
it  can  neither  take  in  nor  give  out  heat,  and  then  allowing  it 
to  expand.  The  decrease  of  pressure  caused  by  the  simul- 
taneous increase  of  volume  and  faU  of  temperature  will  be 
represented  by  the  isentropic  curve  ah;  so  that,  when  the 
temperature  of  the  gas  has  reached  T,,  its  volume  and 
pressure  have  become  ovand  ih  respectively. 

(2)  The  variable  body  is  placed  in  communication  with 
a  body  iTj  of  temperature  T,,  and  then  allowed  to  expand  still 
further,  but  so  that  all  the  heat  lost  in  expansion  is  restored  by 
K^.  With  respect  to  the  latter  it  is  assumed  that,  on  account  of 
its  magnitude  or  from  some  other  pause,  its  temperature  is  hot 


94       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

perceptibly  altered  by  this  giving  out  of  beat,  and  may  tbere- 
fore  be  taken  as  constant.  Hence  the  variable  body  will  also 
preserve  during  its  expansion  the  same  constant  temperature 
r,,  and  its  diminution  of  pressure  will  be  represented  by  an 
isothermal  curve  be.  Let  the  quantity  of  heat  thus  given  off 
by  Z,  be  called  Q^. 

(3)  The  variable  body  is  disconnected  from  K^  and 
allowed  to  expand  still  further,  without  being  able  either  to 
take  in  or  give  out  heat,  until  its  temperature  has  faUen  from 
T^  to  fj.  Let  this  diminution  of  pressure  be  represented  by 
the  isentropic  curve  cd. 

(4)  The  variable  body  is  placed  in  communication  with 
a  body  K^,  of  constant  temperature  T^,  and  is  then  com- 
pressed, parting  with  all  the  heat  generated  by  the  com- 
pression to  jKj.  This  compression  goes  on  until  K^  has 
received  the  same  quantity  of  heat  Q,,  as  was  formerly 
abstracted  from  K .  In  this  case  the  pressure  increases  ac- 
cording to  the  isothermal  curve  de. 

(5)  The  variable  body  is  disconnected  from  K^,  and 
compressed,  without  being  able  to  take  in  or  give  out  heat, 
until  its  temperature  has  risen  from  T^  to  its  original  value 
T,  the  pressure  increasing  according  to  the  isentropic  curve- 
ef.  The  volume  on,  to  which  the  body  is  brought  by  this 
process,  is  less  than  the  original  volume  oh,  since  the  pressure 
to  be  overcome,  and  consequently  the  external  work  to  be 
transformed  into  heat,  is  less  during  the  compression  de 
than  during  the  expansion  be;  so  that,  in  order  to  restore 
the  same  quantity  of  heat  Q,,  the  compression  must  be  con- 
tinued further  than  would  have  been  necessary  merely  to 
annul  the  expansion. 

(6)  The  variable  body  is  placed  in  communication  with  a 
body-^  of  constant  temperature  T,  and  allowed  to  expand  to  its 
original  volume  oh,  the  heat  lost  in  expansion  being  restored 
from  K.  Let  Q  be  the  quantity  of  heat  thus  required.-  If 
the  body  attains  the  original  volume  oh  at  the  original  tem- 
perature T,  then  the  pressure  must  also  revert  to  its  original 
value,  and  the  isothermal  curve,  which  represents  this  last 
expansion,  will  therefore  terminate  exactly  in  the  point  a. 

The  above  six  variations  make  up  together  a  Cyclical  Pro- 
cess, since  the  variable  body  is  finally  restored  exactly  to  its 


THE  EQUIVALENCE  OF  TRANSFOEMATIONS.  95 

original  condition.  Of  the  three  bodies,  K,  K^,  K^,  which  in 
the  whole  process  only  come  under  consideration  in  so  far  as 
they  serve  as  sources  or  reservoirs  of  heat,  the  two  first  have 
at  the  end  lost  the  quantities  of  heat  Q,  Q^  respectively, 
whilst  the  last  has  gained  the  quantity  of  heat  Q^ ;  this  may 
be  expressed  by  saying  that  Q^  has  passed  from  K^  to  K^, 
while  Q  has  disappeared  altogether.  This  last  quantity  of 
heat  must,  by  the  first  fundamental  principle,  have  been 
transformed  into  external  work.  This  gain  of  external  work 
is  due  to  the  fact  that  in  this  cyclical  process  the  pressure 
during  expansion  is  greater  than  during  compression,  and 
therefore  the  positive  work  greater  than  the  negative  ;  its 
amount  is  represented,  as  is  easily  seen,  by  the  area  of  the 
closed  curve  abode/a.  If  we  call  this  work  W,  we  have 
by  equation  (5a)  of  Chapter  I. 

Q=W. 

It  is  easily  seen  that  the  above  Cyclical  Process  embraces 
as  a  special  case  the  process  treated  of  at  the  commencement 
of  Chapter  III.,  and  represented  in  Fig.  8.  For  if  we  make 
the  special  assumption  that  the  temperature  T  of  the  body  K 
is  equal  to  the  temperature  2",  of  the  body  K^,  we  may  then 
dp  away  witL  K  altogether,  and  use  K^  instead.  The  result 
of  the  process  will  then  be  that  one  part  of  the  heat  given 
out  by  the  body  iT^  has  been  transformed  into  work,  and  the 
other  part  has  been  transferred  to  the  body  R^,  just  as  was  the 
case  in  the  process  above  mentioned. 

The  whole  of  this  cyclical  process  may  also  be  carried 
out  in  the  reverse  order.  The  first  step  will  then  be  to 
connect  the  variable  body  with  K,  and  to  produce,  instead 
of  the  final  expansion  fa  of  the  former  case,  an  initial 
compression  af:  and  similarly  the  expansions  fe  and  ed, 
and  the  compressions  dc,  cb,  and  ba  will  be  produced  one 
after  another,  under  exactly  the  same  circumstances  as  the 
converse  variations  in  the  former  case.  It  is  obvious  that 
the  quantities  of  heat  Q  and  Qj^  will  now  be  taken  in 
by  the  bodies  K  and  K^  respectively,  and  the  quantity 
of  heat  Qi  will  be  given  ovi  by  the  body  K^.  At  the  same 
time  the  negative  work  is  now  greater  than  the  positive,  so 
that  the  area  of  the  closed  figure  now  represents  a  loss  of 
work.     The  result  of  the  reversed  process  is  therefore  that 


96  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

the  quantity  of  heat  Q^  has  been  transferred  from  K^  to  K^^, 
And  that  the  quantity  of  heat  Q  has  been  generated  out  of 
work  and  given  to  the  body  K. 

§  3.     On  Uquipalent  Transformations. 

In  order  to  learn  the  mutual  dependence  of  the  two 
simultaneous  transformations  above  described,  viz.  the  trans- 
ference of  Qi,  and  the  conversion  into  work  of  Q,  we  shall 
first  assume  that  the  temperatures  of  the  three  reservoirs  of 
heat  remain  the  same,  but  that  the  cyclical  processes,  through 
which  the  transformations  are  effected,  are  different.  This 
may  be  either  because  different  variable  bodies  are  subjected 
to  similar  variations,  or  because  the  same  body  is  subjected  to' 
any  other  cyclical  process  whatever,  subject  only  to  the  con- 
dition that  the  three  bodies  K,  K^  and  K^  are  the  only  bodies 
which  receive  or  give  out  heat,  and  also  that  of  the  two 
latter  the  one  receives  just  as  much  as  the  other  gives  out. 
These  different  processes  may  either  be  reversible,  as  in  the 
case  considered,  or  non-reversible ;  and  the  law  which  governs 
the  transformations  will  vary  accordingly.  However  the 
modification  which  the  law  undergoes  for  non-reversible  pro- 
cesses can  be  easily  applied  at  a  later  period,  and  hence  for 
the  present  we  will  confine  ourselves  to  the  consideration  of 
reversible  processes. 

For  all  such  it  follows  from  the  Principle  laid  d.own  in  the 
last  chapter  (p.  78)  that  the  quantity  of  heat  Q,,  transferred 
from  if  J  to  K^,  must  stand  in  a  constant  relation  to  the 
quantity  Q  transformed  into  work.  For  let  us  suppose  that 
there  were  two  such  processes,  in  which,  while  Q  was  the 
same  in  both,  Q  was  different :  then  we  might  successively 
execute  that  in  which  Q^  was  the  smaller  in  the  direct  order, 
and  the  other  in  the  reverse.  In  this  case  the  quantity  of 
heat  Q,  which  in  the  first  process  would  have  been  trans- 
formed into  work,  would  in  the  second  process  be  transformed 
again  into  heat  and  given  back  to  the  body  K;  and  in  other 
respects  also  everything  would  at  the  conclusion  be  restored 
to  its  original  condition,  with  this  single  exception  that  the 
quantity  of  heat  transferred  from  K^  to  K^  in  the  second  pro- 
cess, would  be  greater  than  the  quantity  transferred  from  K^ 
to  K^  in  the  first  process.  Thus  on  the  whole  we  have  a 
transfer  of  heat  from  the  colder  body  K^  to  the  hotter  K  -, 


THE  EQUIVALENCE  OF  TEANSFORMATIOKS.  97 

with  nothing  to  compensate  for  it.  As  this  contradicts  the 
fundamental  principle,  it  follows  that  the  above  supposition 
cannot  be  true ;  in  other  words  Q  must  always  stand  in  the 
same  ratio  to  Q^. 

Of  the  two  transformations  in  a  reversible  process  such 
as  the  above,  either  can  replace  the  other,  provided  this  latter 
be  taken  in  the  reverse  direction :  in  other  words,  if  a  trans- 
formation of  the  one  kind  has  taken  place,  this  can  be  again 
reversed,  and  a  transformation  of  the  other  kind  substituted  in 
its  place,  without  the  occurrence  of  any  other  permanent 
change.  For  example,  let  a  quantity  of  heat  Q  be  in  any  way 
generated  out  of  work,  and  taken  in  by  the  body  K;  then  by 
the  cyclical  process  above  described  it  can  be  again  withdrawn 
from  the  body  K,  and  transformed  back  into  work,  but  in  so 
doing  a  quantity  of  heat  Q^  will  be  transferred  from  the  body 
JST,  to  the  body  K^.  Again,  if  the  quantity  of  heat  Q^  has 
previously  passed  from  K^^  to  K^,  it  can  by  performing  the 
above  process  in  the  reverse  order  be  transferred  back  again 
to  K^,  whilst  at  the  same  time  the  quantity  of  heat  Q,  at  the 
temperature  of  the  body  K,  wiU  be  generated  out  of  work. 

It  is  thus  seen  that  these  two  kinds  of  transformation 
may  be  treated  as  processes  of  the  same  nature  j  and  two 
such  transformations,  which  may  mutually  replace  each  other 
in  the  way  indicated,  wUl  be  henceforth  called  "  Equivalent 
Transformations." 

§  4.     Equivalence-Values  of  the  Transformations. 

We  have  now  to  find  the  law  according  to  which  the 
above  transformations  must  be  expressed  mathematically,  so 
that  the  equivalence  of  the  two  may  appear  from  the  equality 
of  their  values.  The  mathematical  value  of  a  transformation 
may  be  termed,  thus  determined,  its  "  Equivalence- Value." 

We  must  £u:st  settle  the  order  in  which  each  transforma- 
tion is  to  be  taken  as  positive :  this  may  be  chosen  arbi- 
trarily for  one  of  the  two  classes,  but  it  will  then  be  fixed 
for  the  other,  since  clearly  we  must  regard  a  transformation 
in  the  latter  class  as  positive,  if  it  is  equivalent  to  a  positive 
transformation  in  the  former.  In  all  that  follows  we  shall 
consider  the  transformation  of  Work  into  Heat,  and  therefore 
the  passage  of  heat  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  temperature,  as 
being  positive  quantities.     It  will  be  seen  later  why  this 

C.  ' 


98  ON   THE  MKCHANICAL  THKORT  OF  HEAT. 

choice  as  to  the  positi-ve  and  negative  sign  is  preferable  to 
the  opposite. 

With  regard  to  the  magnitude  of  the  equivalence-value, 
it  is  at  once  seen  that  the  value  of  a  change  from  work  into 
heat  must  he  proportional  to  the  quantity  of  heat  generated, 
and  that  beyond  this  it  can  only  depend  on  its  temperature. 
We  may  therefore  express  generally  the  equivalence-value  of 
the  generation  out  of  work  of  the  quantity  of  heat  Q,  of 
temperature  T,  by  the  formula  Q  xf(T),  where  f{T)  is  a 
function  of  temperature  which  is  the  same  for  all  eases.  If  Q 
is  negative  in  this  formula,  what  is  expressed  is  that  the 
quantity  of  heat  Q  'has  been  transformed,  not  out  of  work 
into  Tieat,  but  out  of  heat  into  work. 

Similarly  the  value  of  the  passage  of  a  quantity  of  heat  Q 
from  ihe  temperature  Tj  to  the  temperature  2",  must  be  propor- 
tional to  the  quantity  of  heat  which  passes,  and  beyond  this 
can  only  depend  on  the  two  temperatures.  We  may  therefore 
express  it  generally  by  Dhe  formula  Q  x  F  {T^,  T^,  in  which 
F  [T^,  T^  is  a  function  of  the  two  temperatures,  also  constant 
for  all  eases,  and  which  we  cannot  at  present  determine  more 
closely;  but  of  which  it  is  clear  from  the  commencement 
that,  if  the  two  temperatures  are  interchanged,  it  must  change 
its  sign,  without  changing  its  numerical  value.  We  may 
therefore  write, 

FiT„T,)  =  -F{T,,T,) (1). 

In  order  to  compare  these  two  expressions  with  each  other, 
we  have  the  condition  that  in  every  reversible  process  of  the 
kind  given  above  the  two  transformations  that  take  place 
must  be  equal  in  magnitude  but  of  opposite  sign,  so  that 
their  algebraical  sum  is  zero.  Thus  if  we  choose  for  a  mo- 
ment the  particular  process  fully  described  above  (§  2),  the 
quantity  of  heat  Q,  at  temperature  T,  is  then  transformed 
into  work,  giving  as  its  equivalence-value  —  Qx-fiT);  and 
the  quantity  of  heat  Q^  passes  from  temperature  T^  to  T^, 
thus  giving  as  its  equivalence-value  (?,  x  F{T^,  T^.  There- 
fore the  following  equation  must  hold  : 

-Qxf{T)  +  Q,xF{T„T,)=0 (2). 

Let  us  now  suppose  a  similar  process  performed  in  the 
reverse  order,  and  under  the  conditions  that  the  bodies -K" 


THE  EQUIVALENCE  OF  TRANSPOBMATIONS.  99 

and  K^,  amd  the  quantity  of  heat  Q^  which  passes  between 
them,  remain  the  same,  but  that  for  the  body  K  of  tempera- 
ture T  is  substituted  another  body  K'  of  temperature  T': 
and  let  us  call  the  heat  generated  out  of  work  in  this  case  Q'. 
Then,  corresponding  to  the  formier  equation,  we  have  the 
following ; 

Q'  ^/{T')  +  Q,x  F{T„  T,)  =  0 (3). 

Adding  (2)  and  (3)  and  substituting  from  (1)  we  obtain, 

-  Q  xf{T)  +  Q'  xf{T')  =  0 (4). 

Now  let  us  consider,  as  is  clearly  allowable,  that  these  two 
successive  processes  make  up  together  a  single  process ;  then 
in  this  latter  the  two  transferences  of  heat  between  K^  and 
K^  will  cancel  each  other  and  disappear  from  the  result ;  we 
have  therefore  only  left  the  transformation  into  work  of  the 
quantity  of  heat  Q,  given  off  by  K,  and  the  generation  out 
of  work  of  the  quantity  of  heat  Q'  taken  in  by  K'.  These 
two  transformations,  which  are  of  the  same  kind,  can  however 
be  so  broken  up  and  re-arranged  as  to  appear  in  the  light 
of  transformations  of  different  kinds.  For  if  we  simply  hold 
fast  to  the  main  fact,  that  the  one  body  K  has  lost  the 
quantity  of  heat  Q,  and  the  other  K'  gained  the  quantity  Q", 
then  the  heat  equivalent  to  the  smaller  of  these  two  quanti- 
ties may  be  considered  as  having  been  transferred  directly 
from  K  to  K',  and  it  is  only  the  difference  between  the  two 
which  remains  to  be  considered  as  a  transformation  of  work 
into  heat  or  vice  versS,.  For  example,  let  the  temperature  T 
be  higher  than  T;  then  the  transference  of  heat  on  the 
above  view  is  from  a  hotter  to  a  colder  body,  and  is  therefore 
.positive.  Accordingly  the  other  transformation  must  be 
negative,  i.e.  a  transformation  from  heat  into  work  :  whence  it 
follows  that  the  quantity  of  heat  Q  given  off  by  K  is  greater 
than  the  quantity  Q'  taken  in  by  K'.  Thus  if  we  divide  Q 
into  its  two  component  parts  ^  and  Q  —  Q',  then  the  first  of 
these  will  have  passed  over  from  K  to  K',  and  the  second  is 
the  quantity  of  heat  transformed  into  work. 

On  this  view  the  two  processes  appear  as  combined  into  a 
single  process  of  the  same  kindj  for  the  circumstance  that 
the  heat  transformed  into  work  is  not  derived  from  a  third 
body,  but  from  one  or  other  of  the  same  two  bodies,  between 

7—2 


100      ON  THK  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OP  HEAT. 

whicli  the  transference  of  heat  takes  place,  makes  no 
essential  difference  in  the  result.  The  temperature  of  the 
heat  transformed  into  work  is  optional,  and  can  therefore  have 
the  same  value  as  the  temperature  of  one  of  the  two  bodies ; 
in  which  case  the  third  body  is  no  longer  required.  Accord- 
ingly for  the  two  quantities  of  heat  Q'  and  Q—  Q  there  must 
be  an  equation  of  the  same  form  as  (2),  namely : 


-Q^g xf{T)  +  Q'xF {T,  T)  =  0. 

Eliminating  Q  by  means  of  equation  (4)  and  then  striking 
out  Q',  we  obtain 

F{TT')=f{T)-f{T) (5). 

As  the  temperatures  T  and  T'  are  any  whatever,  the  function 
of  two  temperatures  jP'(T'2"),  which  holds  for  the  second  kind 
of  transformation,  is  thus  shewn  to  agree,  with  the  function  of 
one  temperature/ (2'),  which  holds  for  the  first  kind. 

For  the  latter  function  we  will  for  brevity  use  a  simpler 
symbol.  For  this  it  is  convenient,  for  a  reason  which  will  be 
apparent  later  on,  to  express  by  the  new  symbol  not  the 
function  itself,  but  its  reciprocal.     We  wiU  therefore  put 

^■=7^0^/(20  =  ^ (6), 

so,  that  T  is  now  ihe  unknown  function  of  temperature  which 
enters  into  the  Equivalence-value.  If  special  values  of  this 
function  have  to  be  written  down,  corresponding  to  tempera- 
tures Tj,  T^,  etc.',  or  T',  T' ,  etc.,  then  this  can  be  done  by 
simply  using  the  indices  or  accents  for  t  itself.  Thus  equa- 
tion (5)  wiE  become 

i^(r,  2")  =  -,--. 

T         T 

Hence  the  second  Main  Principle  of  the  Mechanical 
Theory  of  Heat,  which  in  this  form  may  perhaps  be  called 
the  principle  of  the  Equivalence  of  Transformations,  can  be 
expressed  in  the  following  terms : 

"K  we  call  two  transformations  which  may  cancel  each  other 
without  requiring  any  other  permanent  change  to  take  place, 
Equivalent  Transformations,  then  the  generation  out  of  work 


THE  EQUIVALENCE  OP  TRANSFORMATIONS.     101 

of  the  quantity  of  heat  Q  of  temperature<^nas  tne  equivalence- 
value  — ;  and  the  transference  of  the  quantity  of  heat  Q  from 
temperature  T,  to  temperature  T,  has  the  Equivalence-value 


<-^> 


in  which  t  is  a  function  of  temperature  independent  of  the 
kind  of  process  by  which  the  transformation  is  accomplished." 

§  5.  Combined  value  of  all  the  transformations  which 
take  place  in  a  single  Cyclical  Process. 

If  we  write  the  last  expression  of  the  foregoing  section 

in  the  form ,  we  see  that  the  passage  of  the  quantity 

of  heat  Q  from  temperature  T  to  T^  has  the  same  equiva- 
lence-value as  a  double  transformation  of  the  first  kind, 
viz.  the  transformation  of  the  quantity  Q  from  heat  of  tem- 
perature T,  into  work,  and  again  out  of  work  into  heat  of 
temperature  T^.  The  examination  of  the  question  how  far 
this  external  agreement  has  its  actual  foundation  in  the 
nature  of  the  process  would  here  be  out  of  place ;  but  in  any 
case  we  may,  in  the  mathematical  determination  of  the 
Equivalence-Value,  treat  every  transference  of  heat,  in  what- 
ever way  it  may  have  taken  place,  as  a  combination  of  two 
opposite  transformations  of  the  first  kind. 

By  this  rule  it  is  easy  for  any  Cyclical  Process  however 
complicated,  in  which  any  number  of  transformations  of  both 
kinds  take  place,  to  deduce  the  mathematical  expression 
which  represents  the  combined  value  of  all  these  trans- 
formations. For  this  purpose,  when  a  quantity  of  heat  is 
given  off  by  a  heat  reservoir,  we  have  no  need  first  to 
enquire  what  portion  of  it  is  transformed  into  work,  and 
what  becomes  of  the  remainder ;  but  may  instead  reckon 
every  quantity  of  heat  given  off  by  the  hea,t  reservoirs  which 
occur  in  the  cyclical  process  as  being  wholly  transformed  into 
work,  and  every  quantity  of  heat  taken  in  as  being  generated 
out  of  work.  Thus  if  we  assume  that  the  bodies  K-^,  K^,  K^, 
etc.  of  temperatures  T^,  T^,  T,,  etc.  occur  as  heat  reservoirs,  and 
if  Q^,  Q^,  Q^,  etc.  are  the  quantities  of  heat  given  off  during 


102  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 

the  Cyclical  Process  (in  wliicli  we  will  now  consider  quanti- 
ties of  heat  taken  in  as  negative  quantities  of  heat  given 
out*),  then  the  combined  value  of  all  the  transformations, 
which  we  may  call  N,  will  be  represented  as  follows : 

j^=_i^_Q._^_etc., 

Ta       ■^2       T3 
or  using  the  sign  of  summation, 

iV — 2^ (7). 

T 

It  is  here  supposed  that  the  temperatures  of  the  bodies 
K^,  K^,  K^,  etc.  are  constant,' or  at  least  so  nearly  so  that 
their  variations  may  be  neglected.  If  however  the  tempera- 
ture of  any  one  of  the  bodies  varies  so  much,  either  through 
the  taking  in  of  the  quantity  of  heat  Q  itself,. or  through  any 
other  cause,  that  this  variation  must  be  taken  into  account, 
then  we  must,  for  every  element  of  heat  dQ  which  is  taken 
in,  use  the  temperature  which  the  body  has  at  the  moment 
of  its  being  taken  in.  This  naturally  leads  to  an  integration. 
If  for  thje  sake  of  generality  we  assume  this  to  hold  for  all 
the  bodies,  th.en  the  foregoing  equation  takes  the  following 
form : 

f''^        (8), 


"—It 


in  which  the  integral  is  to  be  taken  for  all  the  quantities  of 
heat  given  off  by  the  different  bodies. 

§  6.  Proof  that  in  a  reversible  Cyclical  Process  the  total 
value  of  all  the  transformations  must  he  equal  to  nothing. 

If  th-e  Oyclical  Process  under  consideration  is  reversible, 
then,  however  complicated  it  may  be,  it  can  be  proved 
that  the  transformations  which  occur  in  it  must  cancel  each 
other,  so  that  their  algebraical  sum  is  equal  to  nothing. 

*  This  choice  of  positive  and  negative  signs  for  the  quantities  of  heat 
agrees  with  that  which  we  made  in  the  last  chapter,  where  we  considered  a 
quantity  of  heat  taken  in  by  the  variable  body  as  positive,  and  a  quantity 
given  out  by  it  as  negative  ;  for  a  quantity  given  out  by  a  heat  reservoir  is 
taken  in  by  the  variable  body,  and  vice  versa. 


THE  EQUIVALENCE  OF  TRANSFORMATIONS.     103 

For  let  us  suppose  tliat  this  is  not  the  case,  i.e.  that  this' 
algebraical  sum  has  some  other  value ;  then  let  us  imagine 
the  following  process  applied.  Let  all  the  transformations 
which  take  place  be  divided  into  two  parts,  of  which  the  first 
has  its  algebraical  sum  equal  to  nothing,  and  the  second  is 
made  up  of  transformations  all  having  the  same  sign.  Let 
the  transformations  of  the  first  division  be  separated  out  into 
pairs,  each  composed  of  two  transformations  of  equal  magnitude 
but  opposite  signs.  If  all  the  heat  reservoirs  are  of  constant 
temperature,  so  that  in  the  Cyclical  Process  there  is  only  a 
finite  number  of  definite  temperatures,  then  the  number  of 
pairs  which  have  to  be  formed  will  be  also  finite;  but  should  the 
temperatures  of  the  heat  reservoirs  vary  continuously,  so  that 
the  number  of  temperatures  is  indefinitely  great,  and  therefore 
the  quantities  of  heat  given  off  and  taken  in  must  be  dis- 
tributed in  indefinitely  small  elements,  then  the  number  of 
pairs  which  have  to  be  formed  will  be  indefinitely  large. 
This  however,  by  our  principle,,  makes  no  difference.  The 
two  transformations  of  each  pair  are  now  capable  of  being  done 
backwards  by  one  or  two  Cyclical  Processes  of  the  form 
described  in  §  2. 

Thus  in  the  first  place  let  the  two  given  transformations 
be  of  different  kinds,  e.g.  let  the  quantity  of  heat  Q  of  tem- 
perature T  be  transformed  into  work,  and  the  quantity  of 
heat  Q^  be  transferred  from  a  body  K^  of  temperature  T,  to 
a  body  K^  of  temperature  T^.  The  symbols  Q  and  Q^  are 
here  supposed  to  represent  the  absolute  values  of  the  quanti- 
ties. Let  it  be  also  assumed  that  the  magnitudes  of  the  two 
quantities  stand  in  such  relation  to  each  other  that  the  follow- 
ing equation,  corresponding  to  equation  (2),  will  hold,  viz. 


Then  let  us  suppose  the  Cyclical  Process  to  be  performed  in 
the  reverse  order,  whereby  the  quantity  of  heat  Q,  of  tem- 
perature T,  is  generated  out  of  work,  and  another  quantity 
of  heat  is  tra,nsferred  from  the  body  K^  to  the  body  K^.  Thi§ 
lattier  quantity  must  then  be  exactly  equal  to  the  quantity  Q^, 
given  in  the  above  equation,  and  the  given  transformations 
have  thus  been  performed  backwards. 

Again  let  there  be  one  transformation  from  work  into 


104  lON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

heat  and  one  from  lieat  into  work,  e.g.  let  the  quantity  of 
heat  Q  of  temperature  T  be  generated  out  of  work,  and 
the  quantity  of  heat  ^  of  temperature  2"  be  transformed 
into  work,  and  let  fbese  two  stand  in  such  relation  to  each 
other  that  we  may  put 

T         T 

Then  let  us  suppose  in  the  first  place  that  the  same  process  as 
last  described  has  been  performed,  whereby  the  quantity  of 
heat  Q  of  teinperature  T  has  been  transformed  into  work,  and 
another  quantity  Q^  has  been  transferred  from  a  body  K^  to 
another  body  K^.  Next  let  us  suppose  a  second  process  per- 
formed in  the  reverse  direction,  in  which  the  last-named 
quantity  Q^  is  transferred  back  again  from  K^  to  K^,  and  a 
quantity  of  heat  of  temperature  T'  is  at  the  same  time  gene- 
rated out  of  work.  This  transformation  from  work  into  heat 
must,  independently  of  sign,  be  equivalent  to  the  former 
trajisformation  from  heat  into  work,  since  they  are  both  equi- 
valent to  one  and  the  same  transference  of  heat.  The  quantity 
of  heat  of  temperature  T',  generated  out  of  work,  must  there- 
fore be  exactly  as  great  as  the  quantity  Q'  found  in  the  above 
equation,  and  the  given  transformations  have  thus  been  made 
backwards. 

Finally,  let  there  be  two  transferences  of  heat,  e.g.  the 
quantity  of  heat  Q  transferred  from  a  body  K^  of  tempera- 
ture Tj  to  a  body  K^^  of  temperature  T^,  and  the  quantity 
Q\,  from  a  body  K\  of  temperature  T'j  to  a  body  K\  of  tem- 
perature T\,  and  let  these  be  so  related  that  we  may  put 


«.(i-i).e'.(^-ij=o. 


Then  let  us  suppose  two  Cyclical  Processes  performed,  in  one 
of  which  the  quantity  Q,^  is  transferred  from  K^  to  K^,  and 
the  quantity  Q  of  temperature  T  thereby  generated  out  of 
work,  whilst  in  the  second  the  same  quantity  Q  is  again 
transformed  into  work,  and  thereby  another  quantity  of  heat 
transferred  from  K\  to  K\.  This  second  quantity  must  then 
be  exactly  equal  to  the  given  quantity  Q\,  and  the  two 
given  transferences  of  heat  have  thus  been  done  backwards. 


THE  EQUIVALENCE  OP  TRANSFORMATIONS.  105 

When  by  operations  of  this  kind  all  the  transformations 
of  the  first  division  have  been  done  backwards,  there  then 
rernain  the  transformations,  all  of  the  like  sign,  of  the  second 
division,  and  no  others  whatever.  Now  first,  if  these  trans- 
formations are  negative  then  they  can  only  be  transformations 
from  heat  into  work  and  transferences  from  a  lower  to  a  bigher 
temperature;  and  of  these  the  transformations  of  the  *first 
kind  may  be  replaced  by  transformations  of  the  second  kind. 
For  if  a  quantity  of  heat  Q  of  temperature  T  is  transformed 
into_  work,  then  we  have  only  to  perform  in  reverse  order  the 
cyclical  process  described  in  §  2,  in  which  the  quantity  of 
heat  Q  of  temperature  T  is  generated  out  of  work,  and  at  the 
same  time  another  quantity  $j  is  transferred  from  a  body  K^ 
of  temperature  T^  to  another  body  K^  of  the  higher  tempera- 
ture Tj^.  Thereby  the  given  transfonnation  from  heat  into 
work  is  done  backwards,  and  replaced  by  the  transference  of 
heat  from  K^  to  Ky  By  the  application  of  this  method,  we 
shall  at  last  have  nothing  left  except  transferences  of  heat 
from  a  lower  to  a  higher  temperature  which  are  not  com- 
pensated in  any  way.  As  this  contradicts  our  fundamental 
principle,  the  supposition  that  tlie  transformations  of  the 
second  division  are  negative  must  be  incorrect. 

Secondly,  if  these  transformations  were  positive,  then 
since  the  cyclical  process  under  consideration  is  reversible, 
the  whole  process  might  be  performed  in  reverse  order; 
in  which  case  all  the  transformations  which  occur  in  it 
would  take  the  opposite  sign,  and  every  transformation  of 
the  second  division  would  become  negative.  We  are  thus 
brought  back  to  the  case  already  considered,  which  has  been 
found  to  contradict  the  fundamental  principle. 

As  then  the  transformations  of  the  second  division  can 
neither  be  positive  nor  negative  they  cannot  exist  at  all ;  and 
the  first  division,  whose  algebraical  sum  is  zero,  must  em- 
brace all  the  transformations .  which  occur  in  the  cyclical 
process.  We  may  therefore  write  iV=  0  in  equation  (8),  and 
thereby  we  obtain  as  the  analytical  expression  of  the  Second 
Main  Principle  of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat  for  reversi- 
blg  processes  the  equation 

'"'^^  =  0...,, , ,(VII). 


/' 


T 


106       ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT, 

§  7.     On  the  Temperatures  of  the  various  quantities  of 
Heat,  and  the  Entropy  of  the  Body. 

In  the  development  of  Equation  VII.  the  temperatures  of 
the  quantities  of  heat  treated  of  were  determined  by  those  of 
the  heat  reservoirs  from  which  they  came,  or  into  which  they 
passed.  But  let  us  now  consider  a  cyclical  process,  which  is 
such  that  a  body  passes  through  a  series  of  changes  of 
condition  and  at  last  returns  to  its  original  state.  This 
variable  body,  if  placed  in  connection  with  the  heat  reservoir 
to  receive  or  give  off  heat,  must  have  the  same  temperature 
as  the  reservoir ;  for  it  is  only  in  this  case  that  the  heat  can 
pass  as  readily  from  the  reservoir  to  the  body  as  in  the  reverse 
direction,  and  if  the  process  is  reversible  it  is  requisite  that 
this  should  be  the  case.  This  condition  cannot  indeed  be 
exactly  fulfilled,  since  between  equal  temperatures  there  can  in 
general  be  no  passage  of  heat  whatever ;  but  we  may  at  least 
assume  it  to  be  so  nearly  fulfilled  that  the  small  remaining 
dififerences  of  temperature  may  be  neglected. 

In  this  case  it  is  obviously  the  same  thing  whether  we 
consider  the  temperature  of  a  quantity  of  heat  which  is  being 
transferred  as  being  equal  to  that  of  the  reservoir  or  of  the 
variable  body,  since  these  are  practically  the  same.  If  how- 
ever we  choose  the  latter  and  suppose  that  in  forming  Equa- 
tion VII.  every  element  of  heat  Q  is  taken  of  that  tem- 
perature which  the  variable  body  possesses  at  the  moment  it 
is  taken  in,  then  we  can  now  ascribe  to  the  heat  reservoirs 
any  other  temperatures  we  please,  without  thereby  making 

any  alteration  in  the  expression  |  — .     With  this  assumption 

as  to  the  temperatures  we  may  consider  Equation  VII.  as 
holding,  without  troubling  ourselves  as  to  whence  the  heat 
comes  which  the  variable  body  takes  in,  or  where  that  goes 
which  it  gives  off,  provided  the  process  is  on  the  whole  a  re- 
versible one. 

The  expression  —  ,  if  it  be  understood  in  the  sense  lust 

T 

given,  is  the  differential  of  a  quantity  which  depends  on  the 
condition  of  the  body,  and  at  the  same  time  is  fully  deter- 
mined as  soon  as  the  condition  of  the  body  at  the  moment 
is  known,  without  our  needing  to.  know  the  path  by  which 


THK  EQUIVALENCE  OF  TRAKSFOllMATIONS.  107 

the  body  has  arrived  at  that  condition ;  for  it  is  only  in  this  case 
that  the  integral  will  always  become  equal  to  zero  as  often  as 
the  body  after  any  given  variations  returns  to  its  original  con- 
dition. In  another  paper*,  after  introducing  a  further  de- 
velopment.of  the  equivalence  of  transformations,  the  author 
proposed  to  call  this  quantity,  after  the  Greek  word  Tpoirrj, 
Transformation,  the  Entropy  of  the  body.  The  complete 
explanation  of  this  name  and  the  proof  that  it  correctly 
expresses  the  conditions  of  the  quantity  under  consideration  . 
can  indeed  only  "be  given  at  a  later  period,  after  the  develop- 
ment just  mentioned  has  been  treated  of;  but  for  the  sake 
of  convenience  we  shall  use  the  name  henceforward. 

If  we  denote  the  Entropy  of  the  body  by  ;Si  we  may  put 

T 

or  otherwise 

dQ  =  rdS., (VIII). 

§  8.     On  the  Temperature  Fimction  t. 

To  determine  the  temperature  function  r  we  will  apply  the 
same  method  as  in  Chaptei*  III.  §  7,  p.  81,  to  determine  the 
function  4>  (T^,  T^.  Eor,  as  the  function  t  is  independent  of 
the  nature  of  the  variable  body  used  in  the  cyclical  process,  we 
may,  in  order  to  determine  its  form,  choose-  any  body  we 
please  to  be  subjected  to  the  process.  We  will  therefore 
again  choose  a  perfect  gas,  and,  as  in  the  above-mentioned 
section,  suppose  a  simple  process  performed,  in  which  the  gas 
takes  in  heat  only  at  one  temperature  T,  and  gives  it  out 
only  at  another  T^.  The  two  quantities  of  heat  which  are 
taken  in  and  given  out  in  this  case,  and  whose  absolute 
values  we  may  call  Q  and  Q^,  stand  by  equation  (8)  of  the 
last  chapter,  p.  83,  in  the  following  relation  to  each  other : 

QrT, ^^^- 

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  apply  Equation  VII.  to  this 
simple  cyclical  process,  whilst  at  the  same  time  we  treat  the 

*  Fogg.  Ana^  Vol.  cxxv.  p.  390. 


108      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OF  HEAT. 

giving  out  of  the  quantity  of  heat  Q  as  equivalent  to  the 
taking  in  of  the  negative  quantity  —  Q,  we  have  the  follow- 
ing equation : 

^^»■"^^. ™- 

From  equations  (9)  and  (10)  we  obtain 

or  ^^^T (U). 

If  we  now  take  T  as  being  any  temperature  whatever  and  2\ 
as  some  given  temperature,  we  may  write  the  last  equation 
thus : 

T=Tx  Const (12), 

and  the  temperature  function  t  is  thus  reduced  to  a  constant 
factor. 

What  value  we  ascribe  to  the  constant  factor  is  indiffe- 
rent, since  it  may  be  struck  out  of  Equation  VII.  and  thus 
has  no  influence  on  any  calculations  performed  by  means  of 
the  equation.  We  will  therefore  choose  the  simplest  value, 
viz.  unity,  and  write  the  foregoing  equation 

r=T ,....(13). 

The  temperature  function  is  now  nothing  more  than  the 
absolute  temperature  itself. 

Since  the  foregoing  determination  of  the  function  t  rests 
on  the  equations  deduced  for  the  case  of  gases,  one  of  the 
foundations  on  which  this  determination  rests  will  be  the 
approximate  assumption  made  in  the  treatment  of  gases, 
viz.  that  a  perfect  gas,  if  it  expand  at  constant  temperature, 
absorbs  only  just  so  much  heat  as  is  required  for  the 
external  work  thereby  performed.  Should  anyone  on  this 
account  have  any  hesitation  in  regarding  this  determination 
as  perfectly  satisfactory,  he  may  in  Equations  VII.  and  VIII. 
regard  t  as  the  symbol  for  the  tempierature  function  as  yet 


THE  EQUIVALENCK  OF  TEANSFOEMATIONS. ,     109 

undetennined,  and  use  the  equations  in  that  form.  Any  such 
hesitation  would  not,  in  the  author's  opinion,  be  justifiable, 
and  in  what  follows  T  will  always  be  used  in  the  place  of  t. 
Equations  VII.  and  VIII.  wUl  then  be  written  in  the  following 
forms,  which  have  already  been  given  under  Equations  V. 
and  VI.  of  the  last  chapter,  viz. 


dQ  =  TdS. 


CHAPTER  V. 

FORMATION  OF  THE  TWO  FUNDAMENTAL  EQUATION* 

•    §  1.    Discussion  of  the  Variables  which  determine  the 
Condition  of  the  Body. 

In  the  general  treatment  of  the  subject  hitherto  adopted 
we  have  succeeded  in  expressing  the  two  main  principles  of 
the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat  by  two  very  simple  equations 
numbered  III.  and  VI.  (pp.  31  and  90). 

dQ  =  dU+dW ..(Ill), 

dQ  =  TdS (VI). 

We  will  now  throw  these  equations  into  altered  forms 
which  make  them  more  convenient  for  our  further  calcula- 
tions. 

Both  equations  relate  to  an  indefinitely  small  alteration 
of  condition  in  the  body,  and  in  the  latter  it  is  further 
assumed  that  this  alteration  is  affected  in  such  a  way  as  to 
be  reversible.  For  the  truth  of  the  first  equation  this  assump- 
tion is  not  necessary  :  we  will  howevpr  make  it,  and  in  the 
following  calculation  will  assume,  as  hitherto,  that  we  have 
only  to  do  with  reversible  variations. 

We  suppose  the  condition  of  the  body  under  considera- 
tion to  be  determined  by  the  values  of  certain  magnitudes, 
and  for  the  present  we  will  assume  that  two  such  magnitudes 
are  sufficient.  The  cases  which  occur  most  frequently  are 
those  in  which  the  condition  of  the  body  is  determined  by  its 
temperature  and  volume,  or  by  its  temperature  and  pressure, 
or  lastly  by  its  volume  and  pressure.  We  will  not  however 
tie  ourselves  to  any  particular  magnitudes,  but  will  at  first 


FORMATION  OF  THE  TWO  FUNDAMENTAL  EQUATIONS.      Ill 

assume  that  the  condition  of  the  body  is  determined  by  any 
two  magnitudes  which  may  be  called  x  and  y ;  and  these  mag- 
nitudes we  shall  treat  as  the  independent  variables  of  our 
calculations.  In  special  cases  we  are  of  course  always  free  to 
take  one  or  both  of  these  yariables  as  representing  either  one 
or  two  of  the  above-named  magnitudes.  Temperature,  Volume 
and  Pressure. 

If  the  magnitudes  x  and  y  determine  the  condition  of 
the  body,  we  can  in  the  above  equations  treat  the  Energy  IT 
and  the  Entropy  S  as  being  functions  of  the  variables.  In 
the  same  way  the  temperature  T,  whenever  it  does  not  itself 
form  one  of  these  variables,  may  be  considered  as  a  function 
of  the  two  variables.  The  magnitudes  W  and  Q  on  the  con- 
trary, as  remarked  above,  cannot  be  determined  so  simply, 
but  must  be  treated  in  another  fashion. 

The  differential  coefficients  of  these  magnitudes  we  shall 
denote  as  follows : 

dW  dW 

f  =  ^=     f  =  ^ (^)- 

These  differential  coefficients  are  definite  functions  of  x 
and  y.  For  suppose  the  variable  x  is  changed  into  x+dx 
while  y  remains  constant,  and  that  this  alteration  of  condi- 
tion in  the  body  is  such  as  to  be  reversible,  then  we  are 
dealing  with  a  completely  determinate  process,  and  the 
external  work  done  in  that  process  must  therefore  be  also 

dW 
determinate,  whence  it  follows  that  the  quotient  -^  must 

equally  have  a  determinate  value.  The  same  will  hold  if  we 
suppose  y  to  change  to  1/  +  dy  while  x  remains  constant.  If 
then  the  differential  coefficients  of  the  external  work  W  are 
determinate  functions  of  x  and  y  it  follows  from  Equation  III. 
that  the  differential  coefficients  of  the  quantity  of  heat  Q 
taken  in  by  the  body  are  also  determinate  functions  of  x 
and  y. 

Let  us  now  write  for  dW  and  dQ  their  expressions  as 
functions  of  dx  and  dy,  neglecting  those  terms  which  are  of  a 


112      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

higher  order  than  doa  and  dy.     We  then  have, 

dW  =  mdx  +  ndi/  (3), 

dQ  =  Mdx  +  Ndi/ (4),  " 

and  we  thus  obtain  two  complete  differential  equations,  which 
cannot  be  integrated  so  long  as  the  variables  a;  and  y  are 
independent  of  each  other,  since  the  magnitudes  m,  n  and 
M,  N  do  not  fulfil  the  conditions  of  integrability,  viz. 

dm  _dn       ,  dM  _dN 
dy  ~  dx  dy      dx  ' 

The  magnitudes  W  and  Q  thus  belong  to  that  class  which 
was  described  in  the  mathematical  introduction,  of  which  the 
peculiarity  is  that,  although  their  differential  coefficients  are 
determinate  functions  of  the  two  independent  variables,  yet 
they  themselves  cannot  be  expressed  as  such  functions,  and 
can  only  be  determined  when  a  further  relation  between  the 
variables  is  given,  and  thereby  the  way  in  which  the  varia- 
tions took  place  is  known. 

§  2.  Elimination  of  the  quantities  U  and  S  from  the 
two  Ftmdamental  Equations. 

Let  us  now  return  to  Equation  III.,  and  substitute  in  it 
for  dW  and  dQ  expressions  (3)  and  (4) ;  then,  collecting  to- 
gether the  terms  in  dx  and  dy,  the  equation  becomes, 

Mdx  +  Ndy  =  (^+  m^  dx+(~  +  «)  dy. 

As  these  equations  must  hold  for  all  values  of  dx  and  dy, 
we  must  have, 

iV=-5-H-W. 


FORMATION  OF  THE  TWO  FUNDAMENTAL  EQUATIONS.      113 

Differentiating  the  first  equation  according  to  y,  and  the 
second  according  to  x,  we  obtain, 

dM^ffU_     dm 
dy      dxdy     dy ' 

dN^  cP£     dn 
dx      dydx     dx 

We  may  apply  to  JJ  the  principle  which  holds  for  every 
function  of  two  independent  variables,  viz.  that  if  they  are 
differentiated  according  to  both  variables,  the  order  of  dif- 
ferentiation is  a  matter  of  indifference.     Hence  we  have 

d'u  ^  dru_ 

dxdy     dydx ' 

Subtracting  one  of  the  two  above  equations  from  the 
other  we 'obtain, 

dM     dN_  dm_dn 

dy      dx      dy      dx ^ 

We  may  now  treat  Equation  VII.  [in  the  same  manner. 
Putting  for  dQ  and  d8  their  complete  expressions,  it  be- 
comes, 

Mdx  +  Ndy  =  T  ij- dx -^ -^  dyj  , 

M^      N.       dS,      dS, 
or  Y'^^'^T^^'^^'^'^d^'^'''- 

This  equation  divides  itself,  like  the  last,  into  two,  viz. 

M^dS 
T     dx' 

F_d8 
T     dy' 

Differentiating  the  first  of  these  according  to  y,  and  the 
second  according  to  x,  we  obtain, 


114'  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  01?  HEAT. 

T^  _dxdy ' 

dx dx  _  d'S 

:     T^  dydx' 

d'S       d'S 


But  as  before, 


dxdy     dydx ' 


hence  subtracting  one  of  tbe  above  equations  from  the  other 
we  obtain : 

dy  dy  dx  dx  _^ 

dM    dN     Ifji^dT     ,rdT\  ,. 

l^-d^  =  T[^dy-^dx) ^^^- 

The  two  equations  (5)  and  (6)  may  be, also  written  in  a 
somewhat  different  form.  To  avoid  the  use  of  .so  many- 
letters  ill  the  formula,  we  will  replace  M  and  N,  which  were 

introduced  as  abbreviations  for  -^  and -i^,  by  those  differen- 
tial coefficients  themselves.     Similarly  for  m  and  n  we  will 

dW    '     dW 
write  -i—  and  t— ,     Then  the  right  hand  side  of  equation, 
dx  dy  ° 

(5)  may  be  wiitten 


d^  /dW\  _  d^(dW\ 
dy  \dx  J     dx\dy  J  ' 


Thus  the  magnitude  represented  by  this  expression  is  a  func- 
tion of  X  and  y,  which  may  generally.be  considered  as  known, 
inasmuch  as  the  external  forces  acting  on  the  body  are  open 
to  direct  observation,  and  from  these  the  external  work  can 
be  determined.  The  above  difference,  which  will  occur  very- 
frequently  from  henceforward,  we  shall   call   "The  Work 


FORMATION  OF  THE  TWO  FUNDAMENTAL  EQUATIONS.      115 

Difference  referred  to  x  and  y"  and  shall  use  for  it  a  special 
symbol,  putting 

J.    _±  (dW\  _  d_  (dW\ 
.      ..     ^~dy\dx)     dxKdyj ^^^•■ 

Through  these  changes  equations  (5)  and  (6)  are  trans- 
formed into  the  following : 

A.  f^\  _  i.  f^\  -  n  rfi\ 

dy\dx)     dx\dyj~    '" ^>-' 

^(dQ\_±fdQ\^lfdT^dQ_dT^dQ\ 
dy\dx)     dx\dyj      T\dy      dx      dx      dyj"      '' 

These  two  equations  form  the  analytical  expressions  of 
the  two  fundamental  principles  for  reversible  variations,  in 
the  case  in  which  the  condition  of  the  body  is  determined  by 
two  given  variables.  From  these  equations  follows  a  third, 
which  is  so  far  simpler  as  it  contains  only  differential  coeffi- 
cients of  Q  of  the  first  degree,  viz. 

^Jx|f-Sx|=-..- (-)• 

§  3.  Case  in  which  the  Temperature  is  taken  as  one  of  the 
Independent  Variables. 

The  above  three  equations  are  very  much  simplified  if  the 
temperature  of  the  body  is  selected  as  one  of  the  independent 
variables.  Let  us  for  this  purpose  put  y  =  T,  so  that  the  two 
independent  variables  are  the  temperature  T,  and  the  still 
undetermined  quantity  x.     Then  we  have  first, 

^=1 
dy 

dT 
Again,  referring  to  the  differential  coefficient  ;,- ,  it  is 

assumed  in  its  formation  that,  while  x  is  changed  into  x  +  dx, 
the  other  variable,  hitherto  called  y,  remains  constant.  But 
as  T  is  now  itself  the  other  variable,  it  follows  that  T  must 
remain  constant  in  the  above  differential  coefficient,  or  in 
other  words 

dx 

8—2 


116      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OP  HEAT. 

Again,  if  we  form  the  Work-difference  referred  to  x  and 
T,  this  wUl  run  as  follows : 

^e^m\_d_idw\ 

^"^     dT\dx)     dxKdTj  ^    ' 

Hence  equations  (8),  (9),  (10)  take  the  following  form; 

^©-s(S)-^« ('^)- 

±(dQ\_d_(d^\^ldQ  „, 

dT\dx)     dxKdT)     Tdx  ^    '' 

S=^^- (1^)' 

If  the  product  TD^^,,  given  in  equation  (14),  be  substi- 
tuted for  -j^  in  equation  (12),  and  then  differentiated  accord- 
ing to  T,  the  following  very  simple  equation  will  be  the 
result : 

d  fdQ\         dD,^ 

§  4.     Particular  Assumptions  as  to  the  External  Forces. 

We  have  hitherto  made  no  particular  assumptions  as  to 
the  external  forces  to  which  the  body  is  subjected,  and  to 
which  the  external  work  done  during  its  alterations  of  condi- 
tion is  related.  We  will  now  consider  more  closely  a  special 
case,  which  occurs  frequently  in  practice,  namely'  that  in 
which  the  only  external  force  which  exists,  or  at  least  the 
only  one  which  is  of  sufficient  importance  to  be  taken  into 
consideration,  is  a  pressure  acting  on  the  surface  of  the  body, 
everywhere  normal  to  that  surface,  and  of  uniform  intensity. 
In  this  case  external  work  can  only  be  done  during  changes 
in  the  volume  of  the  body.  Let  p  be  the  pressure  per  unit 
of  surface,  v  the  volume ;  then  the  external  work  done, 
where  this  volume  is  increased  to  ?;  +  dv,  is  given  by  the 
equation 

dW=pdv (16). 


FOEMATION  OF  THE  TWO  FUNDAMENTAI,  EQUATIONS.      117 

Let  US  now  suppose  tlie  condition  of  the  body  to  be  given 
by  the  values  of  two  given  variables  x  and  y.  Then  the 
pressure  p  and  volume  v  must  be  considered  as  functions  of 
X  and  y.    We  may  thus  write  the  last  equation  as  follows : 


■"^'^(S-^+l*)- 

whence  it  follows  that 

dW       dv^ 
dx      "  dx 

dW       dv 
dy  ~^  dy\ 

,(17). 


dW         dW 
Putting  these  values  for  —=—  and  -5—  in  equation  (7),  and 

performing  the  differentiations  indicated,  taking  note  also  of 

the  fact  that  -^ — =-  =  ,    ,   ,  we  obtain 
dxdy     dydx 

-.       dp     dv      dp  ,  dv  -,_. 

^^  =  dy''d^-£+d-y (1^)- 

This  value  of  D^  we  have  now  to  apply  to  equations  (9) 
and  (10).  Let  x  and  T  be  the  two  independent  variables ; 
then  equation  (18)  becomes 

_dp     dv  ^     dv  .  „, 

^"'-dT     dx     dx^  dT ^    '' 

which  value  we  have  to  apply  to  equations  (12),  (14)  and 
(15).  The  expression  given  in  (18)  takes  its  simplest  form, 
if  we  choose  for  one  of  the  independent  variables  either  the 
volume  or  the  pressure,  or  if  we  choose  both  for  the  two 
independent  variables.  For  these  cases  equation  (18)  takes, 
as  is  easily  seen,  the  following  forms, 


118 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OF  HEAT. 


I)    =-^, 

""        dj/ 
D^  =  l 


■(21), 
(22). 


Lastly  in  the  cases  in  which  either  the  volume  or  pressure 
is  taken  as  one  of  the  independent  variables,  we  may  choose 
the  temperature  for*  the  other.  We  must  then  put  T  for  y 
in  equations  (20)  and  (21),  which  then  become 


D. 


dp 

'It- 


(23), 


(24). 


§  5.  Frequently  occurring  Forms  of  the  Differential 
Equations. 

In  the  circumstances  described  above,  where  the  only 
external  force  is  a  uniform  pressure  normal  to  the  surface, 
it  is  usual  to  choose  as  the  independent  variables,  which 
are  to  determine  the  condition  of  the  body,  the  quantities 
last  mentioned  in  the  foregoing  section,  viz.  volume  and 
temperature,  pressure,  and  , temperature,  or  lastly,  volume 
and  pressure.  The  systems  of  differential  equations  which 
hold  for  these  three,  cases  may  be  easily  deduced  from  the 
more  general  systems  given  above  ;  but  on  account  of  their 
frequent  use  it  may  be  well  to  collect  them  together  in  this 
place.  The  first  system  is  the  one  which  the  author  has 
usually  employed  in  the  treatment  of  special  cases. 

If  V  and  T  are  taken  as  the  independent  variables, 


d^(dQ\  _d_(^\_dp 


dT 

d_  /^\  _  d^  fdQ 
dT\dv)     dv[dT, 
dQ_     dp 
dv  ~     dT' 


IdQ 
T  dv 


d^(dQ 
dv 


Q- 


dr 


..(2.5). 


FORMATlbN-  OF  THE  TWO  FUNDAMENTAL  EQUATIONS.      119 
If  p  and  T  are  taken  : 

d   (dg\      d_  /dQ\  ^_dv^ 


dT  [dp]     dp  \dTj        dT 

d  dQ  _±  (dQ\_l  dQ 

dT  dp     dp  [dTJ  ~  T  dp  ' 

dp  dT' ' 

dp  [dTj 


dT' 


.(26). 


■(27). 


If  V  and  p  are  taken : 

dp  \dvj     dv  \dp  J       ' 
d_fdQ\_d/dQ\l^rdT    dQ  _dT    dQ\ 
dp  \dv  J     dv  \dpj  ~  T  \dp      dv      dv      dp  J  ' 

dp      dv      dv      dp 

§  6.  Equations  in  the  case  of  a  body  which  undergoes 
a  Partial  Change  in  its  Condition  of  Aggregation. 

A  case  whict  permits  a  still  further  simplification  peculiar 
to  itself,  and  which  is  of  special  interest  from  its  frequent 
occurrence,  is  that  in  which  the  changes  of  condition  in  the 
body  are  connected  with  a  partial  change  in  its  Condition  of 
Aggregation. 

Suppo.se  a  body  to  be  given,  of  which  one  part  is  in 
one  particular  state  of  aggregation,  and  the  remainder  in 
another.  As  an  example  we  may  conceive  one  part  of  the 
body  to  be  in  the  condition  of  liquid  and  the  remainder 
in  the  condition  of  vapour,  and  vapour  of  the  particular 
density  which  it  assumes  when  in  contact  with  liquid  :  the 
equations  deduced  will  however  hold  equally  if  one  part 
of  the  body  is  in  the  solid  condition  and  the  other  in  the 
liquid,  or  one  part  in  the  solid  and  the  other  in  the  vaporous 
condition.  We  shall,  for  the  sake  of  generality,  not  attempt 
to  define  more  nearly  the  two  conditions  of  aggregation 
which  we  are  treating  of,  but  merely  call  them  the  first  and 
the  second  conditions. 


120      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OF  HEAT. 

Let  a  certain  quantity  of  this,  substance  be  inclosed  in 
a  vessel  of  given  volume,  and  let  one  part  have  the  first, 
and  the  other  the  second  condition  of  aggregation.  If  the 
specific  volumes  (or  volumes  per  unit  of  weight),  which  the 
substance  assumes  at  a  given  temperature  in  the  two  dif- 
ferent conditions  of  aggregation,  are  different,  then  in  a 
given  space  the  two  parts  which  are  in  the  different  con- 
ditions of  aggregation  cannot  be  any  we  please,  but  can 
only  have  determinate  values.  For  if  the  part  which 
exists  in  the  condition  of  greater  specific  volume  increases 
in  size,  then  the  pressure  is  thereby  increased  which  the 
inclosed  substance  exerts  on  the  inclosing  walls,  and  con- 
sequently the  reaction  which  those  walls  exert  upon  it, 
and  finally  a  point  will  be  reached,  where  this  pressure  is 
so  great  that  it  prevents  any  further  passage  of  the  substance 
into  this  condition  of  aggregation.  When  this  point  is 
reached,  then,  so  long  as  tHe  temperature  of  the  mass  and 
its  volume,  i.e.  the  content  of  the  vessel,  remain  constant, 
the  magnitude  of  the  parts  which  are  in  the  two  conditions 
of  aggregation  can  undergo  no  further  change.  If,  however, 
whilst  the  temperature  remains  constant,  the  content  of 
the  vessel  increases,  then  the  part  which  is  in  the  conditionj 
of  aggregation  of  greater  specific  volume  can  again  increase 
at  the  cost  of  the  other,  but  only  until  the  same  pressure  as 
before  is  attained  and  any  further  passage  from  one  condition 
to  the  other  thereby  prevented. 

Hence  arises  the  peculiarity,  which  distinguishes  this 
case  from  all  others.  For  suppose  we  choose  the  temperature 
and  the  volume  of  the  mass  as  the  two  independent  variables 
which  are  to  determine  its  condition;  then  the  pressure 
is  not  a  function  of  both  these  variables,  but  of  the  tempera- 
ture alone.  The  same  holds,  if  instead  of  the  volume  we 
take  as  the  second  independent  variable  some  other  quantity 
which  can  vary  independently  of  the  temperature,  and  which 
in  conjunction  with  the  temperature  determines  fuUy  the 
condition  of  the  body.  The  pressure  must  then  be  inde- 
pendent of  this  latter  variable.  The  two  quantities,  tem- 
perature and  pressure,  cannot  in  this  case  be  chosen  as 
the  two  variables  which  are  to  serve  for  the  determination 
of  the  body's  condition. 

We  will  now  take,  in  addition  to  the  temperature  T,  any 


into  the  following: 


dr' 


FORMATION  OF  THE  TWO   FUNDAMENTAL  EQUATIONS.      121 

other  magnitude  x,  as  yet  left  undetermined,  for  the  second 
independent  variable  which  is  to  determine  the  body's 
condition.  Let  us  then  consider  the  expression  given  in 
equation  (19)  for  the  work-diflference  referred  to  xT,  viz. 

T\     _dp     dv      dp  .   dv 
''''~dT''d^~drx^dT- 

In  this  we  must,  by  what  has  been  said,  put  -^  =  0, 
and  we  thus  obtain 

^.-J4: (^«)- 

The  three  equations  (12),  (13),  (14)  are  thereby  changed 
'g: 

d_  fdQ\  _  d^  fdQ\  _dp     dv  .     . 

iT\dool     dx\dT)~  df    dx ^    '' 

ji/^N_^/rf<3\_l      dQ 

dT\dxj     dx\dTj     T     dx  ^     '' 

S  =  ^*x| (^'>- 

§  7.     Clapeyron's  Equation  and  Carnot's  Function. 

To  conclude  the  developments  of  the  Fundamental  Equa- 
tions which  have  formed  the  subject  of  the  present  chapter, 
we  may  consider  the  equation  which  Clapeyron*  deduced  as 
a  fundamentajl  equation  from  the  theory  of  Carnot,  in  order 
to  see  in  what  relation  it  stands  to  the  equations  we  have' 
here  developed.  As  however  Clapeyron's  equation  contains 
an  unknown  function  of  temperature,  usually  designated  as 
Carnot's  function,  it  will  be  advisable  beforehand  to  throw 
our  equations,  so  far  as  they  will  come  under  considera- 
tion, into  the  form  which  they  take,  if  the  temperature 
function  t,  introduced  in  the  last  chapter,  is  treated  as  still 
indeterminate,  and   is   not,   in  accordance  with  the  value 

*  Journal  de  VEcole  Foly technique,  Vol.  xiy.  (1834). 


122      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

there  determined,  put  equal  to  the  absolute  temperature  T. 
We  shall  thereby  obtain  the  advantage  of  fixing  the  relation 
between  our  temperature-function  t  and  Carnot's  Function. 
If  instead  of  equation 

dQ=Td8, 

we  use  the  less  determinate  Equation  VIII.  of  the  last  chapter, 

dQ  =  rdS, 

and  eliminate  8  from  this  eque-tion,   in  the  same  manner 
as  in  §  2,  we  obtain  instead  of  equation  (9)  the  following  : 

£(dQ\_d^(dQ\l^dj^^dQ_dT^dQ\  _ 
dy\dx)      dx\dy)      T\dy      dx     dx      dyj"        '' 

Combining  this  with  (8)  we  obtain  instead  of  equa- 
tion (16), 

^^S-S"!"^- (»^> 

If  we  now  assume  that  the  only  external  force  is  a 
uniform  and  normal  pressure  on  the  surface,  we  may  use 
for  D^y  the  expression  given  in  equation  (18),  and  the  above 
equation  becomes 


dr      dO     dr      dQ        {dip     dv      dp     dv 
—  X  -7^  —  -,  -  X-^=T{-f  x^ f  X 


i) w- 


dy      dx     dx      dy       \dy     dx     dx     dy. 

If  further  we  choose  as  independent  variables  v  and  p, 
putting  x  =  v,  and  y  =  p,  we  obtain 

—     ^  _  !^     '^^  —  r^  "I 

dp     dv       dv      dp        ^     '' 

But  as  T  is  only  a  function  of  T,  we  may  put 

dr^dr^      dT       .dT_dT     dT 
dv     dT^  dv  dp~ dT^  dp- 

Introducing  these  values  of  t-  and  -j-  in  the  above  equation, 


FOEMATION  OF  THE"  TWO  FUNDAMENTAL  EQUATIONS.     123 

and  dividing  by  ^ ,  we  obtain,  instead  of  the  last  of  equa- 
tions (27),  the  following: 

dp      dv      dv      dp      dT ^"'  '' 

dT 

It  is  here  assumed  that  the  heat  is  measured  in  mechani- 
cal units.  To  introduce  the  ordinary  measure  of  heat,  we 
must  divide  the  expression  on  the  right-hand  side  by  the 
mechanical  equivalent  of  heat,  which  gives  : 

dT^^dQ     dT^JQ         r 

dp      dv      dv      dp      zp  dr ^     '' 

dl' 

Clapeyron's  equation  agrees  in  form  with  this,  since  it  is 
written* 

fx^_fx^=(7 (38), 

dp      dv      dv      dp  ^ 

where  C  is  an  undetermined  function  of  temperature,  and  is 
the  same  as  Carnot's  Function  already  mentioned. 

If  we  equate  the  right-hand  expressions  of  (.37)  and  (38), 
we  obtain  the  relation  between  C  and  t,  as  follows : 

^==-fd^  =  Zd^7[ ■■^^^^' 

^dT    ^—df~ 

If,  adhering  to  the  determination  of  t  given  by  the  author, 
we  assume  it  to  be  nothing  more  than  the  absolute  tempera- 
ture T,  then  C  takes  the  simpler  form, 

c=| m. 

As  equation  (33)  is  formed  by  the  combination  of  two  equa- 
tions, which  express  the  first  and  second  Main  Principles,  it 

*  Pogg.  Ann.  Vol.  lix.  p.  574. 


124  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT.   • 

follows  that  Clapeyron's  equation  must  be  considered  not  as  an 
expression  of  the  second  Main  Principle  in  the  form  assumed 
by  the  author,  but  as  the  expression  of  a  principle,  which 
may  be  deduced  from  the  combination  of  the  first  and  second 
principles.  As  concerns  the  manner  in  which  Clapeyron  has 
treated  his  differential  equation,  this  differs  widely  from  the 
method  adopted  by  the  author.  Like  Carnot,  he  started  from 
the  assumption  that  the  quantity  of  heat  which  must  be 
imparted  to  a  body  during  its  passage  from  one  condition  to 
another,  may  be  fully  ascertained  from  its  initial  and  final 
conditions,  without  its  being  necessary  to  know  in  what  way 
and  by  what  path  the  passage  has  taken  place.  Accordingly 
he  considered  ^  as  a  function  of  p  and  v,  and  deduced  by 
integrating  his  differential  equation  the  following  expression 
for  Q'. 

Q=F{T)-C,t>{p,v) (41), 

in  which  F{T)  is  any  function  whatever  of  the  temperature j 
and  ^(p,v)  is  a,  function  of  p  and  v  which  satisfies  the  follow- 
ing more  simple  differential  equation  : 

■  f:.#_f+^/=i (42). 

av      dp     dp      av  ^ 

To  integrate  this  last  equation  we  must  be  able  to  express  the 
temperature  T  for  the  body  in  question  as  a  function  of  p 
and  V.  If  we  assume  that  the  body  in  question  is  a  perfect 
gas,  we  have 

2^=5 (43). 

whence 

dT_p  dT_v_ 

dv      B  dp      B' 

Hence  equation  (42)  becomes 

^^-^f  =  ^ (**)• 

Integrating,  we  have 

^  {p>  v)  =  Rlogp  +  ^  ipv), 


FORMATION  OF  THE  TWO  FUNDAMENTAL  EQUATIONS.      125 

where  ^(pv)  is  any  function  whatever  of  the  product  pv.  For 
this  we  may  by  equation  (43)  substitute  any  function  what- 
ever of  the  temperature,  so  that  the  equation  becomes, 

(^{pv)  =  Blogp  +  ^fr{T) (45). 

If  we  introduce  this  expression  for  <p  {p,  v)  in  (41),  and  put 

where  B  again  expresses  any  function  whatever  of  the  tem- 
perature, we  obtain, 

Q  =  B{B-Clogp) (46). 

This  is  the  equation  which  Clapeyron  has  deduced  for  the 
case  of  gases. 


CHAPTER  VI, 

APPLICATION  OF  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT  TO  . 
SATURATED  VAPOUR. 

§  1.     Fundamental  equations  for  saturated  vapour. 

Among  the  equations  of  the  last  chapter,  those  deduced 
in  §  6,  which  refer  to  a  partial  change  in  the  body's  state  of 
aggregation,  may  conveniently  be  treated  first;  inasmuch  as 
the  circumstance  there  mentioned,  viz.  that  the  pressure  is 
only  a  function  of  the  temperature,  greatly  facilitates .  the 
treatment  of  the  subject.  We  will  in  the  first  place  consider 
the  passage  from  the  liquid  to  the  vaporous  condition. 

Let  a  weight  M  of  any  given  substance  be  inclosed  in  an 
expansible  envelope:  of  this  let  the  partm  be  in  the- condition 
of  vapour,  and  that  vapour  (as  necessarily  follows  from  its 
contact  with  the  liquid)  at  its  maximum  density;  and  let  the 
remainder  M—  m  be  liquid.  If  the  temperature  T  of  the 
mass  is  given,  the  condition  of  the  vaporous  part,  and  at  the 
same  time  that  of  the  liquid  part,  is  thereby  determined.  If 
m  be  also  given  and  thereby  the  magnitudes  of  both  parts 
known,  then  we  know  the  condition  of  the  whole  mass.  We 
will  accordingly  choose  T  and  m  as  the  independent  variables, 
and  will  substitute  m  for  x  in  equations  (29),  (30),  (.31)  of 
the  last  chapter.     Then  these  equations  become 

dT\dm)     dm  [dTJ  ~  dT^  dm W' 

d^fdQ\  _  d_  fdQ\  _l^dQ 
dT\dm)      dm\dTj      T     dm ^'^^' 

dQ^j^dp      dv^  ■ 

dm        dT     dm ^"^J- 


SATUEATED  VAPOUR.  127 

We  may  now  denote  the  specific  volume  (i.e.  the  volume 
of  a  unit  of  weight)  of  the  saturated  vapour  by  s,  and  the 
specific  volume  of  the  liquid  by  a:  Both  these  magnitudes 
bear  some  relation  to  the  temperature  T  and  its  correspond- 
ing pressure,  and  are  therefore,  like  the  pressure,  functions  of 
the  temperature  alone.  If  we  further  denote  by  v  the  total 
volume  of  .the  mass,  we  may  then  put 

v='nis+  {M—m)  a-, 

=  m{s  —  a)  +  Mcr. 

We  will  substitute  for  the  difference  (s  —  cr),  a  simpler  ex- 
pression, by  putting 

u  =  s-a- (4), 

whence  it  follows  that 

V  =  mu  +  Ma- (5) ; 

whence 

^^ 
;^'=" "(6)' 

The  quantity  of  heat  which  must  be  applied  to  the  mass,  if 
a  unit  of  weight  of  the  substance,  at  temperature  T  and 
under  the  corresponding  pressure,  is  to  pass  from  the  liquid 
into  the  vaporous  condition,  and  which  may  be  shortly  called 
the  vaporizing  heat,  may  be  denoted  by  p  ;  then  we  have 

dQ  ,„ 

dm  =  P (')• 

We  will  further  introduce  into  the  equations  the  specific  heat 
of  the  substance  in  the  liquid  and  vaporous  condition.  The 
specific  heat  here  treated  of  is  not  however  that  at  constant 
volume,  nor  yet  that  at  constant  pressure,  but  belongs  to  the 
case  in  which  the  pressure  increases  with  the  temperature  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  maximum  expansive  power  of  the. 
saturated  vapour.  This  increase  of  pressure  has  very  little 
influence  on  the  specific  heat  of  the  liquid,  since  liquids  are 
but  slightly  compressible  by  such  pressures  as  are  herein  con- 
sidered. We  shall  hereafter  explain  how  this  influence  may 
be  calculated,  in  our  researches  on  the  different  kinds  of 
specific  heat,  and  a  single  example  will  suffice  here.  For 
water  at  boiling-point  the  difference  between  the  specific 


128      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

heat  here   considered  and    the    specific   heat    at   constant 

pressure,  is  only  of  the  latter,  a  difference  which  may  be 

neglected.  Accordingly,  we  may  for  the  purposes  of  calcula- 
tion take  the  specific  heat  of  the  liquid  here  considered  as 
being  equal  to  the  specific  heat  at  constant  pressure,  although 
their  meaning  is  different.  We  will  call  this  specific 
heat  0. 

With  vapour  it  is  otherwise.  The  specific  heat  here  con- 
sidered refers,  as  shewn  above,  to  that  quantity  of  heat  which 
saturated  vapour  requires  to  heat  it  through  1",  if  it  is  at  the 
same  time  so  powerfully  compressed  that  even  at  the  higher 
temperature  it  again  returns  to  the  saturated  condition.  As 
this  compression  is  very  considerable,  this  kind  of  specific 
heat  is  very  different  from  all  which  we  have  hitherto  treated 
of  We  shall  call  it  the  Specific  Heat  of  Saturated  Steam, 
and  shall  denote  it  by  H. 

Bringing  in  the  two  symbols  G  and  H,  we  may  now  at  once 
"write  down  the  quantity  of  heat  which  is  necessary  to  give 
the  increase  of  temperature  dT  to  the  quantity  of  vapour 
m,  and  the  quantity  of  liquid  M—  m.  The  result  will  be  as 
follows : 

mHdT+(M-m)CdT, 

whence 

or  otherwise 


'^  =  mH+{M-m)C, 

^  =  m{H-G)+MG (8). 


From  equations  (7)  and  (8)  we  have 
d^(dQ\      dp 

U^h^-' (^»>- 

Substituting  in  equations  (1,  2,  3)  the  values  given  in  equa- 
tions (7,  9, 10)  we  have 


SATUBATED  VAPOUR.  129 

%^C-H=u% (U). 

^+a-F=| (12), 

P  =  Tu^T ^^^)- 

These  are  the  fundamental  equations  of  the  Mechanical 
Theory  of  Heat  as  relates  to  the  generation  of  vapour.  Equa- 
tion (11)  is  a  deduction  from  the  first  fundamental  principle, 
(12)  from  the  second,  and  (13)  from  both  together. 

If  it  is  desired  to  use  the  ordinary  and  not  the  mechanical 
measures  for  the  quantities  of  heat,  we  need  only  divide  all 
the  members  of  the  foregoing  equations  by  the  mechanical 
equivalent  of  heat.  In  this  case  we  will  denote  the  two 
specific  heats  and  the  hjeat  of  vaporization  by  new  symbols, 
putting 

c  =  ^;    ^  =  2;!    ''  =  A' (^*)- 

The  equations  then  become 

dr            ,      u  fdp\  ,, ., 

dT^'-^^EKdT) ^^'^' 

_+C-A.=    y (16), 

§  2.    Specific  Heat  of  Saturated  Steam. 

As  the  foregoing  equations  (15),  (16)  and  (17),  of  which 
however  only  two  are  independentjhave  thus  been  obtained  by 
means  of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat,  we  may  make  use.of 
them  in  order  to  determine  more  closely  two  magnitudes,  of 
which  one  was  previously  quite  unknown  and  the  otber  only 
known  imperfectly;  viz.  the  magnitude  h  and  the  magnitude 
s  contained  in  m. 

If  we  first  apply  ourselves  to  the  magnitude  h,  or  the 
Specific  Heat  of  Saturated  Steam,  it  may  be  worth  while  in 
c.  9 


ISO      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

the  first  place  to  give  some  account  of  the  views  formerly 
promulgated  concerning  this  magnitude. 

The  magnitude  h  is  of  special  importance  in  the  theory 
of  the  steam  engine,  and  in  fact  the  first  who  published,  any 
distinct  views  upon  it  was  the  celebrated  improver  of  the 
steam  engine,  James  Watt.  In  his  treatment  of  the  subject 
he  naturally  started  from  those  views  which  were  based  on  the 
older  theory  of  heat.  To  this  class  belongs  especially  the  idea 
mentioned  in  Chapter  I.,  viz.  that  the  so-called  total  Jheat,  i.e. 
the  total  quantity  of  heat  taken  in  by  a  body  during  its  passage 
from  a  given  initial  condition  to  its  present  condition,  depends 
only  on  the  present  condition  and  not  on  the  way  in  which 
the  body  has  been  brought  into  it ;  and  that  it  accordingly 
may  be  expressed  as  a  function  of  those  variables  on  which 
the  condition  of  the  body  depends.  According  to  this  view 
we  must  in  our  case,  in  which  the  condition  of  the  body  com- 
posed of  liquid  and  vapour  is  determined  by  the  quantities 
T  and  m,  consider  this  quantity  of  heat  ^  as  a  function  of  T 
and  m ;  accordingly  we  have  the  equation 

A  (^  _  A  (i^  =  n 
dT  \<hnj     dm  [dTj     "' 

If  we  here  substitute  for  the  two  second  differentials  their 
values  given  in  equations  (9)  and  (10),  we  have 

dp 


or  dividing  by  JE 


^T  +  C-B=0, 


—  +c-h  =  0, 


whence  we  have,  to  determine  h,  the  equation, 

^  =  ^  +  c (18).    . 

This  was  in  fact  the  equation  which  was  formerly  used  to 
determine  h,  though  not  quite  in  the  same  form.  To  calculate 
fi  from   this  equation  we   must  know  the  differential  co- 

efficient  ^,  or  the  change  of  the  vaporizing  heat  for  a  given 

change  of  temperature, 


SATURATED  VAPOUR.  131 

Watt  had  made  experiments  on  the  vaporizing  heat  of 
water  at  different  temperatures,  and  was  thereby  led  to  a 
result,  which  may  be  expressed  by  a  very  simple  law,  com- 
monly called  Watt's  law.  This  in  its  shortest  form  is  as 
follows :  "  The  sum  of  the  free  and  ktent  heat  is  always ' 
constant."  By  this  is  meant  that  the  sum  of  the  two  quan- 
tities of  heat,  which  must  be  imparted  to  a  unit  of  weight  of 
water,  in  order  to  raise  it  from  freezing  point  to  temperature 
T,  and  then  at  that  temperature  convert  it  into  steam,  is  in- 
dependent of  the  temperature  T  itself.  The  quantity  of 
heat  required  for  heating  the  water  is  expressed  by  the 
integral 


in  which  a  is  the  absolute  temperature  of  freezing  point. 
The  heat  of  vaporization  is  represented  by  r.  Watt's  law 
therefore  leads  to  the  equation 

r-l-f  C£Z!Z'  =  Constant (19). 

Differentiating, 

J+c  =  0 (20), 

,  combining  this  with  equation  (18)  we  have 

fe  =  0 (21). 

This  result  was  long  considered  as  correct,  and  was  expressed 
by  the'  following  principle :  If  steam  of  maximum  density 
changes  its  volume  within  a  vessel  impermeable  to  heat,  it 
always  preserves  its  maximum  density. 

More  recently  Eegnault  made  very  careful  experiments  on 
the  changes  in  the  heat  of  vaporization  with  changes  in  the 
temperature* ;  and  thereby  discovered  that  Watt's  law,  accord- 
ing to  which  the  sum  of  the  free  and  latent  heat  is  always 
constant,  does  not  agree  with  the  facts,  but  that  this  sum  has- 
an  increasing  value  as  the  temperature  rises.  The  result  of 
his  experiments  is  expressed  in  the  following  equation,  in 

*  Relations  de  Experiences,  t.  i. ;  Mem.  de  VAcad.,  t.  ixi.,  1847. 

9-2 


132  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

which  instead  of  the  absolute  temperature  T  we  introduce 
the  temperature  t  reckoned  from  the  freezing  point : 


•+ [ccif=  606-5  + 0-305  i (22). 

•'  0 


Differentiating  this  equation  with  regard  to  t,  and  then  sub- 
stituting  -J   for  -j- ,  both  having  the  same  value,  we  have 

^+c  =  0-305  (2.3). 

Combining  this  equation  with  (18)  we  have 

^=-305 (24). 

This 'was  the  value  of  h,  which  it  was  supposed,  after  the 
publication  of  Eegnault's  experiments,  must  be  substituted 
for  the  value  zero  and  applied  to  the  theory  of  the  steam 
engine.  Hence  arose  the  idea  that  if  saturated  steam  be 
compressed,  and  thereby  heated,  in  such  a  way  that  it  always 
has  exactly  the  temperature  for  which  the  density  is  a  maxi- 
mum, it  must  take  in  heat  from  without ;  and  conversely  in 
expanding,  in  order  to  cool  itself  in  a  manner  corresponding 
to  the  expansion,  it  must  give  out  heat  from  itself  Hence 
we  must  further  conclude  that  if  saturated  steam  be  com- 
pressed in  a  vessel  impermeable  to  heat,  a  fall  of  temperature 
must  take  place ;  whilst  in  expanding  the  steam  will  not' re- 
main at  its  maximum  density,  inasmuch  as  its  temperature 
cannot  fall  so  low  as  this  will  necessitate. 

Having  thus  explained  the  conclusions  previously  drawn 
in  relation  to  h,  we  will  now  see  what  may  be  concluded 
from  the  equations  here  developed. 

The  quantity  h  occurs  in  the  two  equations  (15)  and  (16); 
but  the  first  of  these  also  contains  the  quantity  u,  which  cannot 
at  present  be  considered  as  accurately  known ;  it  is  therefore 
less  convenient  for  determining  h  than  the  latter,  which  in 
addition  to  A  contains  only  such  quantities  as  the  experi- 
ments of  Regnault  have  determined  with  great  accuracy  in 
the  case  of  water,  and  of  many  other  fluids.  This  equation 
may  be  written 

,      dr  r 

^^dT'^''~T • f^25)- 


SATURATED  VAPOUR.  133 

We  have  thus  obtained  by  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat  a 
new  equation  for  determining  h,  which  differs  from  the  equa- 
tion (18),  previously  assumed  to  be  correct,  by  the  negative 

T 

quantity—^,  the  value  of  which  quantity  is  thus  of  great 
importance. 

§  3.     Numerical  Value  of  h.  for  Steam. 

K  we  applj'  equation  (25)  to  the  case  of  water,  we  must  first, 
following  Regnault,  give  to  the  sum  of  the  first  two  symbols 
on  the  right-hand  side  the  value  0'305.  To  determine  the 
last  symbol  we  must  know  the  value  of  r,  as  a  function  of  the 
temperature.    Equation  (22)  gives  us 

»•  =  606-5 -t-0-305«-fcd{ (26). 

Jo 

The  specific  heat  of  water  c  is  determined  according  to 
Regnault  by  the  following  formulae  : 

c  =  1  -f-  0-00004!!  +  00000009«'' (27). 

Applying  this,  equation  (26)  becomes 

r=  606-5  -  0-695f-  0-0000«''-0-0000003f...(28). 

Substituting  this  value  for  r  in  (25),  and  replacing  T  by 
273  + 1,  we  obtain  for  steam  the  following  equation  : 

i     no«-     606-5 -0-695«-000002f- 0-0000003*'     ,„„, 
A  =  0-30o 2^3-j-^ ...(29). 

The  expression  for  r  given  in  (28)  is  inconvenient  from  its 
length,  and  the  experiments  on  the  heat  of  vaporization  at 
different  temperatures,  valuable  as  they  are,  can  scarcely 
possess  such  a  degree  of  accuracy  as  to  make  so  long  a 
formula  necessary  to  represent  them.  Accordingly  in  his 
paper  on  the  theory  of  the  steam  engine  the  author  pre- 
ferred to  use  the  following  formula : 

r  =  607-0-708< (30). 

The  manner  in  which  the  two  constants  in  the  formula, 
are  determined  will  be  more  closely  examined  further  on, 


134 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 


in  describing  the  steam  engine.  Here  "vve  will  only  give  a 
comparison  of  some  values  determined  by  both  formulse,  in 
order  to  shew  that  the  difference  between  them  is  so  small,- 
that  one  may  be  substituted  for  the  other  without  danger : 


* 

0» 

50" 

100» 

150» 

200" 

r  by  equation  (28) ... 
r  by  equation  (30) . . . 

606-5 
607-0 

571-6 
571-6 

536-5 
536-2 

500-7 
500-8 

464-3 
465-4 

Substituting  in  equation  (25)  the  expression  for  }•  in  (30) 
we  have  instead  of  equation  (29)  the  following : 


A  =  0-305 - 


607-0-708^ 
273  4- 1     ' 


or  in  still  simpler  form, 

A  =  1-013 


800-3 
■273  +  i' 


(31). 


A  glance  at  equations  (29)  and  (31)  shews  that  for  mode- 
rate temperatures  A.  is  a  negative  quantity.  Equation  (29) 
gives  for  certain  fixed  temperatures  the  following  values, 
which  agree  very  closely  with  those  calculated  by  equation 
(31):'  ■ 


* 

0« 

50" 

100« 

150» 

200" 

h 

-1-916 

- 1-465 

- 1-133 

-0-879 

-0-676 

The  circumstance  that  the  specific  heat  of  saturated  steam 
has  a  negative  value,  and  that  of  so  large  an  amount,  gives 
it  a  special  character  of  its  own.  We  may  explain  in  the 
following  manner  the  cause  of  this  singular  condition.  If 
steam  is  compressed,  heat  is  generated  by  the  work  thereby 
expended,  and  this  heat  is  more  than  sufficient  to  raise  the- 
temperature  of  the  steam  to  the  point  at  which  the  new 
density  is  the  maximum  density.  Accordingly  if  the  steam 
is  to  be  treated  in  such  a  way  that  it  remains  saturated,  it 
must  be  deprived  of  a  part  of  the  heat  thus  generated.  In 
like  manner  in  the  expansion  of  steam  more  heat  is  con- 
verted into  work  than  is  necessary  to  cool  the  steam  so  iax 


SATURATED  VAPOUR,  135 

only  that  it  remains  exactly  in  the  condition  of  saturated 
steam.  Accordingly  if  this  last  condition  is  to  hold  heat  must 
be  imparted  during  the  expansion. 

Should  the  original  saturated  steam  be  contained  in  a 
vessel  impermeable  to  heat,  it  will  be  superheated  during 
compression  and  will  be  in  part  condensed  during  expan- 
sion. 

The  conclusion  that  the  specific  heat  of  saturated  steam 
is  negative  was  drawn  by  Rankine  and  by  the  author  inde- 
pendently, and  about  the  same  time*.  Eankine  however 
developed  only  the  first  of  the  two  equations  (15)  and  (16), 
which  contain  A,  and  this  in  a  somewhat  different  form. 
The  second  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  develope,  since  he  was 
without  the  second  fundamental  principle,  which  was  neces- 
sary thereto.  Since  in  the  first  equation  there  occurs  together 
with  h  the  specific  volume  of  the  saturated  steam,  which  is 
contained  in  u,  Rankine  in  order  to  determine  this  applied 
to  saturated  steam  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac, 
which,  as  we  shall  see  further  on,  is  inaccurate.  More  exact 
determinations  of  h  could  only  be  accomplished  by  means  of 
equation  (16),  which  was  first  established  by  the  author. 

§  4.    Nwmerical  Vcdue  of  h  for  other  Vapours. 

When  equation  (25)  was  first  published,  Eegnault's  deter- 
minations of  the  specific  heat  and  heat  of  vaporization  as  func- 
tions of  temperature  had  been  performed  only  for  the  case 
of  waterf;  and  therefore  the  numerical  value  of  h  could  be 
given  for  water  only.  Regnault  has  since  extended  his 
measurements  to  other  fluids  J,  and  it  is  now  possible  to  apply 
the  equation  to  obtain  the  numerical  value  of  h  for  these 
fluids.     We  thus  obtain  the  following  results. 

Bisulphide  of  Carbon :  CSjj.  According  to  Regnault  we 
have 

[  cdt  =  0-23523«  +  O'OOOOSlSi', 
Jo 

*  Eankine's  paper  was  read  tefore  the  Eoyal  Society  of  Edinburgli  in 
February,  1850,  and  printed  in  the  Transactions,  Vol.  xx.  p.  147.  The  author's 
paper  was  read  before  the  academy  of  Berlin  ill  February,  1850,  and  printed 
in  Poggendorf's  Annalen,  Vol.  lxxix.  pp.  368  and  500. 

t  Relalions  des  Eaeiperienceii,  Vol.  i.,  Paris,  1847. 

J  Belations  des  Experiences,  Vol.  ii.,  Paris,  1862. 


136      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 


r  + 


Jo 


90  +  OUeOlt  -  00004123^ 


■whence  we  have 

c  =  0-23523 +  00001630«, 

r  =  90-00 -  0-08922« - 00004938^. 

Substituting  these  Values,  equation  (25)  becomes 

,      «««^o^.^.     9000-0-08922«-00004938<'' 
h  =  0-14601  -  0-0008246< 273+T ' 

hence  we  obtain  for  h  the  following  values  amongst  others : 


t 

0» 

100» 

h 

-0-1837 

-0-1406 

The  specific  heat  of  the  saturated  vapour  of  Bi-sulphide 
of  Carbon  is  thus  negative  like  that  of  steam,  but  its  values 
are  smaller. 

Ether ;  C^H,„0.     According  to  Regnault  we  have 
'^^cdt  =  0-52900*  +  0-00029587f , 


/, 


r+l  cdt  =  94-00  +  0-45000* - 0-00055556<', 

Jo 

whence  we  have 

c  =  0-529  +  0-00059174*, 

r  =  94-00  -  0-0790G«  -  0-0008514*'. 

Equation  (25)  thus  becomes 

A  =  0-45000  -  0-0011111  *  -  94-00 -007900* -0-0008524*' 

273  + 1 

and  from  this  the  following  values  are  deduced  : 


i 

0" 

100» 

h 

-0-1057 

-0-1309 

SATURATED  VAPOUR. 


137 


In  the  case  of  Ether  therefore  the  specific  heat  of 
saturated  steam  has,  at  least  at  ordinary  temperatures,  a  posi- 
tive value. 

Chloroform :  CHCI3.     According  to  Regnault  we  have 

f  cd<  =  0-23235«  +  0-0000507a«', 

Jo' 

r+l  cdt  =  67  +  0-1375« ; 

whence  we  have 

c  =-  0-23235  +  0-00010144<, 
r  =  67  -  0-09485f  -  000005072«'. 
Equation  (25)  thus  becomes 

I      ^  n  o.r«     67  -  0-09485*  -  0-00005072i('' 
h^  01375 273T"^ ' 

and  from  this  the  following  values  are  deduced : 


t 

0» 

100» 

h 

^  0-1079 

-00-153 

Bi-  Chloride  of  Carbon :  CCl^.   According  to  Begnault  we 
have: 

f  odt  =  0-197Q8t  +  0-0000906«', 
Jo 

r  +  j%dt  =  52  +  0-14625«  -  0-000172*' ; 
Jo 

whence  we  have 

c  =  0-19798 +  0-0001812^, 

r  ==  52  -  0-05173*  -^  0-000262Qf . 

Equation  (25)  thus  becomes 

52-00  -  0-05173  -  0-0002626*' 


y^  =  0-14625 -0-000344* — 


273  + 1 


138  ON   THE  MECHANICAL   THEORY  OF  HEAT, 

and  from  this  the  following  values  are  deduced : 


t 

0« 

100" 

h 

-0-0442 

-0-0066 

Aceton :  Gfifi.    According  to  Regnault  we  have 
j  cdt  =  0-50643«  +  0-000396SJ', 

r+\  cdt  =  140-5  +  0-36644*  -  0-000516f ; 
Jo 

whence  we  have 

c  =  0-50643 +  0'0007930f, 

7-=  140-5  -  0-13999«-  0-0009125f. 

Equation  (25)  thus  becomes 

140-5  -  0-13999«  -  0-0009125f 


A  =  0-36644 -0-001032«. 


273 +< 


and  from  this  the  following  values  are  deduced : 


t 

0» 

100« 

h 

-0-1482 

-0-0515 

In  addition  to  the    above    Regnault   has  investigated 
Alcohol,  Benzine,  and  Oil  of  Turpentine,  so  far  as  to  deter- 
[t         .  '  ,      " 

mine  the  values  of  r  +  I  cdt.     For  Alcohol  and  Turpentine 

he  gives  no  empirical  formulae  for  ascertaining  their  values, 
on  account  of  the  irresgularities  in  the  experiments ;  and  for 

Benzine  he  has  not  expressed  (  cdt  as  a  function  of  tempera- 

ture,  but  has  only  investigated  a  mean  value  of  the  Specific 
Heat  for  a  narrow  interval  of  temperature.  The  numerical 
value  of  h  is  thus  much  more  uncertain  for  these  fluids  than 
for  those  given  above,  and  accordingly  we  shall  not  treat  of 
them  further. 


SATURATED  VAPOUR.  139 

In  all  the  formulae  for  h  given  above  we  see  that  its  value 
increases  as  the  temperature  rises.  In  the  only  case,  that  of 
ether,  in  which  it  is  positive  at  ordinary  temperatures,  its 
absolute  value  increases  as  the  temperature  rises.  In  the 
other  cases,  in  which  it  is  negative,  its  absolute  value 
diminishes;  it  thus  approaches  to  zero,  and  it  would  appear  that 
at  some  higher  temperature  it  would  attain  the  value  zero, 
and  at  stiU  higher  temperatures  would  become  positive.  To 
determine  the  temperature  at  which  A  =  0,  we  have  by  equa- 
tion (25) 

^+c-J=0 (32). 

In  this  equation  we  must,  as   above,  express  c  and  r  as 
functions  of  t,  and  then  solve  it  with  regard  to  t. 

The  empirical  formulis  of  Regnault,  by  means  of  which 
we  have  expressed  c  and  r  as  functions  of  t,  should  not  of 
course  be  applied  much  beyond  the  limits  of  temperature 
within  which  Regnault  carried  out  his  experiments.  Hence 
the  determination  of  the  temperature  for  which  A.  =  0 
is  in  many  cases  impossible,  as  for  instance  with  water, 
where  the  equations  obtained  by  putting  A  =  0  in  (29) 
and  (31)  would  lead  to  a  value  for  t  of  about  600",  where- 
as the  equations  are  only  applicable  up  to  somewhat  over 
200".  But  with  other  fluids  the  temperature  for  which 
h  =  Q,  and  above  which  h  is  positive,  lies  within  the  limits  of 
application  of  the  formulae.  Thus  Cazin*  calculates  this 
temperature  for  Chloroform  at  123"48°,  and  for  Bi-chloride  of 
Carbon  at  128-9°. 

§  5.  Specific  Heat  of  Saturated  Steam,  as  proved  by 
Expeninent. 

The  result  arrived  at  by  theory,  that  the  Specific  Heat  of 
saturated  steam  is  negative,  and  that  therefore  saturated 
steam,  if  expanded  in  a  non-conducting  envelope,  must 
partially  condense,  has  since  been  experimentally  proved  by 
Hirn-)-.  A  cylindrical  vessel  of  metal  was  fitted  at  the  two 
ends  with  parallel  plates  of  glass,  so  that  it  could  be  seen 
through.    This,  when  filled  with  steam  at  high  pressure  was 

*  Annates  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique,  Series  iv.  Vol.  xiv. 

t  Bulletin  133  de  la  Soci4U  Industrielle  de  Mulhmise,  p.  137. 


140      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

perfectly  cldar;  but  when  a  cock  was  suddenly  opened,  so 
that  part  of  the  steam  escaped,  and  the  remainder  expanded, 
a  thick  cloud  appeared  in  the  interior  of  the  cylinder,  proving 
a  partial  condensation  of  the  steam.  Subsequently,  when 
Volume  II.  of  Renault's  Relation  des  Eceperiences  had  ap- 
peared, containing  the  data,  given  above,  to  determine  h  for 
other  fluids,  and  shewing  that  for  ether  h  must  be  positive.  Him 
proceeded  to  experiment  with  that  vapour  also.  His  description 
is  as  follows  * :  "  To  the  neck  of  a  strong  crystal  flask  I 
connected  a  pump,  the  capacity  of  which  was  nearly  equal  to 
that  of  the  flask,  and  which  was  provided  with  a  cock  at  the 
bottom.  Some  ether  was  poured  into  the  flask,  and  it  was 
immersed  to  the  neck  in  water  at  about  50°.  The  cock  was 
then  kept  open,  until  all  the  air  was  assumed  to  be  expelled. 
Then  the  cock  was  closed,  and  the  pump  plunged  into  the  hot 
water  with  the  flask:  whereupon  the  ether  vapour  raised 
the  piston  to  the  top.  The  apparatus  was  now  suddenly 
taken  from  the  water,  and  the  piston  forced  rapidly  down. 
At  this  moment,  but  for  a  moment  only,  the  flask  became 
filled  with  a  distinct  cloud."  It  was  thus  shewn  that  ether 
vapour  behaves  conversely  to  steam,  partially  condensing,  not 
during  expansion,  but  during  compression;  a  fact  which 
is  in  accordance  with  the  opposite  sign  of  h  in  the  two 
cases. 

To  check  this  conclusion  Him  made  an  exactly  similar 
experiment  with  Bi-sulphide  of  Carbon.  The  result  was 
that  on  forcing  down  the  piston  the  flask  remained  per- 
fectly transparent.  This  is  again  in  accordance  with  the 
theory,  since  with  Bi-sulphide  of  Carbon,  as  with  water, 
h  is  negative,  and  compression  of  the  vapour  produces  a  rise 
of  temperature,  and  not  a  fall.  Some  years  later  Cazin"f, 
aided  by  the  Association  scientifique,  made  with  great  care 
and  skill  a  similar  series  of  experiments,  in  some  respects 
more  extended.  He  used  as  before  a  cylinder  of  metal,  fitted 
with  glass  at  the  ends.  This  was  placed  in  a  bath  of  oil,  so 
as  to  give  it  the  exact  temperature  proper  for  the  experi- 
ment. The  first  series  of  experiments  embraced  only  the 
expansion  of  steam;  the  arrangement  was  such  that,  when 
the  cylinder  was  filled  with  vapour,  a  cock  could  be  opened, 

*  Cosmos,  10  April,  1863. 

+  Anwilcs  de  Chimie  et  de  J^hjfsique,  Series  it.  Vol,  xit. 


SATURATED  VAPOUR.  141 

through  which  a  part  of  the  vapour  escaped  either  into  the 
atmosphere  or  into  an  air  vessel,  the  pressure  in  which 
could  be  kept  at  any  given  point  below  the  pressure  of  the 
vapour.  In  a  second  series  of  experiments  a  pump  was 
connected  with  the  cylinder;  this  was  placed  in  the  same 
bath  of  oil,  and  the  piston  could  be  moved  ra^dly  back- 
wards or  forwards  by  specigj.  mechanism,  so  as  to  increase  or 
diminish  the  volume  of  the  vapour. 

By  these  experiments  the  results  obtained  by  Hirn  for 
steam  and  ether  were  confirmed,  and  with  the  second  ap- 
paratus a  double  proof  was  given  in  each  case,  viz.  both  by 
rarefaction  and  condensation.  Steam  formed  a  cloud  during 
rarefaction,  whilst  it  remained  quite  clear  during  condensa- 
tion. Ether,  on  the  contrary,  formed  a  cloud  during  con- 
densation, and  remained  clear  during  rarefaction.  Some 
special  experiments  were  further  made  with  vapour  of  chloro- 
form. As  mentioned  above,  in  the  case  of  chloroform  A, 
which  is  negative  at  lower  temperatures,  becomes  zero  at  a 
temperature  which  Cazin  has  calculated  at  123'48°,  and  at 
still  higher  temperatures  is  positive.  This  vapour  must  thus 
partially  condense  during  expansion  at  lower  temperatures, 
and  must  partially  condense  during  compression  at  higher 
temperatures  beyond  the  point  of  transition.  With  the  first 
apparatus,  which  only  allowed  of  expansion,  clouds  were 
observed  during  expansion  at  temperatures  up  to  123°.  At 
temperatures  above  145°  there  was  no  formation  of  cloud. 
Between  123°  and  145°  the  conditions  were  somewhat  different 
according  to  the  degree  of  expansion.  With  a  small  degree 
of  expansion  there  was  no  cloud ;  with  a  higher  degree  some 
formation  of  a  cloud  appeared  towards  the  end  of  the  pro- 
cess. The  explanation  of  this  is  simple.  The  high  expansion 
had  produced  a  considerable  fall  of  temperature,  and  the 
vapour  had  thereby  been  reduced  to  the  temperature  at 
which  expansion  is  accompanied  by  a  fall  of  tempera^ 
ture.  The  result  is  thus  completely  in  accordance  with  the 
theory.  With  the  second  apparatus  the  vapour  of  chloroform 
formed  a  cloud  during  expansion  up  to  130°,  whilst  it  re- 
mained perfectly  transparent  during  compression.  Above 
136°  a  cloud  was  formed  during  compression,  whilst  it  re- 
mained clear  during  expansion.  The  theory  is  hereby  more 
fully  established  than  by  the  first  apparatus.  The  circumstance 


142  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORT  OF  HEAT. 

that  the  temperature  at  which  the  law  of  the  vajpour  changes 
appeared  in  these  experiments  to  lie  between  130°  and  136°, 
whilst  theory  gives  it  at  123-48'',  is  not  a  matter  of  great  im- 
portance. On  the  one  hand  these  experiments  are  not  adapted 
for  an  accurate  determination  of  this  temperature,  because 
they  always  involve  finite  changes  of  volume  of  considerable 
magnitude,  whereas  the  theory  embraces  indefinitely  small 
changes  only.  On  the  other  hand,  Cazin  hiriiself  mentions 
that  his  chloroform  was  not  chemically  pure,  and  required  for 
a  given  vapour-pressure  a  higher  temperature  than  that 
found  by  Eegnault.  Having  regard  to  these  circumstances, 
the  theory  must  be  considered  as  being  fully  confirmed  by 
experiment. 

§  6.    Specific  Volume  of  Saturated  Vapour. 

We  will  now  consider  the  second  of  the  two  quantities 
mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  §  2,  viz.  s,  or  the  specific  volume 
of  the  saturated  vapour. 

It  was  formerly  the  custom  to  use  the  law  of  Mariotte  and 
Gay-Lussac,  in  order  to  calculate  the  volume  which  a  gas  as- 
sumes under  difierent  conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure, 
and  to  take  no  account  of  whether  the  vapour  was  in  the  satu- 
rated or  superheated  condition.  It  is  true  that  from  many 
quarters  doubts  were  expressed,  whether  vapours  really  fol- 
lowed this  law  up  to  the  saturation  point:  but,  as  the  experi- 
mental determination  of  the  volumes  offered  great  difficulties, 
and  a  theoretical  determination  was  impossible  from  the  want 
of  well-established  principles,  it  remained  the  custom  to 
apply  the  above  law  in  this  case,  so  as  at  least  to  arrive 
at  some  sort  of  determination  of  the  volume  of  saturated 
vapour.  But  the'  equations  obtained  by  the  author,  and 
given  at  the  end  of  §  1,  now  offer  us  a  means  of  arriving  at 
a  strict  theoretical  calculation  for  the  volume  of  saturated 
vapour,  which,  when  the  data  are  given,  may  be  worked  out 
in  practice.  For  in  these  equations  occurs  the  quantity  u, 
which  =s  —  a;  where  a  is  the  specific  volume  of  the  fluid. 
This,  as  a  rule,  is  very  small  in  comparison  with  s,  and 
may  be  neglected  in  many  calculations ;  but  it  is  still  a 
known  quantity,  and  may  be  taken  account  of  without  diffi- 
culty. 


SATURATED  VAPOUK.  143 

Substituting  (s—a)  for  u  in  the  last  of  these  equations,  (17), 
we  obtain 

T(s-a)     dp  . 

^ ^~~  ^  dT ^•^^^' 

or,  solving  the  equation  for  s, 

Er 
s=-=f-  +  <r {U). 

IT 

By  this  equation  the  specific  volume  of  the  saturated  va- 
pour may  be  calculated  for  all  substances,  whose  pressure  p 
and  heat  of  vaporization  r  are  known  as  functions  of  the 
temperature, 

§  7.  Departure  from  the  law  ofMariotte  and  Gay-Lussac 
in  the  case  of  Saturated  Steam, 

We  will  first  apply  the  foregoing  equations  to  ascertain 
whether  saturated  steam  follows  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay- 
Lussac,  or  how  far  or  in  what  way  it  departs  from  it. 

If  it  follows  the  law  the  following  equation  must  hold ; 
■^=  const., 

or,  substituting  a  +  f  for  T,  and  multiplying  by  ^, 

1  a  , 

TV  Ps 7  =  const. : 

U^  a  +  t 

but  from  equation  (33),  substituting  a  +  <  for  T,  we  obtain 

y,p{s-a)---= =-T- (35). 

^        'pat 

As  the  difference  [s  ->  a)  differs  little  from  »,  the  left-band 
side  of  these  two  equations  is  very  nearly  the  same,  and,  to 


144  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOttT  OF  HEAT. 

ascertain  how  saturated  steam  is  related  to  the  law  of  Mari- 
otte  and  Gay-Lussac,  we  have  only  to  enquire  whether  the 
right-hand  side  of  the  last  equation  is  constant,  or  varies 
with  the  temperature.  To  ascertain  whether  the  successive 
values  of  an  expression  are  equal  to  each  other,  or  in  what 
way  they  depart  from  each  other,  is  a  very  simple  matter ; 
and  the  form  of  equation  (35)  is  very  well  adapted  for  this  pur- 
pose. The  author  has  calculated  the  values  of  this  expression 
for  a  series  of  temperatures  from  0°  to  200°,  applying  the 
numbers  given  by  Regnault  to  r  and  p.  For  r,  the  heat  of 
vaporization,  the  equation  (28)  was  used,  viz. : 

r  =  606-5  -  Q-mU  -  0-00002*''  -  0-0000003«». 

The  more  simple  formula  (30)  might  have  been  used  without 
any  great  difference  in  the  results.  To  obtain  p,  the  author 
first  applied  the  numbers  which  Regnault  has  published  in 
his  well-known  large  Tables,  in  which  the  pressure  of  steam 
for  every  degree  from  —  32°  to  +  230°  is  given.  He  found  how- 
ever some  peculiar  variations  from  the  regular  course  of  the 
numbers,  which  in  certain  ranges  of  temperature  had  quite 
a  different  character  from  what  they  had  in  others ;  and  he 
soon  discovered  that  the  source  of  these  variations  lay  in  the 
fact  that  Regnault  had  calculated  his  numbers  by  empirical 
formulae,  and  that  for  different  ranges  of  temperature  he 
had  empjoyed  different  formulae.  It  then  appeared  desirable 
to  the  author  to  emancipate  himself  entirely  from  the  in- 
fluence of  empirical  formulae,  and  to  confine  himself  to  those 
numbers  Which  express  simply  the  results  of  the  observa- 
tions, because  these  are  specially  adapted  for  comparison  with 
theoretical  results.  Regnault,  in  order  to  obtain  from  his 
numerous  observations  the  most  probable  values,  used  the 
aid  of  graphical  methods.  He  constructed  curves  of  which 
the  abscissae  represent  the  temperature,  and  the  ordinates 
the  pressure  p,  and  which  run  from  —  33°  to  ■\-  230°.  From 
100°  to  230°  he  also  constructed  a  curve  in  which  the  ordi- 
nates represented  not  p  itself,  but  the  logarithm  oip.  From 
this  have  been  obtained  the  following  values,  which  may  be 
considered  the  most  direct  results  of  his  observations,  and 
from  which  were  also  taken  the  values  which  served  for  the 
calculation  of  his  empirical  formulae. 


SATURATED  VAPOUK. 


145 


t  in  Centi- 

t in  Centi- 

p in  Millimetres, 

grade  Degrees 

of  the  Air- 
thermometer. 

p  m 
Millimetres. 

grade  Degrees 
of  the  Air- 
thermometer. 

according  to 
the  Curve  of 

Numbers. 

according  to 
the  Curve  of 
Logarithms  \ 

-20» 

0-91 

110" 

1073-7 

1073-3 

-10 

2-08 

120 

1489-0. 

1490-7 

0 

4-60 

130 

2029-0 

2030-5 

10 

9-16 

140 

2713-0 

2711-5 

20 

17-39 

150 

3572-0 

3578-5 

30 

31-55 

160 

4647-0 

4651-6 

40 

54-91 

170 

5960-0 

5956-7 

50 

91-98 

180 

7545-0 

7537-0 

60 

148-79 

190 

9428-0 

9425-4 

70 

233-09 

200 

11660-0 

11679-0 

80 

354-64 

210 

14308-0 

14325-0 

90 

525-45 

220 

17390-0 

17390-0 

100 

760-00 

230 

20915-0 

20927-0 

In  order  to  make  the  required  calculation  with  these  data, 

the  values  of  — rr  were  determined  from  the  above  table  for 
p  (it 

the  temperatures  5",  15°,  25°,  etc.,  in  the  following  manner, 

As  -  -^  diminishes  but  slowly  as  the  temperature  increases, 

the  decrease  was  taken  as  uniform  for  every  interval  of  10", 
i.e.  from  0°  to  10°,  from  10°  to  20°,  and  so  on ;  e.g.  the  value 
for  25°  was  taken  as  the  mean  of  the  two  values  for  20°  and 
30°.     Then  since 

1  dp  _d  (logp) 

pdt  dt       ' 

the  following  formulae  could  be  used : 

\p  dtJis.' 
or  otherwise 


10 


/IM         _  Logf  SO^I^SIPm  /OfiS 

\pdtJ2,o~  lOM  ^'^'''' 

■where  Log  signifies  the  common  system  of  logarithms,  and  M 

*  In  this  column  are  given,  instead  of  the  Logarithms  given  directly  by 
the  curve  and  used  by  Eegnault,  the  numbers  which  correspond  with  them, 
in  order  to  compare  them  with  the  numbers  in  the  previous  column. 

C.  10 


146 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 


the  modulus  of  that  system.     By  the  help  of  these  values  of 

-  -'^-  and  of  the  values  of  r  given  by  the  equation  stated 
p  dt 

above,  and  lastly  of  the  value  273  for  a,  the  values  were 
calculated  which  the  expression  on  the  right-hand  side  of 
equation  (35)  and  therefore  likewise  the  expression 

1  -     a 

assumes  for  the  temperatures  5°,  15",  25°,  etc.  These  values  are 
given  in  the  second  column  of  the  table  below.  For  tempe- 
ratures over  100°  the  two  series  of  numbers  found  above  for  p 
were  both  made  use  of,  and  the  two  results  thus  obtained  are 
placed  side  by  side.  The  meaning  of  the  third  and  fourth 
columns  will  be  more  fully  explained  below. 


1. 

y^'-'''^-a 

a 

t  in  Degrees 

4. 

Centigrade  of 

2. 

3. 

Differences. 

the  Air- 

According  to 

According  to 

■  thermometer. 

Experiment. 

Equation  (38). 

5" 

30-93 

30-46 

-0-47 

15 

30-60 

30-38 

-0-22 

25 

30-40 

30-30 

-0-10 

35 

30-23 

30-20 

-0-03 

45 

30-10 

30-10 

0-00 

55 

29-98 

30-00 

+  0-02 

65 

29-88 

29-88 

000 

75 

29-76 

29-76 

0-00 

85 

29-65 

29-63 

-0-02 

95 

29-49 

29-48 

-0-01 

1Q5    » 

29-47        29-50 

29-33 

-0-14       -0-17 

115 

29-16        29-02 

29-17 

+  0-01       +0-15 

125 

28-89        28-93 

28-99 

+  0-10       +0-06 

135 

28-88        29-01 

28-80 

-0-08       -0-21 

145 

28-65         28-40 

28-60 

-0-05       +0-20 

155 

28-16        28-25 

28-38 

+  0-22       +0-13 

165 

28-02        28-19 

28-14 

+  012       -0-05 

175- 

27-84  .      27-90 

27-89 

+  0-05       -0-01 

185 

27-76        27-67 

27-62 

-0-14       -0-05 

195 

27-45        27-20 

27-33 

-0-12       +0-13 

205 

26-89        26-94 

27-02 

+  0-13       +0-08 

215 

26-56        26-79 

26-68 

+  0-12       -0-11 

225 

26-64        26-50 

26-32 

-0-32       -0-18 

SATUEATED  VAPOUK.  147 

1 

This  table  at  once  shews  that  ^  « (s  —  <r)  — -  is  not  constant, 

as  it  must  be  if  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac  holds, 
but  decreases  decidedly  as  the  temperature  rises.  Between 
35°  and  95°  this  decrease  appears  very  regular.  Below  35° 
the  decrease  is  less  regular,  the  simple  explanation  being  that 

here  the  pressure  p  and  its  differential  coefficient  -^  are  very 

small,  and  therefore  small  errors  in  their  determination,  which 
are  quite  within  the  limits  of  errors  of  observation,  may  yet 
become  relatively  important.  Above  100°  the  values  of  the 
expression  are  not  so  regular  as  between  25°  and  95°,  but 
shew  on  the  whole  a  similar  rate  of  decrease :  and  if  we 
make  a  graphic  representation  of  these  values,  it  is  found 
that  the  curve,  which  below  100°  passes  exactly  through  the 
points  determined  by  the  numbers  contained  in  the  table, 
can  be  readily  continued  up  to  230°  in  such  a  way  that  these 
points  are  distributed  equally  on  both  sides  of  it. 

The  course  of  this  curve  can  be  expressed  with  sufficient 
accuracy  for  the  whole  extent  of  the  table  by  an  equation  of 
the  form 

^P(«-'^)^i  =  "*-»'«** (37), 

where  e  is  the  base  of  Napierian  logarithms,  and  m,  n,  k  are 
constants.  If  we  determine  the  latter  from  the  values  which 
the  curve  gives  for  45°,  125°,  and  205°,  we  obtain 

m  =  31-549;  w  =  1-0486;  ^  =  0-007138 (37a), 

and  if  for  convenience  we  use  common  logarithms,  we  finally 
obtain 


Logr31-549--^.p(5-o-) 


a-ht 


=  0-0206 +  0003100«... (38), 


The  numbers  contained  in  the  third  column  of  the  table 
are  calculated  from  this  equation,  and  in  the  fourth  column 
are  given  the  differences  between  these  and  the  nUmbers  in 
the  second  cplumn, 

10—2 


148 


ON  THE  MECHAlflCAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 


§  8.    Differential  Coefficienta  of  — . 

Tiie  foregoing  analysis  leads  easily  to  a  formula,  from 
whick  we  can  ascertain  more  exactly  the  mode  in  which 
steam  departs  from  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac, 
Assuming,  this  law  to  hold,  we  shall  be  able  to  put 


PI: 


a  +  t 


where  ps^  represents  the  value  of  ps  at  0".     The  differential 

coefficienit  -,-  (  — )  would  then  have  a  constant  value,  viz.  the 
at  \psgj 

well-known  coefficient  of  expansion  -  =  0003665,     Instead 

of  this,  equation  (37)  gives,  if  we  use  s  -in  place  of  (s  —  tr), 
the  equation 


F^o 


■  me''*     a  +  t 
X , 


(39). 


whence 


d  /ps_ 
dt  [ps^ 


1      m  -  n  [I  +  k  (a  +  t)]  e''t  ,.„ 

=  -  X — (40). 

a  m  —  n 


Thus  the  differential  coefficient  is  not  a  constant,  but  a 
function  which  decreases  as  the  temperature  increases.  This 
function,  if  we  substitute  for  m,  n,  and  Ic  the  numbers  given 
in  (37a),  has  amongst  others  the  following  values,  for  different 
temperatures. 


t. 

0« 

d   /ps\ 
dt  \j,sj- 

t. 

dfps\ 
dt  \psj  ■ 

*. 

dt  \p8j  ■ 

0-00342 

70" 

0-00307 

140" 

0-00244 

10 

0-00338 

80 

0-00300 

150 

0-00231 

20 

0-00334 

90 

0-00293 

160 

0-00217 

30 

0-00329 

100 

0-00285 

170 

0-00203 

40 

0-00325 

110 

0-00276 

180 

0-00187 

50 

0-00319 

120 

0-00266 

190 

0-00168 

60 

0-00314 

130 

0-00256 

200 

0-00149 

SATURATED  VAPOUR,  140 

From  the  above  table  we  see  that  it  is  only  at  low  tem- 
peratures that  the  variations  from  the  law  of  Mariotte  and 
Gay-Lussac  are  small,  and  that  at  higher  temperatures,  e.g. 
above  100°,  they  can  by  no  means  be  neglected. 

A  glance  at  the  tabl-e  is  sufficient  to  shew  that  the  values 

found  for  -n  (  —  )  are  smaller  than  0-003665 -,  whereas  it  is 
at  \psj 

known  that  for  the  gases  which  vary  considerably  from  the  law 

of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac,  such  as  carbonicacid  and  sulphuric 

acid,  the  coefficient  of  expansion  is  not  smaller,  but  greater 

than  the  above  number.     Hence  this  differential  coefficient 

cannot  be  taken  to  correspond  with  the  coefficient  of  expansion 

which  relates  to  increase  of  volume  by  heating  at  constant 

pressure,  nor  yet  with  the  figure  obtained  if  we  leave  the 

volume  constant  during  the  heating,  and  then  observe  the 

increase  of  the  expansive  force.     Thus  we  have  here  a  third 

special  case  of  the  general  differential  coefficient  -jii      )  >  viz. 

that  in  which  the  pressure  increases  during  the  heating 
under  the  same  conditions  as  in  the  case  of  steam,  when  this 
retains  its  maximum  density;  and  this  case  must  be  con- 
sidered for  carbonic  acid  likewise,  if  we  are  to  establish  a  com- 
parison. 

Steam  has  at  about  108° an  expansive  force  equal  to  1  metre 
of  mercury,  and  at  129J°  equal  to  2  metres.  We  will  examine 
what  takes  place  with  carbonic  acid,  if  this  is  also  heated  by 
21^°,  and  thereby  the  pressure  increased  from  1  to  2  metres. 
Regnault*  gives  as  the  coefficient  of  expansion  of  carbonic 
acid  at  constant  pressure  0'00371  if  the  pressure  is  760  mm., 
and  0"003846  if  the  pressure  is  2520  mm.  For  a  pressure  of 
1500  mm.,  the  mean  between  1  and  2  metres,  the  coefficient 
of  expansion,  if  assumed  to  increase  in  proportion  to  the 
pressure,  will  have  the  value  0 '003767.  If  carbonic  acid 
under   this  mean  pressure  is  heated  from  0°  to  Sl^'",  the 

quantitv  —  wiU  increase  from  1  to 

1  +  0-003767  X  21-5  =  1-08099. 

Again  other  experiments  of  Regnault'sf  have  shewn  that,  i| 

*  Relation  d's  Experiences,  t.  i.  Mem.  1. 
t  Relation  des  Eny^rienees,  1. 1.  Mem.  6. 


150      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OF  HEAT. 

carbonic  acid,  which  had  a  pressure  of  about  1  m.  at  a  tem- 
perature of  aiiout  0°,  is  loaded  with  a  pressure  of  1 '98292  m., 
the  quantity  pv  decreases  in  the  ratio  of  1 :  0'99146 ;  or  for  an 
increase  of  pressure  from  1  to  2  ms.,  it  will  decrease  in  the 
ratio  of  1  :  0'99131.  Now  if  both  of  these  take  place 
together,  viz.  a  rise  of  temperature  from  0°  to   21^°,  and 

a  rise  of  pressure  from  1  to  2  ms.,  then  the  quantity  ^ — 

must  increase  from  1  to  108099  x  0-99131  =  1-071596  very 
nearly,  whence  we  obtain  as  the  mean  value  of  the  differen- 
d  /  pv^ 


tial  coefficient   „  , 

at  \pi\. 

^•Q^f^^  000333. 
21-5 

We  thus  see  that  for  the  case  here  considered  we  have  a 
value  for  carbonic  acid  which  is  less  than  0003665,  and 
there  is  therefore  less,  ground  for  surprise  at  obtaining  the 
same  result  for  steam  at  its  maximum  density: 

If  we  seek  to  determine  on  the  other  hand  the  actual 
coefficient  of  expansion  for  steam^  or  the  number  which 
shews  how  far  a  quantity  of  steam  expands,  if  it  is  taken  at 
a  given  temperature  and  at  its  maximum  density  and  then 
heated,  apart  from  water,  at  constant  pressure,  we  shall  cer- 
tainly obtain  a  value  which  is  larger,  and  probably  much 
larger,  than  0-003665. 

§  9.  Formula  to  determine  the  Specifia  Volume  of  Satu- 
rated Stea/m,  and  its  comparison  with  experiment. 

From  equation  (37),  and  equally  from  equation  (34),  the 
relative  values  of  s  —  a;  and  therefore  to  a  close  approxima- 
tion those  of  s,  may  be  calculated  for  different  temperatures, 
without  needing  to  know  the  Mechanical  Equivalent  E.  If 
however  we  wish  to  calculate  from  the  equations  the  absolute 
value  of  s,  we  must  either  know  E^  or  must  attempt  to 
eliminate  it  by  the  help  of  some  other  known  quantity.  At 
the  time  when  the  author  first  began  these  researches,  several 
values  of  E  had  been  given  by  Joule,  taken  from  various 
methods  of  experiment:  these  differed  widely  from  each 
other,  and  Joule  had  not  announced  which  he  considered  the 


SATURATED  VAPOUR.  151 

most  probable.  In  this  uncertainty  the  author  determined 
to  attempt  the  determination  of  the  absolute  value  of  s  from 
another  starting  point,  and  he  believes  that  his  method  still 
possesses  interest  enough  to  merit  description. 

The  specific  weight  of  gases  and  vapours  is  generally  ex- 
pressed by  comparing  the  weight  of  a  unit  of  volume  of  the 
gas  or  vapour  with  the  weight  of  a  unit  of  volume  of  at- 
mospheric air  at  the  same  pressure  and  .temperature.  Simi- 
larly the  specific  volume  may  be  expressed  by  comparing 
the  volume  of  a  unit  of  weight  of  the  gas  or  vapour  with  the 
volume  of  a  unit  of  weight  of  atmospheric  air  at  the  same 
pressure  and  temperature.  If  we  apply  this  latter  method  to 
saturated  steam,  for  which  we  have  denoted  the  volume  of 
a  unit  of  weight  by  s,  and  if  we  designate  by  v'  the  volume 
of  a  unit  of  weight  of  atmospheric  air  at  the  same  pressure 
and  temperature,  then  the  quantity  under  consideration  is 

given  by  the  fraction  —  . 

For  s  we  have  the  following  equation,  obtained  from  (37) 
by  neglecting  <r : 

g^E(a+J)^  

For  v'  we  have  by  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac 
the  equation 

,      jj,  a  + « 

V  =Jti . 

P 

These  two  equations  give 


-,  =  „-(™  — «e*') (42). 


If  we  form  the  same  equations  for  any  given  temperature 
and 
obtain 


t^,   and  denote  the  corresponding  value  of  -  by  (- j ,  we 


[->)  =  p7-(TO-«e*'°). 


152  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

If  by  the  help  of  this  equation  we  eliminate  the  constant 
■p 

factor  T=rr-  from  (42),  we  obtain 
Ka 

t^(s_\  m-n^  ^^g. 

■  The  question  is  now  whether,  for  any  given  temperature 

t„,  the  quantity  f-j  or  its  reciprocal  (- ) ,  which  expresses 

the  specific  weight  of  the  steam  at  temperatute  t„,  can  be 
determined  with  sufficient  certainty. 

The  ordinary  values  given  for  the  specific  weight  of  steam 
refer  not  to  saturated  but  to  highly  superheated  steam. 
They  agree  very  well,  as  is  known,  with  the  theoretical 
values  which  may  be  deduced  from  the  well-known  law  as 
to  the  relation  between  the  volume  of  a  compound  gas,  and 
those  of  the  gases  which  compose  it.  Thus  e.g.  Gay-Lussac 
found  for  the  specific  weight  of  steam  the  experimental  value 
0"6235;  whilst  the  theoretical  value  obtained  by  assuming 
two  units  of  hydrogen  and  one  unit  of  oxygen  to  form,  by 
combining,  2  units  of  steam,  is 

2  X  006926  X  1-10563     „^„„ 
^ =  0-622. 

This  value  of  the  specific  weight  we  cannot  in  general 
apply  to  saturated  steam,  since  the  table  in  the  last  section, 

which  gives  the  values  of  -ri      ]  <  indicates  too  large  a 

divergence  from  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac.  On 
the  other  hand  the  table  shews  that  the  divergences  are 
smaller  as  the  temperature  is  lower;  hence,  the  error  will 
be  insignificant  if  we  assume  that  at  freezing  temperature 
saturated  steam  follows  exactly  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay- 
Lussac,  and  accordingly  take  0-622  as  the  specific  heat  at 
that  temperature.  In  strict  accuracy  we  must  go  yet  further 
and  put  the  temperature,  at  which  the  specific  weight  of 
saturated  steam  has  its  theoretical  value,  still  lower  than 
freezing  point.  But,  as  it  would  be  somewhat  questionable 
to  use  equation  (37),  which  is  only  empirical,  at  such  low 
temperatures,   we   shaU  content  ourselves  with  the   above 


SATURATED  VAPOUH.  153 

assumption.     Thus  giving  to  t^  the  value  0,  and  at  the  same 

time  putting  (-)  =  0-622  and  therefore  (-)\  =  jr^ ,  we  ob- 

\«  /o  \v  Jo    0622 

tain  from  equation  (43) 


m  — we 


M 


.(44). 


v      0-622  (to- w)  

From   this   equation,  using  the  values  for  m,  n,  and  h 

given  in  (37a),  the  quantity  -7,  and  therefore  the  quantity  s, 

may  be  calculated  for  each  temperature.  The  foregoing 
equa,tion  may  be  thrown  into  a  more  convenient  form  by 
putting. 


V 


.(45), 


and  by  giving  to  the  constants  M,  iV,  and  a  the  following 
values,  calculated  from  those  of  to,  n,  and  k : 

-3f=  1-663;  iV=0-05527,-  a  =  1-007164.. .(45a). 

To  give  some  idea  of  the  working  of  this  formula,  we  give 

in  the  following  table  certain  values  of  -,  and  of  its  re- 

V 

.  v  * 

ciprocal  -  ,  which  for  the  sake  of  brevity  we'stall  denote  by 

the  letter  d,  already  used  to  designate  specific  weight. 


t 

0» 

50» 

I00» 

150» 

20()« 

i 

v' 

1-608 

1-585 

1-550 

1-502  . 

1-433 

d 

0-622 

0-631 

0-645 

0-666 

0-698 

The  result  that  saturated  steam  diverges,  so  widely  as  the 
above  formulae  and  tables  indicate,  from  the  law  of  Mariotte 
and  Gay-Lussac,  which  had  been  previously  applied  to  it 
without  reserve,  met  at  first,  as  mentioned  in  another  place, 
with  the   strongest  opposition,  even  from  very,  competent 


154 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OF  HEAT. 


judges.    The  author  believes  however  that  it  is  now  generally 
accepted  as  correct. 

It  has  also  received  an  experimental  verification  by  the 
experiments  of  Fairbairn  and  Tate*,  published  in  1860.  The 
results  of  their  experiments  are  compared  in  the  follow- 
ing table,  on  the^  one  hand  with  the  results  previously  ob- 
tained by  assuming  the  specific  weight  to  be  0-622  at  all 
temperatures,  and  on  the  other  hand  with  the  values  cal- 
culated by  equation  (4-5)'. 


Temperature 
in  Degrees 
Centigrade. 

Volume  of  a  Kilogramme  of  Saturated 
Steam  in  Cubic  metres. 

Values 
previously 
obtained. 

By  Equation 
(45). 

By  Experi- 
ment. 

58-21" 

6.S-52 

70-76 

77-18 

77-49 

79-40 

83-50 

86-83 

92-66 

117-17 
118-23 
118-46 
124-17 
128-41 
130-67 
131-78 
134-87 
137-46 
139-21 
141-81 
142-36 
144-74 

8-38 
5-41 
4-94 
3-84 
3-79 
3-52 
3-02 
'2-68 
2-18 

0-991 
0-961 
0-954 
0-809 
•  0-718 
0-674 
0-654 
0-602 
,0-562 
0-537 
0-502 
0-495 
0-466 

8-23 
5-29 
4-83 
3-7f 
3-69 
3-43 
2-94 
2-60 
2-11 

0-947 
0-917 
0-911 
0-769 
0-681 
0-639 
0-619 
0-569 
0-530 
0-505 
.0-472 
0-465 
0-437 

8-27 
5-33 
4-91 
3-72 
3-71 
3-43 
3-05 
2-62 
2-15 

0-941 
0-906 
0-891 
0-758 
0-648 
0-634 
0-604 
0-583 
0-514 
0-496 
0-457 
0-448 
0-432 

This  table  shews  that  the  values  given  by  experiment  agree 
much  better  with  those  calculated  by  the  author's  equation 
than  jwith  the  values  previously  obtained ;  and  that  the  ex-^ 

*  Proc.  Royal  Soc.  18S0,  and  PMV.  Mag.,  Series  iv.  Vol.  xxi. 


SATURATED  VAPOUR.  155 

perimental  values  are  in  general  yet  further  removed  from 
those  previously  obtained  than  are  the  values  derived  from 
the  author's  formula. 

§  10.     Determination   of  the  Mechanical  Equivalent  of 
Heat  from  the  behaviour  of  Saturated  Steam. 

Since  we  have  determined  the  absolute  values  of  s,  •with- 
out assuming  the  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat  to  be  known, 
we  may  now  applj'  these  values,  by  means  of  equation  (17), 
to  determine  the  mechanical  equivalent  itself.  For  this 
purpose  we  may  give  that  equation  the  following  form : 

£= — T^Cs-.') («). 

The  coefficient  of  s  —  o-  in  this  equation  may  be  calculated 
for  different  temperatures  by  means  of  Regnault's  tables.  For 
example,  to  calculate  its  values  for  100",  we  have  given  for 

-ij  the  value  27"20,  the  pressure  being  reckoned  in  milli- 
metres of  mercury.  To  reduce  this  to  the  measure  here  em- 
ployed, viz.  kilogrammes  per  square  metre,  we  must  multiply 
by  the  weight  of  a  column  of  mercury  at  temperature  0", 
1  square  metre  in  area  and  1  millimetre  in  height,  that  is  by 
the  weight  of  1  cubic  decimetre  of  mercury  at  0".  As  Regnault 
gives  this  weight  at  13"o96  kilogrammes,  the  multiplication 
gives  us  the  number  369  "8.  The  values  of  {a  +  t)  and  of  r 
at  100°  are  373  and  536'5  respectively.     Hence  we  have 

/    a.  rt  ^£ 

^"'  "^  '  ~dt  _  373  X  369-8  _  _.^ 

;: 536-5         "^''^' 

and  equation  (46)  becomes 

^=257(s-o-) (47). 

We  have  now  to  determine  the  quantity  (s  —  a),  or,  since  o-  is 
known,  the  quantity  s  for  steam  at  100°.  The  method  formerly 
pursued,  i.e.  to  use  for  saturated  steam  the  same  specific 
weight,  which  for  superheated  steam  had  been  found  by 
experiment  or  deduced  theoretically  from  the  condensation  of 


156      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 

water,  led  to  the  result,  that  a  kilogram  of  steam  at  100° 
should  have  a  volume  of  1'696  cuhic  metres.  From  the  fore- 
going however  it  appears  that  this  value  must  be  consider- 
ably too  large,  and  must  therefore  give  too  large  a  value  for 
the  mechanical  equivalent  of  teat.  Taking  the  specific  heat 
as  calculated  by  equation  (45),  which  for  100°  is  0"645,  we 
obtain  for  s  the  value  1'638.  Applying  this  value  of  s  we 
get  from  equation  (47) 

^  =  421 ....(48). 

This  method  therefore  gives  for  the  mechanical  equivalent 
of  heat  a  value  which  agrees  in  a  very  satisfactory  manner 
with  the  value  found  by  Joule  from  the  friction  of  water,  and 
with  that  deduced  in  Chapter  II.  from  the  behaviour  of 
gases ;  both  of  which  are  about  equal  to  424.  This  agree- 
ment may  serve  as  a  verification  of  the  author's  theory  as  to 
the  density  of  saturated  steam. 

§  11.  (complete  Differential  Equation  for  Q  m  the  case  of 
a  body  composed  both  of  liquid  and  vapour. 

In  §  1  of  this  chapter  we  expressed  the  two  first  differ- 
ential coefficients  of  Q,  for  a  body  consisting  both  of  liquid 
and  vapour,  by  equations  (7)  and  (8),  as  follows: 

dm     ^' 

^  =  m{E-G)  +  Ma 

Hence  we  may  forai  the  complete  differential  equation  of  the 
first  order  for  Q,  as  follows : 


dQ  =  pdm  + 


o]. 


m{n-G)  +  MG\dT., (49). 


By  equation  (12)  we  may  put 


TT         p_dp  P 


whence  equation  (49)  becomes 

dQ=pdm+    m(^^-^  +  Ma  dT (50). 


satueated  vapour.  157 

Since  p  is  a  function  of  T  only,  and  therefore 

we  have         dQ  =  d{tnp) +  {-'^  + MC\dT (51), 

or  dQ  =  Td{^^^+MCdT (52). 

These  equations  are  not  integrable  if  the  two  quantities,  whose 
dififerentials  are  on  the  right-haad  side,  are  independent  of 
each  other,  and  the  mode  of  the  variations  thus  left  undeter- 
mined. They  become  integrable  as  soon  as  this  mode  is  deter- 
mined in  any  way.  We  can  then  perform  with  them  calcu- 
lations exactly  similar  to  those  given  for  gases  in  Chapter  II. 
We  will  for  the  sake  of  example  take  a  case  which'  on 
the  one  hand  has  an  importance  of  its  own,  and  on  the  other 
derives  an  interest  from  the  fact  that  it  plays  a  prominent 
part  in  the  theory  of  the  steam-engine.  The  assumption  is 
that  the  mass  consisting  both  of  liquid  and  vapour  changes 
its  volume,  without  any  heat  being  imparted  to  it  or  taken 
from  it.  In  this  case  the  temperature  and  magnitude  of  the 
gaseous  portion  also  suffers  a  change,  and  some  external 
work,  positive  or  negative,  must  at  the  same  time  be  per- 
formed. The  magnitude  m  of  the  gaseous  portion,  its  volume 
V,  and  the  external  work  W,  must  now  be  determined  as 
functions  of  the  temperature. 

§  12.     Change  of  the  Gaseous  Portion  of  the  Mass. 

As  the  mass  within  the  vessel  can  neither  receive  nor 
give  off  any  heat,  we  may  put  dQ  =  0.  Equation  (52)  then 
becomes: 


Td 


(^-P^+MCdT=0 (53). 


If  we  divide  this  equation  by  E,  the  quantities  p  and  C,  which 
relate  to  the  mechanical  measure  of  heat,  change  into  r  and 
c,  which  relate  to  the  ordinary  measure  of  heat.  If  we  also 
divide  the  equation  by  T,  it  becomes: 

dl-jrj+Mc-^=0 (53a).  ., 


158      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

The  first  member  of  this  equation  is  a  simple  differential, 
and  may  at  once  be  integrated :  the  integration  of  the  second 
is  also  always  possible,  since  c  varies  only  with  the  tempera- 
ture T.  If  we  merely  indicate  this  integration,  and  denote 
the  initial  values  of  the  various  magnitudes  by  annexing 
the  figure  1,  we  obtain  the  following  equation: 


"^^^-mQ^ (54). 


mr     m,r,      ,,  f^  dT 
or 


Actually  to  perform  the  integration  thus  indicated,  we 
may  employ  the  empirical  formula  for  c  given  by  Regnault, 
For  water  this  formula,  already  given  in  (27),  is  as  follows : 

c  =  1  +  000004  +  00000009*'. 

Since  c  is  thus  seen  to  vary  v6ry  slightly  with  the  tempera- 
ture, we  will  in  our  calculations  for  water  assume  c  to  be 
constant,  which  will  not  seriously  affect  the  accuracy  of  the 
results.     Hence  (54)  becomes: 

~^=-^-Mclog-^  (oo), 

whence 


m 


=  f(^-^clogJj (56). 


If  we  here  substitute  for  r  the  expression  given  in  (28),  or  in 
a  simpler  form  in  (30),  then  m  will  be  determined  as  a  func- 
tion of  tenaperature. 

To  give  a  general  idea  of  the  values  of  this  function, , 
some  values  have  been  calculated  for  a  special  case,  and  col- 
lected in  the  following  table.  The  assumption  is  that  the 
vessel  contains  at  first  no  water  in  a  liquid  condition,  but 
is  filled  with  steam  at  its  maximum  density,  so  that  in 
equation  (56)  we  may  put  m^  =  M.  Let  there  now  be  an 
expansion  of  the  vessel.  A  compression  would  not  be  ad- 
missible, because  on  the  assumption  of  the  absence  of  water 
at  the  commencement,  the  steam  would  not  remain  at  its 


SATURATED  VAPOTJE. 


159 


maximum  density,  but  would  be  superheated  by  the  heat 
developed  in  the  compression.  In  expansion  on  the  other 
hand  the  steam  not  only  remains  at  its  maximum  density, 
but  a  part  of  it  is  precipitated  as  water ;  and  the  diminution 
of  m  thus  produced  is  exhibited  in  the  table.     The  initial 

temperature   is  taken  at  150°  C,  and  the  values  of  -^  are 

given  for  the  moments  when  the  temperature  has  sunk 
through  expansion  to  125",  100°,  etc.  As  before,  the  tem- 
perature is  reckoned  from  freezing  point,  and  is  denoted  by 
t,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  absolute  temperature  T. 


t 

150» 

125" 

100" 

75» 

50" 

25" 

m 
M 

1 

0-956 

0-911 

0-866 

0-821 

0-776 

§  13.     Relation  between  Volume  and  Temperature. 

To  express  the  relation  which  exists  between  the  volume 
V  and  the  temperature,  we  may  first  apply  equation  (5) : 

V  =  mu  +  Ma: 

The  quantity  o-,  which  expresses  the  volume  of  a  unit,  of 
weight  of  the  liquid,  is  a  known  function  of  temperature,  and 
the  same  is  therefore  true  of  Ma:  It  remains  to  determine 
mu.  For  this  purpose  we  need  only  substitute  in  equation 
(55)  the  expression  for  r  given  in  equation  (17).  Thus  we 
obtain 

mU' 

X 


JE      d'l 


dp     m.r,      ,,  ,      T 


T, 


.(-57). 


whence 


mu  = 


|(T-*'°^-?.) <'^)- 


dp 
dT 


dp 


The  differential  coefficient  -pp  may  be  considered  as  known, 

since  ^  is  a  known  function  of  the  temperature  ;  and  there- 
fore this  equation  determines  the  product  mu,  and  thence,  by 
the  addition  of  Ma,  the  required  quantity  v. 


160 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT." 


The  following  table  gives  a  series  of  values  of  the  quotient 

— ,  calculated  by  this  equation  for  the  same  case  as  was  treated 

in  the  last  table.     Under  these  are  placed  for  the  sake  of 

comparison  the  values  of  — ,  which  would  hold  if  the  two 

ordinary  assumptions  in  the  theory  of  the  steam-engine  were 
correct :  viz.  (1)  that  steam  in  expansion  remains  at  its  maxi- 
mum density  without  any  part  of  it  condensing;  (2)  that 
steam  follows  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac.  On  these 
assumptions  we  shall  have 


.t 

150« 

125» 

100" 

V5« 

50" 

25" 

V 

'P     T, 

1 
1 

1-88 
1-93 

,    3-90 
4-16 

9-23 
10-21 

25-7 
29-7 

88-7 
■  107-1 

§  14.    Determination  of  ike  Work  as  a  function  of  Tem- 
perature. 

It  remains  to  determine  the  work  done  during  the  change 
of  volume.     For  this  we  have  the  equation 


W 


=    pdv 


,(59). 


But  by  equation  (5),  taking  the  magnitude  a  (which  is 
generally  small  and  very,  slightly  variable)  as  constant,  we 
have : 

dv  =  d  [mu), 
whence 

pdv=pd{mu), 

which  may  be  also  written  thus 


pdv  =  d  (mup)  —  mu  -JL dT 


(60). 


SATUEATED  VAPOUK.  161 

In  this  equation  we  may  substitute  for  mu  -—  the  expres- 
sion given  in  equation  (57),  and  may  then  perform  the  inte- 
gration. The  result  however  is  obtained  in  a  more  convenient 
form  as  follows.    By  (13)  we  have: 


and  from  (53)  we  obtain 


hence 


'^dT  =  d(mp)  +  MCdT; 
mu^dT=d  (mp)  +  MCdT. 


Equation  (60)  now  becomes 
pdv  =  d  {mup)  —  d  (mp)  —  MCdT 

=  -d[m(p-up)]-MGdT (61). 

Integrating  this  equation  we  obtain 

W  =  m;(p^-u^;)-m(p-wp)  +  MC{T^-T)...(Q2). 

If  in  this  equation  we  substitute  for  p  and  (7,  according  to 
equation  (14),  the  values  JEr  and  JEc,  and  collect  together  the 
terms  which  contain  ^  as  a  factor,  we  have : 

W  =  mup  -  m^^p^  +  E  [m^r^  -mr+ Mc{T^- T)]... (63). 

From  this  equation  we  may  calculate  W,  since  mr  and 

mu  are  already  known  from  the  equations  (56)  and  (58).    This 

calculation  has  been  made  for  the  same  case  as  before,  and 

W 
the  values  of -jr,  i.e.  of  the  work  done  by  a  unit  of  weight 

during  expansion,  are  given  in  the  following  table ;  the  unit 
of  weight  is  here  a  kilogram  and  the  unit  of  work  a  kilo- 
grammetre.  The  value  used  for  H  is  42355,  as  found  by 
Joule. 

As  a  comparison  with  the  numbers  of  this  table  it  may  be 

c.  11 


162 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY   OF  HEAT. 


again  mentioned  that  the  value  obtained  for  the  work  done 
during  the  actual  formation  of  steam,  as  this  overcomes  the 
external  pressure,  is  18700  kilogrammetres  per  kilogram  of 
water,  evaporated  at  temperature  150°  and  at  the  correspond- 
ing pressure. 


t 

1500 

125» 

100» 

750 

50" 

250 

w 

M 

0 

11300 

23200 

35900 

49300 

63700  , 

CHAPTER  VII. 

FUSION  AND   VAPORIZATION  OF  SOLID  BODIES. 

§  1.    Fundamental  Ilqiiations  for  the  process  of  Fusion. 

Whilst  in  the  case  of  vaporization  the  influence  of  the  ex- 
ternal pressure  was  eaxly  observed,  and  was  everywhere  taken 
into  account,  it  had  hitherto  been  left  out  of  account  in  the 
case  of  fusion,  where  it  is  much  less  easily  noticed.  A  little 
consideration  however  shews  that,  if  the  volume  of  a  body 
changes  during  fusion,  the  external  pressure  must  have 
an  influence  on  the  process.  For,  if  the  volume  increases,  an 
increase  of  pressure  will  make  the  fusion  more  difficult, 
whence  it  may  be  concluded  that  a  higher  temperature  is 
necessary  for  fusion  at  a  high  than  at  a  low  pressure.  If  on 
the  other  hand  the  volume  decreases,  an  increase  of  pressure 
will  facilitate  the  fusion,  and  the  temperature  required  will 
be  less,  as  the  pressure  is  greater. 

To  examine  more  exactly  the  connection  between  pressure 
and  fusion-point,  and  the  peculiar  changes  which  are  some- 
times connected  with  a  change  of  pressure,  we  must  form  the 
equations  which  are  supplied  for  the  process  of  fusion  by  the 
two  fundamental  principles  of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of 
Heat.  For  this  purpose  we  pursue  the  same  course  as  for 
vaporization.  We  conceive  an  expansible  vessel  containing 
a  certain  quantity  iHf  of  a  substance,  which  is  partly  in  the 
solid,  and  partly  in  the  liquid  condition.  Let  the  liquid  part 
have  the  magnitude  m,  and  therefore  the  solid  part  the  mag- 
nitude M—m.  The  two  together  are  su^osed  to  fill  the 
vessel  completely,  so  that  the  content  of  tffi;  vessel  is  equal 
to  V,  the  volume  of  the  body. 

If  this  volume  v  and  the  temperature  T  are  given,  thie 
magnitude  m  is  thereby  determined.     To  prove  this,  let  us 

11—2 


164      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

first  suppose  that  the  body  expands  during  fusion.  Let  it  be 
also  in  such  a  condition  that  the  temp'ei-ature  T  is  exactly  the 
melting  temperature  at  that  particular  pressure.  Now  if  in 
this  condition  the  magnitude  of  the  liquid  part  were  to 
increase  at  the  expense  of  the  solid,  the  expansion  which 
must  then  result  would  produce  an  increase  of  pressure 
against  the  walls  of  the  vessel,  and  therefore  an  increased 
reaction  of  the  walls  against  the  body.  This  increased  pres- 
sure would  produce  a  rise  in  the  fusion-point,  and  since  the 
existing  temperature  would  then  be  too  low  for  fusion,  a 
solidification  of  the  liquid  part  must  begin.  If  on  the  con- 
trary the  solid  part  were  to  increase  at  the  expense  of  the 
liquid,  the  point  of  fusion  would  thereupon  sink,  and  since 
the  existing  temperature  would  then  be  higher  than  the 
fusion -point,  a  fusion  of  the  solid  part  must  begin.  Next,  if 
we  make  the  opposite  assumption,  viz.  that  the  volume 
decreases  during  fusion,  then  if  the  solid  part  increase  there 
must  be  a  rise  of  pressure  and  in  consequence  a  partial 
melting,  and  if  the  liquid  part  increase  there  must  be  a  fall 
in  pressure  and  in  consequence  a  pai-tial  solidification.  Thus 
on  either  assumption  we  have  the  same  result,  viz.  that  only 
the  original  proportions  of  the  liquid  and  solid  parts  (which 
proportions  correspond  to  the  pressure  which  gives  a  tem- 
perature of  fusion  equal  to  the  given  temperature)  can  be 
permanently  maintained.  Since  then  the  magnitude  m  is 
determined  by  the  temperature  and  volume,  this  volume  will 
conversely  be  determined  by  the  temperature  and  the  mag- 
nitude m;  and  we  may  choose  T  and  m  as  the  variables 
which  serve  to  determine  the  condition  of  the  body.  It  now 
remains  to  express  ^  as  a  function  of  T.  Here  we  may 
again  apply  -equations  (1),  (2),  (3)  of  the  last  chapter,  viz. : 

dT  [dm]     dm  \dTJ  '^'dT^d^' 

.d_  fdQ\ d_  fdQ\  _  jL^     dQ 

dT\dm)     dm\dT)     T^dm' 
iQ^rpdp  ^  dv_ 
dm        dT     dm ' 
If  we  denote  by  o-,  as  before,  the  specific  volume  (or  volume 
of  a  unit  of  weight)  for  the  liquid  condition  of  the  body, 


FUSION  AND  VAPORIZATION  OP  SOLID  BODIES.        165 

and  the  specific  volume  for  the  solid  condition  by  t,  we  have 
for  the  total  volume  v  of  the  body, 

V  =  ma-  +  {M  —  m)  t, 
or  v=m{a--T)  +  MT  (1), 

^^^e^°e  ^='^-'^ (2). 

If  further  we  denote  the  heat  effusion  for  a  unit  of  weight  by 
p',  we  may  put 

d^-p (^^- 

To  express  -^,  the  other  differential  coefficient  of  Q,  we 

must  employ  symbols  for  the  specific  heat  of  the  body  in  the 
liquid  and  in  the  solid  condition.  Here,  however,  we  must 
make  the  same  remark  as  in  the  case  of  vaporization,  viz. 
that  it  is  not  the  specific  heat  at  constant  pressure  which  is 
treated  of,  but  the  specific  heat  for  the  particular  case  in 
which  the  pressure  alters  with  the  temperature  in  such  a  way 
that  the  temperature  shall  always  be  the  temperature  of 
fusion  for  that  particular  pressure.  In  the  case  of  vaporiza- 
tion, where  the  changes  of  pressure  are  generally  small,  it 
was  possible  to  neglect  the  influence  of  the  change  of  pressure 
on  the  specific  heat  of  the  liquid  body,  and  to  consider  the 
specific  heat  of  a  liquid  body,  as  found  in  the  formula,  to  be 
equivalent  to  the  specific  heat  at  constant  pressure.  In  the 
present  case  small  changes  of  temperature  produce  such 
great  changes  of  pressure,  that  the  influence  of  these  oq  the 
specific  heat  must  not  be  neglected.  We  will,  therefore,  under 
the  present  circumstances,  denote  by  0"  the  specific  heat  of 
the  liquid,  which  in  the  formula  for  vaporization  we  denoted 
by  C.  The  specific  heat  of  the  solid  body  may  be  de- 
noted in  this  case  by  K'.  Applying  these  symbols  we  may 
write 

'^  =  mC'  +  {M-m)K', 
^=m{0'-K')+MK' (4). 


166  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 

From  equations  (3)  and  (4)  we  have 

dT\dm)~dT ^  '• 


U^)-^-""' (^)- 


,dm  \< 

Inserting  these  sralues,  and  the  ralue  for  -^  given  in  (3),  in 
the  above  differential  equations,  we  obtain 

%+,K'-0'  =  i.-r)^ (7), 

%-^^'-^'4 ^'\ 

/  =  T(<r-r)^ (9). 

In  these  equations  the  heat  is  supposed  to  be  measured  by 
mechanical  units.  If  the  heat  is  to  be  measured  in  ordinary 
units,  we  may  use  the  following  sj'mbols  : 

The  equations  then  become 

£+'--«'-^'© <">■ 

g,+  A'-c'  =  J (12), 


T(a--T)fdp\ 


'■=-^® ('«)■ 


These  are  the  equations  required,  of  which  the  first  corre- 
sponds to  the  first  Fundamental  Principle,  and  the  second  to 
the  second,  whilst  the  third  is  a  combination  of  the  other 

two. 


FUSION  AND  VAPOEIZATIOK  OF  SOLID  BODIES.        167 

§  2.  Relation  between  Pressure  and  Temperature  of 
Ficsion. 

The  foregoing  equations,  only  two  of  -which  are  inde- 
pendent, maybe  applied  to  determine  two  quantities  hitherto 
unknown. 

We  will  first  use  the  last  equation  to  determine  the  way 
in  which  the  temperature  of  fusion  depends  on  the  pressure. 
The  equation  may  be  written 

^T     Tj.-r) 

dp  Er'      ^^*>- 

This  equation  in  the  first  place  justifies  the  remark  already 

made,  that  if  a  body  expand  during  fusion  the  point  of  fusion 

rises  as  the  pressure  increases ;  whereas  if  the  body  contracts 

the  point  of  fusion  falls.     For  according  as  cr  is  greater  or 

less  than  t  so  is  the  difference  a-  —  t,  and  therefore  also  the 

dT 
differential  coefficient  -^ ..  positive  or  negative.    Again,  by 

this  equation  we  may  calculate  the  numerical  value  of  —i-  . 

We  will  calculate  this  value  for  the  case  of  water.  The  vo- 
lume in  cubic  metres,  or  the  value  of  <r,  for  a  kilogramme  of 
water  at  4°  C.  is  O'OOl.  At  freezing  point  it  is  a  little  greater, 
but  the  difference  is  so  small  that  it  may  be  neglected.  The 
volume  in  cubic  metres,  or  the  value  of  t,  for  a_  kilogram 
of  ice  is  0001087.  The  heat  of  fusion  for  water,  or  the 
value  of  r,  is  according  to  Person  79.  At  freezing  point  T 
equals  773,  and  for  E  we  wiU  take  the  value  424.  Hence 
we  obtain 

dT  _     273  X  0-000087 

dp  "  424  X  79      ■ 

If  the  pressure  is  given  not  in  mechanical  units  (kilograms 
per  square  metre),  but  in  atmospheres,  we  must  multiply  the 

above  value  of  -j-  by  10333.     This  gives  us 

^=-000733, 
d/p 

i.e.  an  increase  of  pressure  of  one  atmosphere  will  lower  the 
point  of  fusion  by  G'00733  of  a  degree  Cent. 


168      ON  THK  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

§  3.    Experimental  Verification  of  the  Foregoing  Result. 

The  conclusioii  that  the  melting  point  of  ice  is  lowered 
by  an  increase  of  pressure,  and  the  first  calculation  of  the 
amount,  are  due  to  James  Thomson,  -who  derived  from 
Gamot's  theory  an  equation  -which  differs  from  our  equation 

T 

(14)  only  in  tliis,  that  in  the  place  of  -p  it  contams  an  un- 
known function  of  temperature,  whose  particular  value  for 
the  freezing  point  was  determined  from  Regnault's  data  on 
the  heat  of  vaporization  and- pressure  of  steam.  Sir  William 
Thomson  afterwards  applied  to  this  theoretical  result  a  very 
accurate  test  by  experiment*. 

In  order  to  measure  small  differences  of  temperature,  he 
prepared  a  thermometer  filled  with  ether-sulphide,  the  bulb 
of  which  was  3^  in.  long  and  the  tube  6  J  in.  Of  this  5^  in. 
were  divided  in  220  equal  parts,  and  212  of  these  parts  com- 
prised an  interval  of  temperature  of  3°  Fahr.,  so  that  each 
part  was  about  equal  to  ^  of  a  degree  Fahr.  This  thermo- 
meter was  hermetically  enclosed  in  a  larger  glass  tube,  to 
protect  it  from  the  external  pressure,  and  so  enclosed  was 
placed  in  an  Oersted  press,  filled  with  water  and  lumps  of 
clear  ice,  and  containing  an  ordinary  air  gauge  to  measure 
the  pressure.  When  the  thermometer  had  become  stationary 
at  a  point  corresponding  to  the  melting  point  of  ice  at  atmos- 
pheric pressure,  the  pressure  was  increased  by  screwing  do-wn 
the  press.  The  thermometer  was  at  once  seen  to  fall,  as  the 
mass  of  water  and  ice  assumed  the  lower  melting  tempera- 
ture corresponding  to  the  higher  pressure.  On  taking  off, 
this  pressure  the  thermometer  returned  to  its  original  position. 
The  table  below  gives  the  fall  of  temperature  observed  for  two 


Pressure. 

Fall  of  Temperature. 

Observed. 

Calculated. 

8-1  Atm. 
16-8     „ 

0-059"  0. 
0-129    „ 

0-059"  C. 
0-123    „ 

different  pressures,  and  also  the  fall  of  temperature,  as  cal- 
culated for  those  same  pressures  by  applying  to  temperatures 

*  PHI.  Mag.,  Series  in.  Vol.  xxxvii.  p.  123. 


FUSION  AND  VAPORIZATION  OF  SOLID  BODIES.       169 

dT 
as  high  as  16"8  atm.  the  value  of  t— ,  which  was  found  in  the 

dp 

last  section,  and  which  primarily  relates  to  the  ordinary  at- 
mospheric pressure. 

We  see  that  the  observed  and  calculated  numbers  agree 
very  closely  together,  and  thus  another  result  of  theory 
has  been  verified  by  experiment. 

More  recently  a  very  striking  experiment  was  performed 
by  Mousson*,  who  by  the  application  of  enormous  pressures 
melted  ice  which  was  kept  during  the  experiment  at  a 
temperature  of  — 18°  to  —  20°.  The  pressure  employed  he 
calculates  approximately  at  about  13000  atmospheres ;  on 
which  it  may  be  remarked  that  it  may  be  possible  to  pro- 
duce the  melting  with  a  much  smaller  pressure,  since  with 
his  arrangement  all  that  could  be  known  was  that  the  ice 
had  somehow  melted  during  the  experiment,  and  not  the 
exact  time  at  which  the  melting  took  place. 

§  4.  Experiments  on  Svbstances  which  eoopand  during 
Fusion. 

Bunsent  was  the  first  to  institute  experiments  on  sub- 
stances which  expand  during  fusion,  and  of  which  the 
fusion  point  must  therefore  rise  as  the  temperature  in- 
creases. The  substances  he  chose  were  spermaceti  and 
paraffin.  By  an  ingenious  arrangement  he  obtained  in  an 
extremely  simple  manner  a  very  high  and  at  the  same  time 
measurable  increase  of  pressure,  and  was  able  to  observe 
portions  of  the  same  substance  side  by  side  under  ordinary 
atmospheric,  and  under  the  increased  pressure.  He  took  a 
tube  of  thick  glass  about  the  size  of  a  straw  and  1  foot  in 
length,  and  drew  it  at  one  end  into  a  capillary  tube  15  to 
20  inches  long,  and  at  the  other  end  into  a  somewhat  larger 
one  only  1 J  inches  long.  The  latter,  which  was  placed  lowest 
in  the  apparatus,  was  bent  round  until  it  stood  up  parallel 
to  the  lower  part  of  the  glass  tube.  This  short  curved  part 
was  filled  with  the  substance  to  be  tested,  and  the  larger 
glass  tube  with  quicksilver,  whilst  the  long  capillary  tube 
remained  filled  with  air.     Both  capillary  tubes  were  sealed 

*  Pogg.  Ann.,  Vol.  cv.  p.  161. 
t  Pogg.  Ann.,  Vol.  lxjcxi.  p.  5G2. 


170 


ON  THE  MEtiHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 


at  the  ends.  On  heating  the  apparatus  the  quicksilver 
expanded,  rose  in  the  longer  capillary  tube,  and  compressed 
the  air  within  it.  The  reaction  of  this  air  compressed  first 
the  quicksilver  and  then  the  substance  in  the  shorter  tube, 
and  the  magnitude  of  the  pressure,  which  was  capable  of 
rising  to  above  100  atmospheres,  could  be  measured  by  the 
volume  of  air  left  in  the  upper  tube. 

This  apparatus  was  fixed  on  a  board  close  to  another 
arranged  in  the  same  way  except  that  the  upper  air-tube 
was  not  sealed ;  so  that  no  compression  of  the  air,  and  con- 
sequent rise  of  pressure,  could  take  place.  The  two  tubes 
were  now  plunged  in  water,  the  temperature  of  which  was 
somewhat  higher  than  the  melting  point  of  the  substance 
to  be  tested.  Thus  when  the  lower  tube  filled  with  the 
substance  was  once  completely  under  water,  it  was  only 
needed  to  sink  it  still  deeper  in  order  to  heat  a  larger  part 
of  the  quicksilver,  and  so  to  obtain  a  higher  pressure 
in  the  closed  upper  tube.  Under  these  conditions  Bunsen 
repeatedly  melted  the  substance  in  both  tubes,  and  then  by 
cooling  the  water  allowed  it  again  to  solidify,  observing  the 
temperature  at  which  this  took  place.  The  result  was  that 
this  solidification  always  took  place  at  a  higher  temperature 
in  the  tube  in  which  the  pressure  was  increased  than  in^ 
the  other.     The  following  were  the  numerical  results. 


Spermaceti. 

Preasure. 

Point  of 
Solidification. 

1  Atm. 

29     „ 

96  „ 
141  „ 
156    „ 

47-7»  C. 
48-3    „ 
49-7    „ 
50-5    „ 
50-9    „ 

ParaflSn. 


Pressure. 


1  Atm. 
85    „ 
100    „ 


Point  of 
Solidification. 


46-3''  C. 
48-9  „ 
49-9     „ 


FUSION  ANB  VAPOEIZATION  OF  SOLID  BODIES.        171 

More  recently  Hopkins*  experimented  with  spermaceti, 
wax,  sulphur,  and  stearine,  producing  pressures  by  means  of 
a  weighted  lever  to  800  atmospheres  and  upwards.  With  all 
the  above  substances  a  rise  of  the  melting  point  under  an 
increase  of  pressure  was  observed.  The  particular  tempera- 
tures observed  with  different  pressures  shewed  however 
considerable  irregularities.  In  the  case  of  wax,  with  which 
the  rise  of  temperature  was  most  regular,  an  increase  of 
pressure  of  808  atmospheres  produced  a  rise  in  the  melting 
point  of  15J°  Cent. 

The  calculation  of  the  rise  in  the  melting  point  from 
the  theoretical  formula  cannot  well  be  performed  for  the 
substances  tested  by  Bunsen  and  Hopkins,  since  the  data 
required  are  not  known  with  sufficient  accuracy. 

§  5.  BddUon  between  the  h$at  oonswmed  in  Fusion  and 
the  temperature  of  Fusion. 

Having  applied  equation  (13),  in  §  2,  to  determine  the 
relation  between  the  temperature  of  fusion  and  the  pressure, 
we  will  now  turn  to  equation  (12),  which  may  be  written  as 
follows : 

g=C'-A'+^y (15). 

This  equation  shews  that,  if  the  temperature  of  fusion  is 
changed  by  a  change  of  pressure,  the  quantity  of  heat  r 
required  for  fusion  also  changes.  The  amount  of  this  change 
can  be  determined  from  the  equation.  In  this  the  symbols 
c'  and  y  denote  the  specific  heat  of  the  substance  in  the 
liquid  and  in  the  solid  condition,  not  however,  as  already 
observed,  the  specific  heat  at  constant  pressure,  but  the 
specific  heat  in  the  case  in  which  the  pressure  changes  with 
the  temperature  in  the  manner  indicated  by  equation  (13). 

The  mode  of  determining  this  kind  of  specific  heat  will 
be  described  in  the  next  chapter.  Here  we  will  merely 
by  way  of  example  give  the  numeyical  values  in  the  case 
of  water.  The  specific  heat  at  constant  pressure,  i.e.  that 
specific  heat  which  is  simply  measured  at  atmospheric 
pressure,  has  in  the  neighbourhood  of  0°  the  value  1  for 
watgr,  andy  according  to  Personf,  the  value  0"48  for  ice, 

*  Report,  Brit.  Assoc,  1854,  p,  57. 
t  Cojuptes  Rendvs,  Vol.  zxx,  p,  S26. 


172      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

The  specific  heat  for  the  case  here  considered  has  on  the 
contrary  for  water  and  ice  the  values  c'=0"945  and  k'=OQM. 
For  /  we  may  take  Person's  value  79.     We  thus  obtain 

£=0-945 -0-631 +  ^3 

=  0-314  +  0-289 
=  0-603. 

It  is  known  that  the  freezing  point  of  water  can  also 
be  lowered  by  protecting  it  from  every  sort  of  disturbance. 
This  lowering  of  temperature  however  only  refers  to  the 
commencement  of  freezing.  As  soon  as  this  has  begun,  a 
portion  of  the  water  freezes  immediately  such  that  the  whole 
mass  of  water  is  thereby  warmed  again  up  to  0°,  and  the  re- 
mainder of  the  freezing  takes  place  at  that  temperature. 
There  is  therefore  no  need  to  examine  more  closely  the  change 
in  the  magnitude  r'  which  corresponds  to  a  lowering  of  the 
temperature  of  this  kind,  and  which  is  simply  determined  by 
the  difference  of  the  specific  heat  of  water  and  ice  at  constant 
pressure. 

§  6'.    Passage  from  the  solid  to  the  gaseous  condition. 

Hitherto  we  have  considered  the  passage  from  the  liquid 
to  the  gaseous  and  from  the  solid  to  the  liquid  condition. 
It  may  however  happen  that  a  substance  passes  direct  from 
the  solid  to  the  gaseous  condition.  In  this  case  three  equa- 
tions will  hold  of  the  same  form  as  equations  (15),  (16) 
and  (17)  of  the  last  chapter,  or  (11),  (12),  (13)  of  this :  we 
must  only  remember  to  choose  the  specific  heats  and  specific 
volumes  relating  to  the  different  states  of  aggregation,  and 
the  quantities  of  heat  consumed  in  the  passage  from  one  con- 
dition to  the  other,  in  the  manner  corresponding  to  the  pre- 
sent case. 

The  circumstance  that  the  heat  expended  is  greater  in 
the  passage  from  the  solid  condition  to  the  gaseous  than 
from  the  liquid,  leads  to  a  conclusion  which  has  already  been 
drawn  by  Kirchhoff  *.  For  if  we  Consider  a  substance  when 
just  at  its  melting  point,  vapour  may  be  developed  at  this 
temperature  both  from  the  liquid  and  from  the  solid.     At 

*  Pogg.  Ann.,  Vol.  cm.  p.  206. 


FUSION  AND  VAPORIZATION  OF  SOLID  BODIES.       173 

temperatures  above  the  melting  point  we  have  only  to  do 
with  vapour  developed  from  a  liquid,  and  at  temperatures  below 
with  vapour  developed  from  a  solid,  leaving  out  of  account 
the  special  case  mentioned  in  the  last  section,  in  which  a 
liquid  kept  perfectly  Still  remains  fluid  in  spite  of  having 
reached  a  lower  temperature. 

If  for  these  two  cases,  i.  e.  for  temperatures  above  and  below 
the  melting  point,  we  express  the  pressure  of  vapour  p  as  a 
function  of  temperature,  and  construct  for  each  case  the  curve 
which  has  the  temperatures  for  abscissae  and  the  pressures 
for  ordinates,  the  question  arises  how  the  curves  correspond- 
ing to  the  two  cases  are  related  to  each  other  at  the  common 
limit,  viz.  the  temperature  of  fusion.  In  the  first  place,  so 
far  as  concerns  the  value  of  p  itself,  we  may  consider  it  as 
known  by  experience  to  be  equal  in  the  two  cases ;  and 
thus  the  two  curves  will  meet  in  one  point  at  the  tempera- 
ture of  fusion.    But  with  regard  to  the  differential  coeflScient 

-—, ,  the  last  of  the  above-named  three  equations  shews  that  it 

has  different  values  in  the  two  cases ;  and  thus  the  tangents 
to  the  two  curves  at  their  point  of  intersection  have  different 
directions. 

Equation  (17)  of  Chapter  VI.  which  relates  to  the  passage 
from  the  liquid  to  the  gaseous  condition,  may  be  written  as 
follows : 

dip  _      Er  .     . 

dT~  T{s-iT) ^^''^• 

To  form  the  corresponding  equation  for  the  passage  from 
the  solid  to  the  gaseous  condition,  we  should  set  on  the  left 
hand  the  pressure  of  the  vapour  given  off  by  the  solid  body, 
which  for  distinction  we  may  ca,ll  P.  On  the  right  hand  we 
must  put,  instead  of  <t,  which  is  the  specific  volume  of"the 
liquid,  the  specific  volume  of  the  solid  which  we  may  call  t  ; 
the  difference  thus  indicated  is  however  very  small,  since 
these  two  specific  volumes  differ  very  slightly  from  each 
other,  and  in  addition  are  small  in  comparison  with  s,  the 
specific  volume  of.  the  substance  as  a  gas.  It  is  of  more 
importance  to  substitute  for  r,  which  is  the  heat  required  to 
cause  the  passage  from  the  liquid  to  the  gaseous  condition, 
the  quantity  of  heat  required  for  the  passage  from  the  solid 


174     OK  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOat^  OF  HEAT. 

*  to  the  gaseous  condition.  This  latter  equals  r  +  r',  where  r' 
is  the  heat  required  for  melting.  Thus  in  the  present  case 
the  equation  is : 

dP  _M{r  +  r')        ■  .- 

dT  ,  T{s-t) ^    '' 

Combining  this  eqjiation  with  (16),  and  neglecting  the  small 
difference  between  <t  and  t,  we  have 

dP     dp         Er'  , 

dT     dT~T{s-0-) ^  /■ 

If  we  apply  this  equation  to  water,  we  must  put  T=  273, 
r'=  79,  s  =  205,  a-  =  0-001,  and  giving^  the  known  value  424 
we  have 

dP     c?p_424x79_ 

dT     drr  273x205" 

If  we  wish  to  express  the  pressure  in  millimetres  of  mer- 
cury, instead  of  kilogrammes  per  square  metre,  we  must,  as 
remarked  in  Chapter  VI.  §  10,  divide  the  above  result  by 
13'596;  then  putting  for  p  and  P  the  Greek  letters  tt  and 
IT,  we  have 

^-^  =  0-044 
dT     dT^^^- 

It  may  be  added  for  the  sake  of  comparison  that  the  diffe- 
rential coefficient  t™  has  for  0°  the  value  0'33,  according  to 

the  pressures  which  Renault  has  observed  at  temperatures 
just  over  0°. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


ON  HOMOGENEOUS  BODIES. 


§  1.  Changes  of  Condition  without  Change  in  the  Con- 
dition of  Aggregation. 

We  will  now  return  to  the  general  equations  of  Chapter 
V.  and  will  apply  them  to  cases,  in  which  a  body  undergoes 
changes  which  do  not  extend  so  far  as  to  alter  its  condition 
of  aggregation,  but  in  which  all  parts  of  the  body  are  always 
in  the  same  condition.  We  will  suppose  these  changes  to  be 
produced  by  changes  in  the  temperature  and  in  the  external 
pressure.  In  consequence  of  these,  changes  take  place  in  the 
arrangement  of  the  molecules  of  the  body,  which  are  indi- 
cated by  changes  in  form  and  volume. 

With  regard  to  the  external  force,  the  simplest  case 
is  that  in  which  an  uniform  normal  pressure  alone  acts  on 
the  body ;  in  this  case  no  account  need  be  taken  of  changes 
in  the  body's  form,  in  determining  the  external  work,  but  only 
of  its  alteration  in  volume.  Here  we  may  take  the  condition 
of  the  body  as  known,  if  of  the  three  magnitudes,  tempera- 
ture, pressure  and  volume,  which  we  will  denote  as  before 
by  T,  p  and  v,  any  two  are  given.  According  as  we  choose 
for  this  purpose  v  and  T,  or  p  and  T,  or  v  and  p,  so 
we  obtain  one  of  the  three  systems  of  equations,  which  in 
Chapter  V.  are  numbered  (26),  (26)  and  (27) :  these  equa- 
tions we  will  now  use  to  determine  the  different  specific  heats 
and  other  quantities,  related  to  changes  in  temperature, 
pressure,  and  volume. 


176      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOHT  OF  HEAT. 

§  2.  Improved  Denotation  for  the  Differential  Coeffi- 
cients. 

If  the  above-named  equations  of  Chapter  V.  are  referred 
to  a  unit  of  weight  of  the  substance,  the  differential  coefS- 

cient  -^  will  denote  in  equations  (25)  the  specific  heat  at 
constant  volume,  and  in  equations  (26)  the  specific  heat  at  con- 
stant pressure.     Similarly  -p  has  different  values  in  (25) 

and  (27)  and  -^  has  different  values  in  (26)  and  (27).    Such 

indeterminate  cases  always  occur  where  the -nature  of  the 
question  occasions  the  magnitudes  chosen  as  independent 
variables  to  be  sometimes  interchanged.  If  we  have  chosen 
any  two  magnitudes  as  independent  variables,  it  follows 
that  in  differentiating  according  to  one  we  must  take  the 
other  as  constant.  But  if,  whilst  keeping  the  first  of  these 
as  one  independent  variable  throughout,  we  then  choose  for 
the  other  different  magnitudes  in  succession,  we  naturally 
arrive  at  a  corresponding  number  of  different  significations 
for  the  differential  coefficients  taken  according  to  the  first 
variable. 

This  fact  induced  the  author,  in  his  paper  "  On  various 
convenient  forms  of  the  fundamental  equations  of  the  Me- 
chanical Theory  of  Heat,"*  to  propose  a  system  of  denotation 
which  so  far  as  he  knows  had  riot  been  in  use  before.  This 
was  to  subjoin  to  the  differential  coefficient  as  an  index  the 
magnitude  which  was  taken  as  constant  in  differentiating. 
For  this  purpose  the  differential  coefficient  was  inclosed  in 
brackets  and  the  index  written  close  to  it,  a  line  being  drawn 
above'  the  latter,  to  distinguish  it  from  other  indices,  which 
might  appear  at  the  same  place.  The  two  differential  co- 
efficients named  above,  which  represent  the  specific  heat 
at  constant  volume  and  at  constant  pressure,  would  thus  be 

written  respectively  (-T^jand  \^ji)_-     This  method  was 

soon  adopted  by  various  writers,  but  the  line  was  generally 

*  Beport  of  the  Katuralists'  Society  of  Zwrich,  1865,  and  Pogg.  Ann.,  Vol. 
cxxv.  p.  353. 


ON  HOMOGENEOUS  BODIES.  17T 

left  out  for  the  sake  of  conveniencei  More  recently*  the 
author  introduced  a  simplei'  form  of  writing,  which  yet 
retained  th?  essential  advantage  of  the  method.  This  con- 
sisted in  placing  the  index  next  to  d,  the  sign  of  differentia- 
tion. The  brackets  were  thus  rendered  needless  and  also  the 
horizontal  line,  because  no  other  index  is  in  general  placed 
in  this  position.  The  two  above-named  differential  coeffi- 
cients would  thus  be  written  -^  and  -~  ;  and  this  method 

dT  dl 

will  be  adopted  in  what  follows. 

§  3.    Relations  between  the  Differential  Coefficients  of 
Pressure,  Volume,  and  Temperature.- 

If  the  condition  of  the  body  is  determined  by  any  two  of 
the  magnitudes.  Temperature,  Volume,  and  Pressure,  we 
may  consider  each  of  these  as  a  function  of  the  two  others, 
and  thus  form  the  following  six  differential  coeffiicients  : 

d,p     d^p     djo     djV     dJI     d„T 
dT'    dv'   dT'   dp'    dv  '    dp' 

In  these  the  suffixes,  which  shew  which  magnitude  is 
to  be  taken  as  constant,  may  be  omitted,  provided  we  agree 
once  for  all  that  in  any  differential  coefficient  that  one  of  the 
three  magnitudes,  T,p,  v,  which  does  not  appear,  is  to  be  con- 
sidered as  constant  for  that  occasion.  We  shall  however 
retain  them  for  the  sake  of  clearness,  and  because  we  shall 
meet  with  other  differential  coefficients  between  the  same 
m.agnitudes,  for  which  the  constant  magnitude  is  not  the 
same  as  here. 

The  investigations  to  be  made  by  help  of  these  six  dif- 
ferential coefficients  will  be  facilitated,  if  the  relations  which 
exist  between  t}iem  are  laid  down  beforehand.  In  the  first 
place  it  is  clear  that  amongst  the  six  there  are  three  pairs 
which  are  the  reciprocals  of  each  other.  If  we  take  v  as 
constant,  T  and  p  will  then  be  so  connected  that  each  may 
be  treated  as  a  simple  function  of  the  other.  The  same  holds 
with  T  and  v  where  p  is  constant,  and  with  v  and  p  when  T 

*  "On  the  principle  of  the  Mean  Brgal  and  its  application  to  the  mole- 
cular motions  of  Gases."  Proceedings  of  the  Niederrhein.  Ges.  fur  Natur- 
und  Seilkunde,  1874,  p,  183. 

c.  12 


178  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOKY  OP  HEAT. 

is  constant.    Hence  we  may  put 

_1 d^    »L  =  ^    _L  =  ^  (^^ 

<y     dT'   d^    dT'   d^     df ^  ^' 

dp  dv  dv 

To  examine  further  the  relation  between  these  three 
pairs,  we  will  by  way  of  example  treat  ^  as  a  function  of 
T  and  V.    Then  the  complete  differential  equation  for  p  is 


Itp  is  constant,  we  must  put  in  this  equation, 

d^ 
dT 


dp  =  6,    dv  =  ^dT; 


whence  it  becomes 


whence 


0  =  ^dT+^§§,dT: 
dT  dv  dT 

^x^x^  =  -l (2). 

dv      dT     dp 


By  means  of  this  equation  combined  with  equations  (1), 
we  may  express  each  of  the  six  differential  coefficients  by  the 
product  or  the  quotient  of  two  other  differential  coefficients. 

§  4.     Complete  Differential  Equations  for  Q. 

We  will  now  return  to  the  consideration  of  the  heat  taken 
.  in  and  given  out  by  the  body.     If  we  denote  the  specific 
heat  at  constant  volume  by  C^,  and  at  constant  pressure  by 
Gp,  and  take  the  weight  of  the  body  as  unity,  we  have 

dT       "      dT~    "' 

.    We  have  also  the  equations  (25)  and  (26)  of  Chapter  V., 
which  with  our  present  notation  will  be  written  as  follows : 

djQ^rpd^  dTQ__rpd£ 

dv         dT'      dp  dT' 


ON  HOMOGENEOUS  BODIES,  179 

Hence  we  can  write  down  the  following  complete  differen- 
tial equations : 

dQ  =  C,dT+T^,dv (3), 

dQ  =  C^dT-T^^^dp (4). 

From  these  two  we  easily  obtain  a  third  differential  equa- 
tion for  Q,  which  relates  to  t)  and  p  as  independent  variables. 
For  multiplying  the  first  equation  by  G^  and  the  second  by 
G„  subtracting,  and  dividing  the  result  by  (7^—  0„  we  have 

These  three  equations  correspond  exactly  to  those  obtained 
in  Chapter  II.  for  perfect  gases,  except  that  the  latter  are 
simplified  by  applying  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac. 
The  equation  expressing  this  law  is 

pv  =  RT, 
whence  we  have 

^  ^  -B,       d^  _R 
dT      V  '     dT     p' 

Substituting  these  values  in  the  above  equations,  and  in  the 

last  putting  -^  for  T,  we  get 

dQ=G,dT  +  ^dv, 

dQ  =  G^dT-^dp, 

C  0 

dQ  =  Q-_jQ  pdv  +  Q  Zc  ^'^^' 

These  equations  are  the  same  as  (11),  (15)  and  (16)  of 
Chapter  II. 

The  equations  (3),  (4)  and  (5)  are  not  immediately  inte- 
grable,  as  has  been  already  shewn  with  respect  to  the  special 
equations  holding  for  gases.    For  equations  (.3)  and  (4)  this 

12—2 


180  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOKT  OF  HEAT. 

follows  from  equations  already  given.  If  in  the  last  equa- 
tions of  the  systems  (25)  and  (26)  of  Chapter  :¥.  we  use  the 
symbols  G,  and  G^,,  and  also  the  method  above  explained  of 
writing  the  differential  coefficients,  we  have 

dv  ~   dT"    dp         dr ^  ^" 

Whereas  the  conditions  which  must  be  fulfilled,  if  (3)  and 
(4)  are  to  be  integrable,  are  as  follows : 

dflv^rpdlp     d^,      d^G^^     „djv     dj) 
dv         dT^'^dT'       dp  dr     dT' 

By  a  similar  but  longer  process  we  may  shew  that  equa- 
tion (5)  is  not  integrable;  as  may  at  once  be  concluded  from 
the  fact  that  it  is  derived  from  equations  (3)  and  (4), 

These  three  equations  thus  belong  to  that  class  of  com- 
plete differential  equations  which  are  described  in  the  Intro- 
duction, and  which  can  only  be  integrated  if  a  further  relation 
between  the  variables  is  given,  and  the  path  of  the  variation 
thereby  fixed. 

§  5.  Specific  Seat  at  Gonstant  Volwne  and  at  Gonstant 
Pressure. 

If  in  equation  (4)  we  substitute  for  the  indeterminate 

differential  dp  the  expression  -^  dT,  we  introduce  the  special 

case  in  which  the  body  changes  its  temperature  by  dT,  the 
volume  remaining  constant.     If  we  divide  hj  dTwe  have  on 

the  left-hand  side  the  differential  coefficient  -^  ,  which  is 

the  specific  heat  at  constant  volume  and  has  been  denoted 
by  (7„.  Hence  we  obtain  the  following  relation  between 
Cf.  andC,: 

C.=  C,-2^g,x^ (^)- 

Substituting  in  equation  (5)  the  value  of  G^,  —  G„  given 
by  this  equation,  we  obtain  the  following  simpler  form : 

dQ^G/^dv  +  G/^dp .(8). 


ON  HOMOGENEOUS  BODIES.  181 

If  by  means  of  equation  (7)  we  proceed  to  determine  the 
specific  heat  at  constant  volume  from  that  at  constant  pres- 
sure, it  is  requisite  first  to  make  a  slight  change  in  the 

equation.     The  differential  coefficient  -^  contained  therein 

aT 

expresses  the  expansion  of  the  body  upon  a  rise  of  tempera- 
ture, and  may  generally  be  taken  as  known,  but  the  other 

differential  coefficient  -^  cannot  in  general  be  determined 

for  solid  and  liquid  bodies  by  direct  experiment.     However 
from  equation  (2)  we  have 

d^ 
d,p^_dT 
dT      '  djv' 

dp 

In  this  fraction  the  numerator  is  tlie  differential  coeffi- 
cient already  discussed,  and  the  denominator  expresses,  if 
taken  with  a  negative  sign,  the  diminution  of  volume  by  an 
increase  of  pressure,  or  the  compressibility  of  the  body ;  and 
this  for  a  large  number  of  liquids  has  been  directly  measured, 
whilst  for  solids  it  may  be  approximately  calculated  from  the 
coefficients  of  elasticity.    Equation  (7)  now  becomes 

(d^X 

dp 

If  the  specific  heats  are  expressed  not  in  mechanical  but 
in  ordinary  units,  we  may  denote  them  by  c„  and  c,, ;  the  equa- 
tion then  takes  the  form : 

T\dT  ,„, 

''-'^■^E-W • ^^^)- 

dp 

In  applying  this  equation  to  a  numerical  calculation  we 
iinust  remember,  :that  in  the  differential  coefficients  the  unit 
of  volume  must  be  the  cube  of  the  unit  of  length  which  has 


182      ON  THE  MKCHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

been  used  for  determining  E :  and  that  the  unit  of  pressure 
must  be  the  pressure  which  a  unit  of  weight  exerts  on  a  unit 
of  surface.  If,  as  is  usually  the  case,  the  coefficients  of  ex- 
pansion and  compression  refer  to  other  units,  they  must  be 
reduced  to  those  above  mentioned. 

Since  the  differential  coefficifent  ~-  is  always  negative,  the 

specific  heat  at  constant  volume  must  always  be  less  than 
that  at  constant  pressure.    The  other  differential  coefficient 

jm  is  generally  positive.     In  the  case  of  water  it  is  zero  at 

the  temperature  of  maximum  density,  and  accordingly  the 
two  specific  heats  are  equal  at  that  temperature.  At  all 
other  temperatures,  both  above  and  below,  the  specific  heat 
at  constant  volume  is  less  than  that  at  constant  pressure;  for 

although  the  differential  coefficient  -^  is  negative  below  the 

temperature  of  maximum  density,  yet,  as  it  is  the  square  of  this 
which  occurs  in  the  formula,  it  has  no  influence  on  its  value. 
As  an  example  of  the  application  of  equation  (7),  we  will 
calculate  the  difference  between  the  two  specific  heats  in 
the  case  of  water  at  certain  known  temperatures.  According 
to  the  observations  of  Kopp  (see  his  tables  in  Lehrbuch 
der  Phys.  u.  theor.  Ghimie,  p.  204),  we  have  the  following 
coefficients  of  expansion  in  the  case  of  water,  its  volume  at 
4°  being  taken  as  unity : 

at    0°  -0^000061, 
„  25°  +0-00025, 
„  50"  +0-00045. 

According  to  the  observations  of  Grassi*,  we  have  for  the 
compressil^ility  of  water  the  following  numbers,  which  express 
the  diminution  of  volume  upon  an  increase  of  pressure  of  one 
atmosphere,  in  the  form  of  a  decimal  of  the  volume  at  the 
original  pressure : 

at    0"    0-000050, 

„  25°    0-000046, 

,i  50°    0-000044. 

*  Ann.  de  Chim.  et  de  Phys.  3rd  ser.  Vol.  xxxi.  p.  437,  and  Kronig'g 
Joum.  fiir  Physik  des  Auslandes,  Vol.  ii.  p.  129. 


ON  HOMOGENEOUS  BODIES.  183 

We  will  now,  as  an  example,  perform  the  calculation  for 
the  temperature  of  25°.  The  unit  of  length  may  be  the 
metre,  the '  unit  of  weight  the  kilogram.  We  must  then 
take  the  cubic  metre  as  the  unit  of  volume ;  and,  since  a 
kilogram   of  water  at  4°  contains   O'OOl  cubic  metres,  we 

d  1) 

must,  in  order  to  obtain  -^,  multiply  the  coefficient  of  ex- 
pansion given  above  by  O'OOl.     Thus  we  have 

^  =  0-00000025  =  25  X  lO"*. 

For  compression  we  must,  by  what  has  been  said,  take  as 
unit  the  volume  which  the  water  contained  at  the  tem- 
perature in  question  and  at  the  original  pressure  (which  latter 
we  may  assume  to  be  the  ordinary  pressure  of  one  atmosphere). 
This  volume  at  25°  =  0-001003  cubic  metres.  Further  we 
have  taken  one  atmosphere  as  unit  of  pressure,  whereas  we 
must  take  the  pressure  of  1  kilogramme  on  1  square  metre  ; 
in  which  case  a  pressure  of  one  atmosphere  is  expressed  by 
10,333.    Accordingly,  we  must  put 

dj,v  _      0-000046  X  0-001003  _      , .      ^  „_i3 

^-  Ipss  ^"""^^  • 

Further,  we  have  at  25°,  7=  273  +  25  =  298 ;  and  for  E 
we  will  take  Joule's  value  424.  Substituting  these  numbers 
in  equation  (76),  we  get 


298     25^     IT" 
■  424  ^  45  ^  10" 


c„  -  c,  =  T^  X  -7^  X  ^7^5  =  0-0098. 


Jn  the  same  way  we  obtain. from  the  values  given  above 
for  the  coefficients  of  expansion  and  compression  at  0°  and 
50°  the  following  numbers : 

at    0°,  Cj,-c,  =  0-0005, 
„  50°,  c^-c,  =  0-0358. 

If  we  now  give  to  Cp,  or  the  specific  heat  at  constant  pres- 
sure, the  experimental  values  found  by  Regnault,  we  obtain 
for  the  two  specific  heats  the  following  pairs  of  values: 


184  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT, 

at     0° 

„  25° 
,.  50- 


9995, 

'c^  =  1-0016 
c,  =  0-9918, 

c^  =  1-0042 
9684. 


fe  =  l-C 
k  =  0£ 


§  6.     Specific  Heats  under  other  circumstances. 

In  the  same  way  as  we  have  determined  the  specific  heat 
at  constant  volume  in  the  last  section,  we  may  determine  also 
the  specific  heat  corresponding  to  various  other  circumstances, 
since  we  may  by  equation  (4)  fix  its  relation  to  the  specific 
heat  at  constant  pressure. 

Thus,  if  the  circumstances  are  given  under  which  the 
heating  takes  place,  the  two  differentials  dT  and  dp  are  no 
longer  independent,  but  the  one  is  determined  by  the  other. 

We  can  therefore  write  for  dp  the  product  ^  dT,  in  which 

—,  is  a  known  function  of  the  variables  on  which  the  con- 
dl 

dition  of  the  body  depends.     Substituting  this  product  for 

dp  in  equation  (4),  dividing  hj  dT,  and  denoting  by  G  the 

quotient  -M,,  which  stands  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  equa- 
tion, and  which  expresses  the  specific  heat  under  the  given 
circumstances,  we  obtain 

'^="--^^4? ■■■■» 

If  the  specific  heat  is  to  be  expressed  in  ordinary  units, 
we  may  use  the  symbol  c  instead  of  C ;  and  the  equation 
becomes 

c^c--^^  (9a) 

"    E'dfdT ^^"^• 

We  will  employ  this  equation,  by  way  of  example,  to  de- 
termine the  specific  heats  which  came  under  consideration  in 
the  two  last  chapters,  viz.  (1)  the  specific  heat  of  water,  wh^n 
in  contact  with  steam  at  maximum  pressure ;  (2)  the  specific 


ON  HOMOGENEOUS  BODIES.  185 

heat  of  water  and  ice,  when  the  pressure  changes  with  the 
temperature  in  such  a  way  that  the  temperature  of  melting 
corresponding  to  the  pressure  at  any  moment  is  always  equal 
to  the  temperature  which  exists  at  that  moment. 

In  the  first  case  we  have  simply  to  give  to  -^  the  value 

corresponding  to  the  intensity  of  pressure  of  the  steam.  For 
the  temperature  100°  this  value  is  370,  taking  as  unit  of 
pressure   a   kUbgram    per    square   metre.     With   regard  to 

^,  the  researches  of  Kopp  give  0-00080  as  the  coefficient  of 

expansion  of  water  at  100°,  taking  the  volume  of  water  at  4° 
as  unity.   This  number  must  be  multiplied  by  Q-OOl,  in  order  to 

obtain  the  value  of  -^  in  the  case  when  a  cubic  metre  is 

taken  as  the  unit  of  volume  and  a  kilogram  as  the  unit  of 
weight:  we  thus  obtain  the  number  0'0000008.  Lastly  we 
write  for  T  the  absolute  temperature  for  100°,  or  373,  and 
for  E,  as  usual,  424.     Then  equation  (9a)  becomes 

c  =  c^  -  ll^  X  0-0000008  X  370  =  c^  -  0-00026. 

If  we  take  for  the  specific  heat  of  water  at  constant  pres  - 
sure,  and  at  100°,  the  values  derived  from  the  empirical 
formula  of  Regnault,  we  obtain  for  the  two  specific  heats 
which  we  wish  to  compare,  the  following  simultaneous  values : 

c,  =  1-013, 
c  =  1-01274. 

It  thus  appears  that  these  two  quantities  are  so  nearly 
equal,  that  it  would  have  been  useless  to  take  account  of  the 
difference  between  them  in  the  calculations  as  to  saturated 
steam. 

The  consideration  of  the  influence  of  pressure  on  the 
freezing  point  of  liquids  shews  that  a  great  change  in  the 
pressure  only  produces  a  very  slight  alteration  in  the  freezing 

point;  hence  in  this  case  -^  must  be  very  large.     If  we 

assume,  according  ,to.  the  calculations  in  Chapter  VII.,  that  an 


186      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

increase  of  pressure  of  one  atmosphere  lowers  the  freezing 
point  by  O-OOTSS"  C,  we  have 

dp  _       10  333  , 

dT  ~      0'00733 ' 

h«nce  equation  (9ffl)  becomes,  giving  to  T  the  value  at  the 
freezing  point,  viz.  273,  and  to  E  the  value  424, 

273      10333_^_      .908000^ 
'^ -  «=*  +  424  "*  000733  ^  dT~ °*  +  ^"^"""  dT 

Applying  this  equation  first  to  water,  we  will  tal^e  Kopp's 
value  for  the  coefficient  of  expansion  of  water  at  0°,  viz. 
—  0000061 ;  then,  using  the  kilogram  as  unit  of  weight,  and 
the  cubic  metre  as  unit  of  volume,  we  have 

^=  -  0-000000061 ; 

whence,  from  the  equation  above, 

c  =  c^-  0-055. 

As  Cj,  is  here  =  1,  being  the  ordinary  heat  unit,  we  have  finally 

c  =  0-945. 

Next,  to  apply  the  equation  to  ice,  we  will  take  the  linear 
coefficient  of  expansion  of  ice  at  0'000051,  following  the 
experiments  of  Schumacher,  Pohrt,  and  Moritz ;  whence  the 
cubic  coefficient  will  be  0-000153.  In  order  to  reduce  this 
number  to  the  required  units,  we  must  multiply  it  by 
0-001087,  the  volume  of  a  kilogram  of  ice  in  cubic  metres: 
whence  we  obtain 

^=0-000000166. 
dl 

Substituting  this  value,  the  equation  becomes 

c  =  c,+ 0151. 
According  to  Person*  c,  =  0-48  :  hence  we  have  finally 

c  =  0-631. 
*  Coinpte^  Ji^Ttdus,  Vol.  xzz.  p.  526. 


ON  HOMOGENEOUS  BODIES.  187 

These  values,  0'945  and  0'631,  were  those  employed  in  Chap- 
ter VII.  for  the  calculation  by  ■which  the  relation  between 
the  heat  expended  in  fusion  and  the  temperature  of  fusion 
was  determined. 

§  7.    Isentropic  Variations  of  a  Body. 

Instead  of  determining  the  kind  of  variation  of  condition, 
which  a  body  is  to  undergo,  by  means  of  an  equation  con- 
taining one  or  more  of  the  quantities  T,  p,  v,  we  will  now 
lay  down  as  a  condition,  that  no  heat  is  imparted  to  or  with- 
drawn from  the  body  during  its  variation.  This  is  expressed 
mathematically  by  the  equation 

If  this  equation  holds,  we  have  further 

that  is,  the  entropy  S  of  the  body  remains  constant.  We 
will  therefore  give  to  this  kind  of  variation  the  designation 
isentropic,  already  applied  to  the  curves  of  pressure  which 
correspond  to  it :  and  will  characterize  the  differential  co- 
efficients formed  in  discussing  it  by  the  index  8. 
If  in  equation  (3)  we  put  dQ  =  0,  we  have 

If  we  divide  this  equation  by  dv,  the  differential  coeffi- 

dT 
cient  -7-,  thus  obtained,  refers  to  the  case  of  an  isentropic 

variation,  and  hence  we  must  write  : 

d,^=.^^i£  no) 

dv         c'^dT ''^"^• 


Similarly  we  obtain  from  equation  (4), 

x^,  ....(11). 


d,T     T  __djj 


dp      Cr,     dT 
Applying  either  equation  (5)  or  equation  (7),  we  have 

0-c/£dv^C.pp; 


188  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

,  d,v        C,  dT 

whence  -7—  =  —  7=r  T~  • 

dp         Gp  d^ 

dT 
Applj'ipg  equations  (1)  (2),  this  equation  becomes 

dp  _0^     d£  ,^  ,> 

dp'o^'^dp  ^  ^'• 

If  here  we  give  to  0,  its  value  from  (7a),  we  obtain 

d„v  _d,v      T  /d^v\'  ,    . 

-d^—d^^-oXdr)  ^^^>- 

If  we  take  the  reciprocal  of  (12),  we  obtain  the  equation 

^^  =  g.x^    (14). 

dv      C,      dv 

This  equation,  if  transformed  in  the  same  way  as  (12), 
gives 

dv       dv      C,\dTj     ^     '' 

These  differential  coeflScients  between  volume  and  pres- 
sure, for  the  case  of  the  entropy  being  constant,  have  been 
applied  to  calculate  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  sound  in 
gases  and  liquids,  as  has  been  already  described  in  Chap- 
ter II.  for  the  case  of  perfect  gases. 

* 

§  8.  Special  Forms  of  the  Fimdamental  Equations  for 
an  Expanded  Bod. 

Hitherto  we  have  always  considered  the  external  force  to 
be  a  uniform  surface  pressure.  We  will  now  give  an  ex- 
ample of  a  different  kind  of  force,  and  will  take  the  case  of 
an  elastic  rod  or  bar,  which  is  extended  lengthwise  by  a 
tensional  strain,  e.g.  a  hanging  weight,  whilst  no  forces  act 
Upon  it  in  a  ti'ansVerse  direction.  Instead  of  a  tensional  we 
may  take  a  compressive  strain,  so  long  as  the  rod  is  not  thereby 
bent.  This  we  should  simply  treat  in  the  formulae  as  a 
negative  tension.  The  condition  that  no  transverse  force 
acts  on  the  rod  would  be  exactly  fulfilled  only  if  the  rod  were 


ON  HOMOGENEOUS  BODIES.  189 

placed  in  vacuo  and  thus  freed  from  the  atmospheric  pres- 
sure. But,  since  the  longitudinal  strain,  which  acts  on  the 
cross  section,  is  very  large  in  comparison  with  the  atmos- 
pheric pressure  upon  an  equal  area,  the  latter  may  be 
neglected. 

Let  P  be  the  force,  and  I  the  length  of  the  rod,  when 
acted  on  by  the  force  and  at  temperature  T.  The  length, 
and  in  general  the  whole  condition,  of  the  rod  is  under  these 
conditions  determined  by  the  quantities  P  and  T;  and  we  may 
therefore  choose  these  as  independent  variables. 

Let  us  now  suppose  that  by  an  indefinitely  small  change 
in  the  force  or  temperature  or  both,  the  length  I  is  increased 
by  dl.  The  work  Fdl  will  then  have  been  done  by  the 
force  P.  Since  however  in  our  formulae  we  have  taken  as 
positive  not  the  work  done  but  the  work  destroyed  by  a 
force,  the  equation  for  determining  the  external  work  must 
be  written 

dW=-Pdl (16). 

Taking  Z  as  a  function  of  P  and  T,  we  may  write  this  equa- 
tion as  follows : 


dW=-F{gdF+§dT); 


dW       ^dl     dW        „  dl 
whence  _=-P_;   _=-P_. 

Differentiating  the  first  of  these  equations  according  to  T 
and  the  second  according  to  P,  and  observing  that,  since 

dP 

P  and  T  are  independent  variables,  -jfjj  =  0,  we  have 


A(W] p. 


d'l 


dT\dP)  dPdT' 


dP\dT)~     dT        dTdP- 
If  we  subtract  the  second  of  these  from  the  first,  and 
substitute  for  the  difference  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the 
resulting  equation  the   symbol  already   employed  for  the 
same  purpose,  viz.  Df^,  we  have 

I>rT  =  §,-- (17). 


190     ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OP  HEAT. 

This  value  of  2)pj,  we  will  apply  to  equations  (12),  (13), 
(14),  (15)  of  Chapter  V.,  substituting  P  for  x  in  this  parti- 
cular case  throughout.  We  then  obtain  the  fundamental 
equations,  in  the  following  form  : 

dT\dP)     dP\dT)     dT ^     ^' 

±(dQ\_±(dQ\_l_dQ 

dT\dP)     dP\dT)~  T  dT ^    '' 

g=^§ (^«)' 

dP  [dTj~-^  dT' ^     '■ 

§  9.  Alteration  of  Temperature  during  the  extension  of 
the  Mod. 

The  form  of  equation.  (20)  indicates  a  special  relation 
between  two  processes,  viz.  the  alteration  in  temperature 
produced  by  an  alteration  in  length,  and  the  alteration 
in  length  produced  by  an  alteration  in  temperature.  Thus 
if,  as  is  usually  the  case,  the  rod  lengthens  when  heated 

under  a  constant  strain,  and  -^  is  therefore  positive,  the 

equation  shews  that  t=  is  also  positive ;  whence  it  follows 

that,  if  the  rod  is  lengthened  by  an  increase  in  the  external 
force,  it  must  take  in  heat  from  without  if  it  is  to  keep  its 
temperature  constant,  or  in  other  words,  if  no  heat  is  im- 
parted to  it,  it  will  cool  during  extension.  On  the  other 
hand  if,  as  may  happen  in  exceptional  cases,  the  rod  shortens 

when  heated  at  constant  pressure,  and  therefore  -^^  is  nega- 

tive,  then  the  equation  shews  that  -j^  is  also  negative.     In 

this  case  the  rod  must  give  out  heat,  when  lengthened  by 
an  increase  of  strain,  if  it  is  to  preserve  a  constant  tempera- 
ture ;  and  if  no  giving  out  of  heat  takes  place  it  must  grow 
warmer  in  lengthening. 


ON  HOMOGENEOUS  BODIES.  191 

The  magnitude  of  the  alteration  of  temperature  which 
takes  place  if  the  force  is  varied,  without  any  heat  being 
imparted  to  or  taken  from  the  rod,  is  easily  determined  if 
we  form  the  complete  differential  equation  of  the  first  order 
for  Q,  in  the  same  way  as  we  have  already  done  in  the  case 
of  bodies  under  a  uniform  surface  pressure.     The  differen- 

f?  (1 
tial  coefficient  -jn   is  determined  by  equation  (20),  in  which 

we  will  write  for  -ttt,  the  fuller  form  -^ .    In  order  to  ex- 
dl  dl 

press  the  other  differential  coefficient   -^  in  a  convenient 
^  dT 

form,  we  may  denote  the  specific  heat  of  the  rod  under 

constant  strain  by  C>,  and  the  weight  of  the  rod  by  M.  Then 

we  have 

dT  -^^^^' 
and  the  complete  differential  equation  is  as  follows  : 

dQ  =  MG^dT+T^ (22). 

If  we  now  assume  that  no  heat  is  imparted  to  or  taken 
from  the  rod,  we  must  put  dQ  =  0,  which  gives 

0  =  MC^dT+T^dP. 

dT 
If  we  divide  this  equation  by  dP,  the  quotient  -^p  ex- 
presses that  differential  coefficient  of  T  according  to  P,  in 
the  formation  of  which  the  entropy  is  taken  as  constant; 

it  should  therefore  be  written  more  fully  -f^-     We  thus 
obtain  the  following  equation : 

d,T_       T       dj 

'dF~~Mcr,''dT ^^^^■ 

This  equation  was  first  developed,  though  in  a  slightly 
different  form,  by  Sir  William  Thomson,  and  its  correctness 
was  experimentally  verified  by  Joule*.    The  agreement  of 

•  Phil.  Traiw.,  1869. 


192     ON  THE.  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

observation  and  tteory  was  specially  brought  out  by  a  pbe- 
nomenon  occurring  with  India  rubber,  which  had  already 
been  noticed  by  Gough,  but  was  then  observed  also  by  Joule 
and  verified  by  accurate  measurements.  So  long  as  India 
rubber  is  not  extended  at  all,  or  only  by  a  very  small  force, 
it  behaves,  with  regard  to  alterations  in  length  produced  by 
alterations  in  temperature,  in  the  same  way  as  other  bodies ; 
i.  e.  it  lengthens  when  heated  and  shortens  when  cooled.  When 
however  it  is  extended  by  a  greater  force  its  behaviour  is 
the  opposite;  i.e.  it  shortens  when  heated  and   lengthens 

when  cooled.     The  differential  coefficient  -^  is  thu^  positive 

in  the  first  case  and  negative  in  the  second.  In  accordance 
with  this  it  exhibits  the  peculiarity  that  it  is  cooled  by  an 
increase  of  the  strain,  so  long  as  the  strain  remains  small, 
but  is  heated  by  an  increase  of  the  strain  when  the  strain 
is  large.     This  agrees  with  equation  (23),  according  to  which 

j^-  must  always  have  the  opposite  sign  to  -~^ . 

§  10.     Further  Deductions  from  the  Equations, 

The  complete  differential  equation  (22)  may  also  be  so 
formed  as  to  present  T  and  I,  or  I  and  P,  as  the  independent 
variables.  For  this  purpose  we  must  first  state  the  relation 
which,  holds  between  the  differential  coefficients  of  the 
quantities  T,  I,  and  P.  This  relation  will  be  expressed  by 
an  equation  of  the  same  form  as  (2),  viz, : 

'                         U/^Jr      (tpt      a^  J.          _  ,     . 

W''df''~dP^~^ ^^*''- 

First,  to -form  the  complete  differential  equation  which 
contains  T  and  I  as  independent  variables,  we  must  consider 
P  as  a  function  of  T  and  I,  and  accordingly  write  (22)  in, the 
form 

dQ  =  MG,dT+  T  ^  (g  dT  +  ^  dl) 
-[MO.^Tf/^)dT  +  T%'-§dl 


ON  aoMOGENEOTD'S!  BODIESi  193^ 

Transforming  the  last  term  by  means  of  equation  (24), 
we  have 

dQ=^(MG,  +  T^x^^)dT-T^,dl (25). 

If  we  denote  by  0,  the  specific  heat  at  constant  length, 
the  coefficient  of  dT  in  this  equation  must  be  equal  to  MCi ; 
whence 

•  ^'=^'+J4^f » 

Transforming  this  by  means  of  (24),  we  have 
T     UtI 

^'-^'■-M^'-dj; (27)- 

dp 

Equation  (25)  assumes  then  the  following  simplified 
form: 

dQ  =  MO,dT-T^dl (28). 

Secondly,  to  form  the  complete  differential  equation  which 
contains  I  and  P  as  independent  variables,  we  must  consider 
T  as  a  function  of  I  and  P.     Equation  (22)  then  becomes 

dQ  =  MC^{^+%dP)  +  T'^dP 

=  Mc/-^dl  +  (Mc/^^T'f^dP. 

Transforming  the  coefficient  of  dP,  we  have 

dQ  =  M-G/-^dl,-(MO^+T'^.^^)l^dP.         . 

By  equation  (26)  MOi  can  be  substituted^for  the  expression 
in  brackets.     The  equation  then  becomes 

dQ  =  MG,^dl  +  MC,^dP (29). 

We  will  again  apply  equations  (28)  and  (29)  'fo  the  case 
c.  13 


aad  the  secoead 


194      ON  THE  MKCHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

of  the  rod  when  it  neither  receives  nor  gives  out  any  heat, 
and  therefore  dQ  =  0.    The  first  equation  then  becomes 

'-i-m^i? ^''^•' 

dl 
But  by  equation  (24)  we  may  write  the  latter  thus : 

ds^  _  C^,     dji  ,„  w  V 

dp-o,''dP ^^^^' 

Giving  to  (7,' its  value  according  to  (27),  we  have 

dl_dl T_  /dpZy  ,  „. 

dP~dP    MOMt)  " ^    '' 

The  relation  between  length  and  stretching  force  which 

is  expressed  by  the  diflferential  coefficient  ^4,,  as  here  de- 
termined, is  that  which  has  to  be  applied  to  calculate  the 
velocity  of  sound  in  an  elastic  rod,  in  place  of  the  relation 

Expressed  by  the  differential  coefficient  -5^,  which  is  commonly 

used,  and  which  is  determined  by  the  coefficient  of  elasticity. 
In  the  same  way,  to  calculate  the  velocity  of  sound  ii;i 
gaseous  and  liquid  bodies,  we  must  use  the  relation  between 

volume  and  pressure  expressed  by  -~  in  place  of  that  ex- 
pressed by  -J- .    We  may  however  remark  that  in  treating 

of  the  propagation  of  sound,  in  cases  where  the  force  P  is 
not  large,  we  may  in  equation  (82),  which  serves  to  deter- 
mine -J-,  substitute  for  the  specific  heat  at  constant  tension, 

denoted  by  Cp,  the  specific  heat  at  constant  pressure,  as 
measured  in  the  ordinary  way  under  the  pressure  of  the 
atmosphere. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

DETERMINATION  OF  ENEBQT  AND  ENTBOPY. 

§  1.     General  Equations. 

In  former  chapters  we  have  repeatedly  spoken  of  the 
Energy  and  Entropy  of  a  body  as  being  two  magnitudes  of 
great  importance  in  the  Science  of  Heat,  which  are  determined 
by  the  condition  of  the  body  at  the  moment,  without  its 
being  necessary  to  know  the  way  in  which  the  body  has 
come  into  this  condition.  Knowing  these  magnitudes,  we 
can  easily  make  by  their  aid  various  calculations  relating 
to  the  body's  changes  in  condition,  and  the  quantity  of  heat 
thereby  brought  into  action.  One  of  these,  the  Energy,  has 
already  been  made  the  subject  of  many  valuable  researches, 
especially  by  Kirchhoff*,  and  the  method  of  determining  it  is 
therefore  more  accurately  known.  We  will  here  treat  of 
Energy  and  Entropy  simultaneously,  and  set  forth  side  by 
side  the  equations  which  serve  to  determine  them. 

In  Chapters  I.  and  III.  the  two  following  fundamental 
equations,  denoted  by  (III.)  and  (VI.)  were  developed : 

dQ  =  dU+dW. (Ill), 

dQ^TdS. (YI). 

Here  U  and  S  denote  the  Energy  and  Entropy  of  the 
body,  and  dU  and  dS'  the  changes  produced  in  them  by  an 
indefinitely  small  change  in  the  body's  condition :  dQ  is  the 
quantity  of  heat  taken  in  by  the  body  during  its  change; 

*  Pogg.  Am,.,  Vol.  cm.  p.  177. 

13—2 


196  ON   THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OP  HEAT. 

dW  the  external  work  performed;  and  T  tlie  absolute  tem- 
perature at  which  the  change  takes  place.  The  first  equa- 
tion is  applicable  to  any  indefinitely  small  change  of  con- 
dition, in  whatever  way  it  takes  place,  but  the  latter  can 
be  applied  only  to  such  changes  as  are  in  their  nature 
reversible.  These  two  equations  we  will  now  write  in 
the  form : 

dU=dQ-dW (1), 

dS  =  ^ (2). 

Their  integration  will  then  determine  U  and  8. 

Here  we  must  first  notice  a  point  which  has  already  been 
mentioned  with  regard  to  energy  in  Chapter  I.,  §  8.  It  is 
not  possible  to  determine  the  whole  energy  of  a  body,  but 
only  the  increase  which  the  energy  has  received,  whilst  the 
body  was  passing  into  its  present  condition  from  some  other 
which  we  choose  as  its  initial  condition ;  and  the  same  is  also 
true  of  the  Entropy. 

Now  to  apply  equation  (1).  Let  us  suppose  that  the  body- 
has  been  brought  into  its  present  condition  from  the  given 
initial  condition,  the  energy  of  which  we  will  denote  by  U„, 
by  any  convenient  path,  and  in  any  way  reversible  or  not 
reversible ;  and  let  us  suppose  dU  to  he  integrated  through 
the  range  of  this  change  in  condition.  The  value  of  this 
integral  will  be  simply  IT—  t/,.  The  integrals  oi  dQ  and 
dW  represent  the  whole  quantity  of  heat  which  the  body 
has  taken  in,  and  the  whole  external  work  which  it  has  per- 
formed, during  the  change  in  condition.  These  we  will  de- 
note by  Q  and  W.    Then  we  have  the  equation 

U=U,+  Q-W... (3). 

Hence  it  follows  that  if  for  any  mode  of  passing  from 

a  given  initial  condition  to  the  present  condition  of  the  body, 

we  can  determine  the  heat  taken  in  and  the  work  performed, 

,  we  thereby  know  also  the  energy  of  the  body,  except  as 

regards  one  constant  depending  on  the  initial  condition. 

Next  to  apply  equation  (2).  Let  us  suppose  that  the  body 
has  been  brought  into  its  present  condition  from  the  given 
initial  condition,  the  entropy  of  which  we  denote  by  S„,  by 
any  path  whatever,  but  by  a  process  which  is  reversible; 


DETERMINATION  OP  ENERGY  AND  ENTROPY.     197 

and  let  us  suppose  the  equation  integrated  for  this  change  in 
condition.  The  integral  of  dS  will  have  the  value  8  —  8„: 
whence  we  have 

S-S,  +  j^ (4). 

Hence  it  follows  that  if  for  any  passage -of  the  body,  by 
a  reversible  method  but  by  any  path  whatever,  from  a  given 
initial  condition  to  its  present  condition,  we  can  determine 

-fp- 1  we  shall  thereby  know  the  value  of  the  entropy,  ex- 
cept as  regards  one  constant  depending  on  the  initial  con- 
dition. 


/ 


§  2.  Differential  Equations  for  ike  Case  in,  which  only 
Reversible  Changes  take  place,  a/nd.  in  which  the  condition  of 
the  Body  is  determined  by  two  Independmi  Variables. 

If  we  apply  both  the  equations  (III.)  and  (VI.)  to  one 
and  the  same  indefinitely  small  and  reversible  change  in  the 
body's  condition,  the  element  dQ  will  be  the  same  in  both 
equations,  and  may  therefore  be  eliminated.  Hence  we 
have 

^dS=dU+dW (5). 

We  will  now  assume  that  the  condition  of  the  body  is 
determined  by  two  variables,  wMch,  as  in  Chapter  VI.,  we 
will  generally  denote  by  x  and  y,  signifying  by  these  certain 
magnitudes  to  be  fixed  later  on,  such  as  temperature, 
volume,  pressure.  If  the  condition  is  determined  by  x  and  y, 
then  all  magnitudes,  the  values  of  which  are  fixed  by  the  con- 
dition of  the  body  at  the  moment,  without  its  being  neces- 
sary to  know  the  way  in  which  the  body  has  come  into  that 
condition,  are  capable  of  being  represented  by  functions  of 
these  variables;  in  which  functions  the  variables  must  be' 
considered  as  independent  of  each  other.  Accordingly  the 
entropy  8  and  the  energy  U  must  be  looked  upon  as 
functions  of  x  and  y.  On  the  other  hand,  the  external  work 
W,  as  we  have  repeatedly  observed,  holds  a  completely  dif- 
ferent position  in  this  relation.  It  is  true  that  the  differ-!, 
ential  coefficients  of  W,  so  far  as  concerns  reversible  changes, 
may  be  considered  as  known  functions  of  x  and  y :  W  itself 
however  caimot  be  represented  by  such  a  function,  $,nd  can 


198      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

only  be  determined,  if  we  have  given  not  only  the  initial 
and  final  conditions  of  the  body,  but  also  the  path  by  which 
it  has  passed  from  one  to  the  other. 
If  in  equation  (5)  we  put 

dU^-^da,  +  ~^dy, 
,^^    dW.    ,  dW. 

that  equation  becomes 
^dS  ,    ,  rpdS  ,      [dU  ,dW\.  ^{dU     dW\, 

As  this  equation  must  hold  for  any  values  whatever  of  dx 
and  dy,  it  must  hold  for  the  cases  alnongst  others  in  which 
one  or  other  of  these  differentials  is  equal  to  zero.  Hence 
it  divides  into  the  two  following  equations : 


.(6). 


rpdS^md^ 

doe      dx       dx 
^dS^dJl     dW. 

dy      dy       dy 

From  these  equations  either  S  or  U  may  be  eliminated  by 

a  second  differentiation.     We  will  first  take  U,  as  this  gives 

rise  to  the  simplest  equation.     For  this  purpose  we  must 

differentiate  the  first  of  equations  (6)  according  to  y,  and  the 

second  according  to  x.   We  shall  write  the  second  differential 

coefficients  of  8  and  U  in  the  ordinary  manner :  but  the  differ- 

dW        dW 
ential  coefficients  of  -y-  and  -^ —  we  will  write  as  follows : 
dx  dy 

-r-  (^- land-^-  f-i— ).     This  is  with  the  same  obiect  as  in 
ay  \dx/         dx  \dy  J.  '' 

Chapter  V.,  viz.  to  shew  that  they  are  not  second  differential 

coefficients  of  a  function  of  x  and  y.    Finally  we  may  observe 

that  Tf  the  absolute  temperature  of  the  body,  which  in  this 


DETERMINATION  OF  ENERGY  AND  ENTROPY.    199 

investigation  we  assume  to  be  uniform  throughout  the  body, 
may  also  be  considered  as  a  function  of  a;  and  y.    We  thus  obtain 

dT^dS     ^  d'S  ^<PU      d  idW\ 
dy      dfX        dxdy     dxdy     dy\dx}' 

dT^dS    .^d'S  ^d'U      d  fdWs 
dx     dy        dydx     dydx     dx\dy )' 

Subtracting  the  second  of  these  equations  from  the  first, 
and  remembering  that 

d'S        d^S         ,    d^U      d^U 
,  and 


dxdy     dydx'  dxdy     dydx' 

we  have 

dT ^dS     dT^^dS_d/dW\      d  /dW\ 
dy     dx      dx     dy     dy\dxj     dx\dy )' 

The  right-hand  side  of  this  equation  we  have  named  in , 
Chapter  V.,  "the  work,  difference  referred  to  xy"  and 
have  denoted  it  by  D^/,  hence  we  may  put 

J.   _d  fdW\      d  /dW\  .^ 

"'  ,dy\dxj     dx\~d^)  '■'''' 

and  the  previous  equation  becomes 

dT     dS     dT     dS_ 

dy^dx     dx^dy~^^  ^  ^• 

This  is  the  differential  equation,  derived  from  equation  (5), 
which  serves  to  determine  {8). 

Secondly,  to  eliminate  8  from  equations  (6),  we  write  them 
in  the  following  form  : 

dS     1  dU      IdW 
cQ~'T  dx'^  T  dx' 

d,8_i^dU     1  dW 
dy-  T  dy  '^T  dy- 


200      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OP  HEAT. 

Differentiating  the  first  of  these  equations  according  to  yi^ 
.and  the  second  according  to  cs,  we  have 

d'S      1      d?U      1      dT    dU  ,   d   n  dW\ 


dxdy~ T     dxdy     T     dy      dx  '^ dy  \T  dxl' 

d'S      1      d^_±     dT    dJJ    ±n^\ 
dydx     T^  dydx     T^  dx  ^1^^  dx\T  dyj  ' 


Subtracting  the  second  of  these  equations  from  the  first, 
putting  all  the  terms  containing  U  in  the  resulting  equation 
on  the  left-hand  side,  and  multiplying  the  whole  equation  by 
I",  we  have 

^  X  —  -  —  X  — = r  F—  f-  —)  -A(l  ^)~ 

dy      dx      dx      dy  [dy  \T  dx  j     dx  \T  dy ) _ 

We  will  adopt  a  special  symbol  for  the  right-hand  side  of 
this  equation,  viz., 

""       [dy\T  dx)     dx\T  dy}\ ^'' 

and  we  may  point  out  that  between  D^  and  A,^  there  is  the 
following  relation: 

■       ■       ."     _„       dTdW    dTdW 

^-  =  ^^--^d^  +  S^  (10). 

Using  this  symbol,  the  above  equation  assumes  the  form 

■       •       dTdU_dTdU 
dy  dx      dx  dy 


=  K   (11). 


This    is    the   differential  equation,   derived  from  equation 
(5),  which  serves  to  determine  U. 

§  3.  Introduction  of  the  Temperature  as  one  of  the 
Independent  Variables. 

The  above  equations  take  a  specially  simple  form,  if  the 
temperature  2^  is  chosen  as  one  of  the  independent  variables. 
If  we  put  T=y,vfe  have 

—  =  1  —  =  0 
dy        '  dx 


DETERMINATION  OF  ENERGY  AND.  ENTROPY, 


201 


We  thus  obtain  from  (10)  the  following  expression  of  the 

dW 


relation  between  A,,,  and  D^ 


A,,=  TD,,- 


dx 


.(12). 


Equations  (8)  and  (11)  also  become 


dx        ' 


.(13); 


dU    ^ 

The  differential  coefficients  of  the  two  functions  8  and  U 
with  regard  to  x  are  thus  known.  For  their  differential 
coefficients  with  respect  to  T  we  will  take  the  expressions 
which  follow  directly  from  (2)  and  (1)  on  the  assumption 
that  the  condition  of  the  body  is  determined  by  T  and  x,  viz. : 


dS 
dT~ 

IdQ 
'TdT 

» 

dU 
dT 

dQ 
~'dT 

dW 
dT  J 

.(14). 


From  equations  (13)  and  (14)  we   can  form  the  following 
complete  differential  equations : 


dS  =  \,§,dT+D^ 


.dx, 


'^^=(i'^)^^+^-^^ 


(15). 


Since  8  and  U  must  be  capable  of  being  expressed  as 
functions  of  T  and  x,  in  which  functions  these'  two  variables 
may  be  taken  as  independent  of  each  other,  the  well-known 
condition  of  integrability  must  hold  for  the  case  of  the  two 
equations  just"  given.  For  the  first  equation  this  condi- 
tion is 

d  [\dQ\^dD^ 

dxKTdTj      dT  ' 


OF 


Uw)-^'-w (">• 


202  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OF  HEAT. 

which  is  equation  (15)  of  Chapter  V.     For  the  second  equa- 
tion the  condition  is 

dx\dT)~dx\dT)~  dT  ^''' 

This  equation  can  be  easily  shewn  to  depend  on  the  last. 
For  by  (12) 

Differentiating  this  equation  according  to  T,  we  have 
dK,_     dB^^  d  (dW\ 

'df~-^   dT  '^^^'~dT\dx)- 

Now,  remembering  that 


'^~dT\dx)     dx\dTJ' 


we  may  write  this  equation  as  follows : 

dA^^     dD,,_d^(dW\ 
dT  dT      dx\dTj' 

On  substituting  this  value  of  -~  in  equation  (17),  we  are 

brought  back  to  the  form  of  equation  (16). 

We  have  now  to  determine  8  and  U  themselves,  by 
integrating  equations  (15).  Let  us  suppose  that  the  body 
has  been  brought  into  its  present  condition,  by  any  path 
we  please,  from  an  initial  condition  for  which  the  quantities 
T,  8,  X,  TJ  have  the  values  T^,  8^,  x„,  U„  respectively :  and 
let  this  particular  change  of  condition  give  the  range  of  the 
integration.  As  an  example,  let  us  suppose  that  the  body 
is  first  heated  from  the  temperature  T„  to  the  temperature 
T,  while  the  other  variable  keeps  its  initial  value  x^,  and 
then  that  this  other  variable  changes  its  value  from  «„  to  x, 
while  the  temperature  remains  constant.     Then  we  have 


(18). 


(19). 


DETERMINATION  OF  ENERGY  ANB  ENTROPY.  203 

In  botli  these  equations  the  first  integral  on  the  right-hand 
side  is  a  simple  function  of  T,  whilst  the  second  is  a  function 
of  T  and  x. 

Let  us  now  make  the  opposite  assumption,  viz.  that  the 
change  of  x  first  takes  place  at  the  initial  value  of  T,  and 
then  the  change  of  T  at  the  final  value  of  x.  Then  we 
obtain 

In  both  these  equations  the  first  integral  on  the  right-hand 
side  is  a  simple  function  of  x,  and  the  second  of  T  and  x. 

By  what  has  been  said  above,  we  may  choose  any  other 
path  whatever,  instead  of  that  which  we  have  taken  as  our 
example,  in  which  path  the  changes  of  T  and  x  may  be 
transposed  in  any  way,  or  may  both  take  place  at  once 
according  to  any  law.  We  should  naturally  in  each  special 
case  choose  that  path,  for  which  the  data  requisite  to  perform 
the  calculation  are  most  accurately  known. 

§  4.  Bpedal  case  of  the  Differential  equations  on  the 
assumption  that  the  only  external  force  is  a  Uniform  Surface 
Pressure. 

If  we  assume  as  the  only  External  Force  a  Uniform 
Pressure  normal  to  the  surface,  we  must  put 

dW=pdv. 

„  dW       dv      ,  dW       dv 

Hence  t^  —  Pt-  ^^^d  —r-  =Pj-. 

dx     ^  dx  dy     "■  dy 

The  expressions  for  D^  and  A^  then  assume  peculiar  forms. 
Those  for  D^  have  been  already  considered  in  Chapter  V. 
We  have  first 

_    _  d  (    ^\  _^f   ^^ 
■^^~d^V'&)    di[Pd^)' 

"* ~       Uy  \T     dx)  .   dx\T^  dy) 


204  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

In  the  last  of  these  equations  we  will  put  for  th^  sake  of 
brevity : 

^  =  f, (20), 

whereby  it  becomes 

A    —  T^\  ^  {    ^'''\  ^  ^  (    ^'^\ 
"  \jly\    dx)     dx  \    dyl _ 

Performing    the     differentiation    in    these    equations,    and 

remembering  that   ,   ,  ■  =  ,    ,   ,  we  have 
°  dxay     dydx 

^■.'%^i-t-% w. 

If  the  temperature  T  be  selected  as  one  independent 
variable,  whilst  the  other  remains  x  as  before,  the  expressions 
become 

_dp     du     d^     d^ 
^'■'~ dT     dx  -  dx^  dT ^  '^'' 

^.'=^-®4-£-S <^*)^ 

or,  restoring  to  ir  its  value  ■'^ , 

^^'-^Uy     d^     dx     dT)     ^dx ^'^^'''■ 

The  equations  (15)  then  assume  the  following  forms  : 

db      t""  dT'^^^\dT''dx     dx'^dTr"' ^^''^' 

.jy    fdQ        dv\    ^     rmfdir     dv     dir      dv\  ,        ,„_. 


DETEBMINATION  OF  ENERGY  AND  ENTEOPT. 
or  written  in  another  form, 


205 


.(26a). 


If  we  further  choose  for  the  second  variable,  as  yet  unde- 
termined, the  volume  v,  and  thus  put  x  =  v,  we  have 

,      dv  ^   dv 

Hence  the  preceding  equations  become 


(4^i')^ 


.(27). 


If    the  pressure  p   be   chosen   as  the  second  independent 
variable,  so  that  x=p,  we  have 


and  the  equations  become 


'^-■VS'^^-pp' 


^H'dT-^S)'H'TT-4)'' . 


(28). 


§  5.  Application  of  the  foregoing  Equations  to  Homo- 
geneous Bodies,  and  in  particular  to  Perfect  Gases. 

For  Homogeneous  Bodies,  where  the  only  external  force 
is  a  uniform  pressure  normal  to  the  surface,  it  is  usual,  as 
at  the  end  of  the  last  section,  to  choose  for  independent 

variables  two  of  the  quantities  T,v,  p;  and  -j^  then  takes 

the  simple  significations  which  we  have  several  times  alluded 
to.     Thus  if  T  and  -v  are  the  independent,  variables,  and  if 


206 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT, 


the  weight  of  the  body  be  a  unit  of  weight,  -^  signifies  the 

specific  heat  at  constant  volume :  or,  if  T  and  p.  are  the 
independent  variables,  the  specific  heat  at  constant  pressure. 
Equations  (27)  and  (28)  become  in  these  cases 


dU=C,dT+(T^-p)dv 


.(29), 


d8  =  ^dT- 


dv 


(30). 


^rpdp, 

dU={c^-p§)dT-{T%.p'^)dp\ 

If  we  wish  to  apply  these  equations  to  a  perfect  gas,  we 
may  use  the  following  well  known  equation : 

pv=IiT. 
Hence,  if  T  and  v  be  selected  as  independent  variables, 

dT~  v' 
and  equations  (29)  then  become 

d8=G,f^E'^' 

dU=C,dT 

As  in  this  case  G,  must  be  regarded  as  a  constant,  these 
equations  can  at  once  be  integrated,  and  give 


.(31). 


.(32). 


8  =  S,+  CJog^+Rlogl^ 

If  we  choose  T  and  p  as  independent  variables,  we  may 
put 

dv     R      ,  dv         ET 


dT 


=  —  and  ^-  = 


P 


dp 


P 


DKTERMINATION  OF  ENERGY  AND  ENTROPY.  207 

accordingly  equations  (30)  become 

'^'''.f-^fl (S3,. 

Whence  "we  obtain  by  integration 

8  =  S.  +  C^lo4-Blogl\ ^3^^_ 

The  integration  of  the  general  equations  (29)  and  (30)  can 
of  course  only  be  accomplished  if,  in  (29),  p  and  G,  are 
known  functions  of  T  and  v,  or  if,  in  (30),  v  and.  C^  are 
known  functions  of  T  and  p. 

§  6.  Application  of  the  Equations  to  a  Body  composed 
of  matter  in  two  Different  States  of  Aggregation. 

As  another  special  case  we  may  select  the  state  of  things 
treated  of  in  Chapters  VI.  and  VII.,  viz,  the  case  in  which 
the  body  under  consideration  is  partly  in  one  state  of  aggre- 
gation and  partly  in  another,  and  when  the  change,  which 
the  body  may  undergo  at  constant  temperature,  is  such  that 
the  magnitudes  of  the  parts  in  the  two  different  states  of 
aggregation  are  altered,  with  a  corresponding  change  in  the 
volume,  but  no  change  in  the  pressure.  In  this  case  the 
pressure  jp  depends  only  on  the  temperature ;  and  we  may 

therefore  put  -^  =  0,  by  which  equations  (25)  and  (26)  are 

transformed  as  follows : 


(35). 


As  in  Chapters, VI.  and  VII.,  let  us  denote  by  ilf  the  weight 
of  the  whole  mass,  and  by  m  the  weight  of  the  part  in  the 
second  state  of  aggregation ;  and  let  us  take  m  in  place  of  x 


208      ON  I'HE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

for  the   second   independent  variable;    then   equation    (6), 
Chapter  VI.,  becomes 

dv  _ 

dm       ' 

for  which,  by  equation  (12),  Chapter  "VI.,  we  may  substitute 
dv 


dm     J,  dp ' 

dT 

Then  the  ahove  equations  become 

<^S  =  -^^dT+jjdm, 


''H§-''S)''*f-^y- 


>    (36). 


To  integrate  these  equations  we  may  take  as  a  starting 
point  the  condition  that  the  whole  mass  M  is  in  the  first 
state  of  aggregation,  that  its  temperature  is  T^,  and  that  its 
pressure  is  the  pressure  corresponding  to  that  tempera:ture. 
The  passage  from  this  to  its  present  condition  (in  which 
the  temperature  is  T,  and  in  which  the  part  m  of  the  whole 
mass  is  in  the  second,  and  the  part  Jf  —  m  in  the  first  state  of 
aggregation)  may  be  supposed  to  take  place  in  the  following 
way : — First  let  the  mass,  still  remaining  entirely  in  the  first 
state  of  aggregation,  be  heated  from  T„  to  T,  and  let  the 
pressure  change  at  the  same  time,  in  such  a  way  that  it 
is  always  the  pressure  corresponding  to  the  temperature  at 
the  moment :  then  let  the  part  m  pass  at  temperature  T  from 
the  first  to  the  second  state  of  aggregation.  The  integration 
has  to  be  performed  according  to  these'  two  successive  stages. 

During  the  first  stage  dm  =  0,  and  thus  it  is  only  the  first 
term   on  the  right-hand  side  which  has  to  be  integrated. 

Here  -^  has  the  value  MG,  where  C  signifies  the  specific 

heat  of  the  body  in  its  first  state  of  aggregation,  and  for  the 
case  in  which  the  pressure  changes  during  the  heating  in  the 
way  described  above.  This  kind  of  specific  heat  has  been 
already  discussed  several  times,  and  the  conclusions  drawn 
in  Chap.  VIII.,  §  6,  shew  that  where  the  first  state  of  aggre- 


DETERMINATION  OP  ENERGY  AND  ENTROPY. 


209 


gation  is  the  solid  or  liquid,  and  the  second  the  gaseous, 
it  may  safely  be  taken,  for  purposes  of  numerical  calculation, 
as  equal  to  the  specific  heat  at  constant  pressure.  It  is  only 
at  very  high  temperatures,  for  which  the  vapour  tension 
increases  very  rapidly  with  the  temperature,  that  the  difference 
between  the  specific  heat  0  and  the  specific  heat  at  constant 
pressures  is  important  enough  to  be  taken  into  account. 
Further,  during  the  first  change  the  volume  v  has  the  value 
Ma,  where  a  is  the  specific  volume  of  the  substance  in  the 
first  state  of  aggregation.  During  the  second  stage  dT=  0, 
and  therefore  it  is  only  the  second  term  on  the  right-hand 
side  of  equation  (3a)  which  has  to  be  integrated.  This  inte- 
gration can  be  at  once  performed  for  both  equations,  since 
the  coefficient  of  dm  is  a  constant  with  regard  to  m.  The 
resulting  equations  therefore  are 

S  =  S,  +  Mf^^dT+^, 


U=U„  +  M 


/:(--!?) 


dT  +  mp 


.(37). 


If  in  these  equations  we  put  m  =  0  or  m  =  il/,  we  obtain 
the  entropy  and  energy  for  the  two  cases  in  which  the  mass 
is  either  entirely  in  the  first  or  entirely  in  the  second  state  of 
aggregation,  under  the  temperature  T,  and  under  the  pressure 
corresponding  to  that  temperature.  For  example,  if  the  first 
state  is  the  liquid  and  the  second  the  gaseous,  then  if  we  put 
m  =  0,  the  expressions  Prelate  to  .the  case  of  liquid  under  tem- 
perature T,  and  under  a  pressure  equal  to  the  maximum 
vapour  tension  at  that  temperature ;  or  if  we  put  m  =  M,  they 
relate  to  saturated  vapour  at  temperature  T. 

§  7.     delations  of  the  Eocpressions  T>^^  and  A^^. 
In  concluding  this  chapter  it  is  worth  while  to  refer  again 
to  the  expressions  D, 
following  meanings : 

_  d  fdW\      d  (dW\ 
'^~dy\dxl     dx\dy)' 


^  and  A„,  which  by  (7)  and  (9)  have~the 


A„,  =  r 


d^  (l  d'W\  _  d_  /I  dM\ 
dy\Tdx)     dx\T^dy}_ 


14 


210 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 


These  are  both  functions  of  x  and  y :  but  if  to  determine 
the  condition  of  the  body  we  choose  instead  of  x  and  y  any 
two  other  variables  which  we  may  call  ^  and  ?;,  we  may  form 
corresponding  expressions  D^^  and  Aj,  as  follows : 


I>i. 


'dvKd^J     d^\dr,)' 


Hn-- 


mi 


d  (l  dW\  _d^(l  dM\ 
_d^n\T  d^J     d^\T  dr, 


,(38). 


These  are  of  course  functions  of  f  and  17,  as  the  former 
were  of  x  and  y.  But  if  we  compare  one  of  them,  e.g.  that 
for  D^^,  with  the  corresponding  expresssion  for  D^^,  we  find 
that  these  are  not  simply  two  expressions  for  one  and  the 
same  magnitude  referred  to  different  variables,  but  are 
actually  two  different  magnitudes.  For  this  reason  D^  has 
not  been  called  simply  the  work  difference,  but  the  work 
difference  referred  to  xy,  so  that  it  may  be  distinguished 
from  Di,,,  the  work  difference  referred  to  ^t].  The  same  holds 
true  of  Aj,j,  and  A|,. 

The  relation  which  exists  between  D^^,.  and  Z)j,  may  be 
found  as  follows.  The  differential  coefficients  which  occur  in 
the  expression  for  i)^,  in  (38),  may  be  derived  by  firfjt  forming 
the  differential  coefficients  according  to  x  and  y,  and  then 
treating  each  of  these  as  a  function  of  ^  and  rj.  Thus  we 
have 

om^^dW     dx     dW     d^ 
d^       dx      d^      dy      d^' 

dW^dW     dx     dW     dy 
dr]   '    dx      drj      dy      drj' 

Differentiating  the  first  of  these  equations  according  to  77 
and  the  second  according  to  ^,  and  again  applying  the  same 
artifice,  we  have 


d  (dW\_ 
dvKd^J- 


d^  fdW\  dxdx      d  fdWX  dx  dy 
dx\dx)  d^  dr]     dy\dx  J  d^  dr] 
dW  d^      d  /dW\  dx  dy 
dx  d^d/r]     dx\dy)dr]d^ 
d_  fdW\dydy     dW  d'y 
dy\dy)  d^  dr]      dy  d^dr] '" 


DETERMINATION  OF  ENERGY  AND  ENTROPY. 


211 


d_  /dW\  ^ 


d_  (dW\  dxdx      d^  /dF\  dm  dy 
dx  \  djo  J  d^  drj     dy\dx  J  d/q  d^ 
dW  d^x       d  fdrW\dxdy 
dx  d^dt)     dx\dy  )■  d^  drf 
d  /dW\dydy     dW  d^y 
dy\dy)  d^  d/rj      dy  d^d/ij ' 


If  we  subtract  the  second  of  these  equations  from  the  first, 
all  the  terms  on  the  right-hand  side  disappear  except  four, 
which  may  be  expressed  as  the  product  of  two  binomial  terms 
in  the  following  equation : 


dv\d^J     d^[dvJ~\d^^dv' 


dx     dy\ 
'dv^'d^J 


±fdM\ 
dy\dx) 

dx  \dy  )  \' 

Here  the  expression  on  the  left  side  is  jDj,,  and  the  expres- 
sion in  the  square  bracket  is  D^^     Hence  we  have  finally 


i'.-C 


dx     dy     dx     dy 
d^      dr)      drj      d^, 


)l>. 


.(39). 


Similarly  we  may  obtain 
fdx 


Hi' 


d^     dr) 


dx     dy\   . 
'd^'^t^)^"'- 


.(39a). 


If  we  substitute  one  new  variable  only,  e.g.  if  we  keep  the 

variable  x,  but  replace  y  by  17,  we  must  put  a;  =  |^  in  the  two 

dcs  dss 

last   equations,  whence  -tz.  =  ^  and  3-  =  0-     The   equations 

then  become 

--^D    and  A    -^A 


A, 


.(40). 


If  we  retain  the  original  variables,  but  change  their  order 
of  sequence,  the  expressions  simply  take  the  opposite  sign,  as 
is  seen,  at  once  on  inspection  of  (7) 'and  (9).    Hence 

(41). 


D,^  =  -  J?^,  and  A,^  =  -  A^^,. 


14—2 


CHAPTER  X. 


ON  NON-REVEKSIBLE  PE0CESSE3. 


§  1.  Completion  of  the  Mathematical  Expression  for  the 
second  main  Principle. 

In  the  proof  of  the  second  main  principle,  and  in  the 
investigations  connected  therewith,  it  was  throughout  assumed 
that  all  the  variations  are  such  as  to  be  reversible.  We  must 
now  consider  how  far  the  results  are  altered,  when  the 
investigations  embrace  non-reversible  processes. 

Such  processes  occur  in  very  different  forms,  although  in 
their  substance  they  are  nearly  related  to  each  other.  One 
case  of  this  kind  has  already  been  mentioned  in  Chapter  I., 
viz.,  that  in  which  the  force  under  which  a  body  changes  its 
condition,  e.g.  the  force  of  expansion  of  a  gas,  does  not 
meet  with  a  resistance  equal  to  itself,  and  therefore  does 
not  perform .  the  whole  amount  of  work  which  it  might 
perform  during  the  change  in  condition.  Other  cases  of  the 
kind  are  the  generation  of  heat  by  friction  and  by  the 
resistance  of  the  air,  and  also  the  generation  of  heat  by  a 
galvanic  current  in  overcoming  the  resistance  of  the  wire. 
Lastly  the  direct  passage  of  heat  from  a  hot  to  a  cold  body,  by 
conduction  or  radiation,  falls  into  this  class. 

We  will  now  return  to  the  investigation  by  which  it  was 
proved  in  Chapter  IV.  that  in  a  reversible  process  the  sum  of 
all  the  transformations  must  be  equal  to  zero.  For  one  kind  of 
transformation,  viz.  the  passage  of  heat  between  bodies  of 
different  temperatures,  it  was  taken  as  a  fundamental  principle 
depending  on  the  nature  of  heat,  that  the  passage  fropi  a 
lower  to  a  higher  temperature,  which  represents  negative 
transformation,  cannot  take  place  without  compensation.    On 


ON  NON-REVERSIBLE  PROCESSES.  213 

this  rested  the  proof  that  the  sum  of  all  the  transformations 
in  a  cyclical  process  could  not  be  negative,  because,  if  any 
negative  transformation  remained  over  at  the  end,  it  could 
always  be  reduced  to  the  case  of  a  passage  from  a  lower  to  a 
higher  temperature.  It  was  finally  shewn  that  the  sum  of 
the  transformations  could  not  be  positive,  because  it  would 
then  only  be  necessary  to  perform  the  process  in  a  reverse 
order,  in  order  to  make  the  sum  a  negative  quantity. 

Of  this  proof  the  first  part,  that  which  shews  that  the  sum 
of  the  transformations  cannot  be  negative,  still  holds  without 
alteration  in  cases  where  non-reversible  transformations  occur 
in  the  process  under  consideration.  But  the  argument  which 
shews  that  the  sum  cannot  be  positive  is  obviously  inappli- 
cable if  the  process  is  a  non-reversible  one.  In  fact  a  direct 
consideration  of  the  question  shews  that  there  may  very- 
well  be  a  balance  left  over  of  positive  transformations  ;  since  in 
many  processes,  e.g.  the  generation  of  heat  by  friction,  and  the 
passage  of  heat  by  conduction  from  a  hot  to  a  cold  body, 
a  positive  transformation  alone  takes  place,  unaccompanied  by 
any  other  change. 

Thus,  instead  of  the  former  principle,  that  the  sum  of  all 
the  transformations  must  be  zero,  we  must  lay  down  our  prin- 
ciple as  follows,  in  order  to  include  non-reversible  variations : — 

The  algebraic  svmi  of  all  the  transformations  which  occur 
in  a  cyclical  process  must  always  he  positive,  or  in  the  limit 
equal  to  zero.  '        ' 

We  may  give  the  name  of  uncompensated  transformations 
to  such  as  at  the  end  of  a  cyclical  process  remain  over  without 
anything  to  balance  them ;  and  we  may  then  express  our 
principle  more  briefly  as  follows ; — 

Uncompensated  transformations  must  always  he  positive. 

In  order  to  obtain  the  mathematical  expression  for  this 
extended  principle  we  need  only  remember  that  the  sum 
of  all  the  transformations   in   a   cyclical  process  is  given 

'  7^ .    Thus  to  express  the  general  principle,  we  must 

write  in  place  of  equation  V.  in  Chapter  III., 


.,-/< 


/f-io... ,.(ix). 


214  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

Equation  (VI.),  Chapter  III.,  then  becomes 

dQ<TdS (X.) 

§  2.    Magnitude  of  the  Uncompensated  Transformation. 

In  many  cases  the  magnitude  of  the  Uncompensated 
Transformation  is  obtained  directly  from!  the  equivalence 
value  of  the  transformations,  as  determined  by  the  method 
of  Chapter  IV.  If  for  example  a  quantity  of  heat  Q  is 
generated  by  any  process  such  as  friction,  and  this  is  finally 
imparted  to  a  body  of  temperature  T,  the   uncompensated 

transformation  thus  produced  has  the  value  j, .   Again,  if  a 

quantity  of  heat  Q  has  passed  by  conduction  from  a  body 
of  temperature  2\  to  another  of  temperature   T^,  then  the 

uncompensated  transformation  is  Q(nr  —  -^-j.     If  a  body 

has  passed  through  a  non-reversible  cyclical  process,  and  we 
wish  to  determine  the  resulting  uncompensated  transforma- 
tion, which  we  may  call  N,  we  have,  by  the  principles 
explained  in  Chapter  IV.,  the  equation 


N-. 


./f (1).. 


As  however  a  cyclical  process  may  be  made  up  of  several 
individual  changes  of  condition  in  a  given  body,  some  of 
which  may  be  reversible,  others  non-reversible,  it  is  in  many 
cases  interesting  to  know  how  much  any  particular  one  of 
the  latter  has  contributed  towards  making  up  the  whole 
sum  of  uncompensated  transformations.  For  this  purpose 
we  may  suppose  that  after  the  change  of  condition  which 
we  wish  to  enquire  into,  the  variable  body  is  brought  by  any 
reversible  process  into  its  former  condition.  By  this  means 
we  form  a  smallei:  cyclical  process,  in  which  equation  (1) 
may  be  applied  just  as  well  as  in  the  whole  process.  Thus 
if  we  know  the  quantities  of  heat  which  the  body  has  taken 
in  during  this  process,  and  the  temperatures  which  appertain 

to    them,  the  negative  integral  —  1  -yp-   gives  the   uncom- 
pensated transformations  which  have  taken  place.     But  as 


ON  NON-EEVEESIBLE  PROCESSES.  215 

the  return  to  the  original  condition,  which  has  taken  place 
in  a  reversible  manner,  cEln  have  contributed  nothing  to 
increase  this  sum,  the  expression  above  gives  the  uncom- 
pensated transformation  which  was  sought,  and  which  was 
caused  by  the  given  change  in  condition. 

If  we  examine  in  this  way  all  the  parts  of  the  whole 
process  which  are  non-reversible,  and  thereby  find  the  values 
of  N^,  N.^  etc.,  which  must  all  be  individually  positive,  then 
the  sum  of  these  gives  the  magnitude  N  relating  to  the 
whole  cyclical  process,  without  requiring  ua  to  bring  under 
review  those  parts  of  it  which  are  known  to  be  reversible. 

§  3.  Expansion  of  a  Gas  imaccompanied  by  External 
Work. 

It  may  be  worth  while  to  examine  more  closely  those 
changes  of  condition,  mentioned  in  §  1,  which  take  place 
in  a  non-reversible  manner  because  the  resistances  to 
be  overcome  are  less  than  the  forces  at  work ;  our  ob- 
ject being  to  determine  the  amount  of  heat  taken  in 
during  the  process.  As  however  there  are  a  great  number 
of  different  changes  ,of  this  kind,  which  are  produced  in  a 
great  number  of  ways,  we  must  confine  ourselves  to  a  few 
cases,  which  are  either  especially  noteworthy  on  account  of 
their  simplicity,  or  have  some  special  interest  on  other 
grounds. 

The  general  equation  for  determining  the  quantity  of 
heat  which  a  body  takes  in,  whilst  it  undergoes  any  given 
change  of  condition,  reversible  or  non-reversible,  is  as 
follows : 

Q=U,-U,+  W .....(2); 

in  which  U^  and  'U^  are  the  energy  in  the  initial  and  final 
conditions,  and  W  is  the  external  work  done  during  the 
variation. 

To  determine  the  energy  we  can  employ  the  equations  of 
Chapter  IX.  If  the  only  external  force  is  a  uniform  pres- 
sure, and  if  the  condition  of  the  body  is  determined  by  its 
tempei-ature  and  volume,  then  we  may  use  equation  (29),  viz. 

dU=0,dT+{T^P,-p\dv (3). 


2lQ  ON  THE  MECHAlJlCAI,  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

This  must  be  integrated  for  a  passage  in  some  reversible 
manner  from  the  initial  to  the  final  condition.  If  the 
temperature  is  equal  in  the  two  conditions,  as  we  shall, 
assume  in  the  examples  which  follow,  then  the  integration 
may  be  performed  at  constant  temperature,  and  the  result 
will  be,  if  we  denote  the  initial  and  final  volumes  by 
t)j  and  v^, 

^.-^."i:(4H* <*'i 

whence  equation  (2)  becomes 


^=£;(^S'"^)'^^-^^ ^^> 


As  the  first  and  simplest  case  we  may  take  that  in  which  a 
gas  expands  without  doing  any  external  work.  We  may  sup- 
pose a  quantity  of  the  gas  to  be  contained  in  a  vessel  and  that 
this  vessel  is  put  in  connection  with  another  in  which  is  a  va- 
cuum, so  that  part  of  the  gas  can  pass  from  one  to  the  other 
without  meeting  any  external  resistance.  The  quantity  of 
heat  which  the  gas  must  in  this  case  take  in,  in  order  to  keep 
its  temperature  unaltered,  is  determined  by  putting  W=0  in 
the  last  equation  ;  thus  we  have 

«=£;(^S-^)'^" (^>- 

If  we  make  the  special  assumption  that  the  gas  is  a 
perfect  one,  and  therefore  that^w  —RT,  we  have 

dp  _R 
dT~  v' 
whence 

dT~^  v~  R      v~P' 
whence  (6)  becomes 

<3  =  0 (7). 

As  alreiady  mentioned,  Gay-Lussac,  Joule,  and  Eegnault 
have  experimented  on  expansion  apart  from  external  work. 
Joule  annexed  to  his  experiment^,  described  in  Chapter  II.,  by 
which  he  determined  the  heat. generated  in  the  compression 


ON  NON-REVERSIBLE  PROCESSES. 


217 


Pig.  18. 


of  air,  other  experiments  upon 
the  expansion  of  air.  The  re- 
ceiver R,  shewn .  in  Fig.  6,  was 
filled  with  air  condensed  to  22 
atmospheres,  and  was  then  con- 
nected, in  the  manner  shewn  in 
Fig.  18,  with  an  empty  receiver 
B',  so  that  the  communication 
between  the  two  was  only  closed 
by  the  cock.  The  two  receivers 
were  placed  together  in  a  water 
calorimeter,  and  the  cock  was  then  opened,  whereupon  the 
air  passing  over  to  the  receiver  B'  expanded  to  about  twice 
its  former  volume.  The  calorimeter 'shewed  no  loss  of  heat, 
and  thus,  so  far  as  could  be  measured  by  this  apparatus, 
no  heat  seemed  to  be  required  for  the  expansion  of  the  air. 

The  above  result  however  holds  only  for  the  process  as  a 
whole,  and  not  for  its  individual  parts.  In  the  first  receiver, 
in  which  the  expansion  takes  place  and  the  motion  originates, 
heat  is  required;  in  the  second,  on  the  contrary,  in  which  the 
motion  ceases,  and  the  air  which  rushes  in  first  is  compressed 
by  that  which  follows,  heat  is  generated ;  and  so  also  in  the 
places  where  friction  has  to  be  overcome  during  the  passage.. 
Since  however  the  heat  generated  and  the  heat  required  are 
equal,  they  cancel  each  other;  and  we  may  say,  so  far  as  the 
general  result  of  the  whole  process  is  concerned,  that  no 
expenditure  of  heat  takes  place. 


Fig.  19. 

To   observe  specially  the  different  parts  of  the  process. 
Joule  varied  his  experiment  by  placing  the  two  receivers  and 


218      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

the  pipe  carrying  the  cock  in  three  different  calorimeters,  as 
shewn  in  Fig.  19.  Then  the  calorimeter  in  which  was  the 
receiver  containing  the  air  shewed  a  loss  of  heat,  and  the  two 
other  calorimeters  a  gain.  The  whole  gain  and  the  whole  loss 
were  so  nearly  equal  that  Joule  considers  the  difference  to  be 
within  the  limits  of  error  of  the  observation. 

§  4.    Eaypansiori  of  a  Gas  doing  Partial  Work. 

If  a  gas  in  expanding  has  a  resistance  to  overcome,  but  one 
which  is  less  than  its  expansive  force,  then  an  amount  of  work 
will  be  performed  less  than  the  amount  which  the  gas  could 
perform  during  the  expansion.  An  example  of  this  is  the 
case  of  a  gas  rushing  into  the  atmosphere  out  of  a  vessel 
in  which  it  has  a  pressure  higher  than  atmospheric  pressure. 

In  this  case  also  the  process  is  a  complicated  one.  We 
have  not  only  to  deal  with  the  work  necessary  for  the 
expansion  and  the  corresponding  consumption  of  heat,  but  in 
addition  heat  is  consumed  in  producing  the  velocity  with 
which  the  gas  escapes ;  and  heat  is  again  generated  when  this 
velocity  is  subsequently  checked.  Similarly,  heat  is  con- 
sumed in  overcoming  the  resistance  of  friction,  and  is 
generated  by  the  friction  itself.  To  investigate  accurately 
all  these  individual  parts  of  the  process  would  involve  us  in 
great  difficulties. 

If  however  we  only  wish  to  determine  the  quantity  of 
heat,  which  on  the  whole  must  be  taken  in  from  without  in 
order  to  keep  the  temperature  of  the  gas  constant,  the  case  is 
simple.  We  can  then  leave  out  of  account  those  parts  of  the 
process  which  balance  each  other,  and  need  only  consider  the 
initial  and  final  volume  of  the  gas,  and  so  much  of  the  work 
done  as  is  not  transformed  back  again  into  heat.  Then  the 
internal  work  is  the  same  as  in  any  other  case  of  the  gas 
expanding  at  the  same  temperature  and  between  the  same 
initial  and  final  volumes  ;  while  the  external  work  is  simply 
represented  by  the  product  of  the  increase  of  volume  and  the 
atmospheric  pressure. 

To  determine  the  required  quantity  of  heat,  we  start 
again  from  equation  (5),  and  there  substitute  for  W  the 
expression  for  the  external  work  performed  in  the  present 
case,  viz.  p^  (v^  —  v^,  where  p^  is  the  atmospheric  pressure. 


ON  NON-SEVERSIBLE  PROCESSES. 
The  equation  thus  becomes 


219 


<^-f!^{''%-py^-^p^(^^-^:)- 


.(8). 


If  the  gas  is  a  perfect  one,  the  integral  on  the  right-hand 
side,  as  shewn  in  the  last  section,  will  =  0,  and  the  equation 
takes  the  simpler  form 


Q=pA%-'"d- 


•(9), 


which  expresses  that  in  this  case  the  heat  taken  in  is  only 
that  corresponding  to  the  work  required  for  overcoming  the 
external  pressure  of  the  air. 

If  the  heat  is  to  be  measured  according  to  the  ordinary, 
not  the  mechanical  unit,  we  must  divide  the  right-hand  side 
of  (8)  and  (9)  by  the  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat,  whence 
we  have 


Q=^(v,-v,). 


.(9a). 


This  kind  of  expansion  has  also  been  experimented  on  by 
Joule.  Having  as  before  compressed  air  to  a  high  pressure 
in  a  receiver,  he  allowed  it  to  escape  under  atmospheric 
pressure.  In.  order  to  bring  the  escaping  air  back  to  the 
original  temperature,  he  caused 
it,  after  leaving  the  receiver,  to 
pass  through  a  long  coil  of  pipe, 
as  shewn  in  Eig.  20,  which  was 
placed  together  with  the  receiver 
in  a  water  calorimeter.  There 
then  remained  in  the  air  only  a 
small  reduction  of  temperature, 
which  it  shared  in  common 
with  the  whole  mass  of  the  calo- 
rimeter. The  cooling  of  the 
calorimeter  gave  the  quantity  of 
heat  given  off  to  the  air  during  Fig.  20. 


220      OS  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

its-  expansion.  Applying  equation  (9a)  to  this  quantity  of 
heat,  Joule  was  able  to  use  this  experiment  as  a  means  of 
calculating  the  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat.  The  numbers 
obtained  from  three  series  of  experiments  gave  a  mean  value 
of  438  (in  English  measures  798) ;  a  value  which  agrees  closely 
with  the  value  444  found  by  the  compression  of  air,  and  does 
not  differ  from  the  value  424,  found  by  the  friction  of  water, 
more  widely  than  can  be  explained  by  the  causes  of  error 
inherent  in  these  experiments. 

§  5.     Method  of  Experiment  used  hy  Thomson  and  Joule. 

The  above-mentioned  experiments  of  Joule,  in  which  air 
contained  in  a  receiver  was  expanded  either  by  espaping  into 
another  receiver  or  into  the  atmosphere,  shewed  that  the 
conclusions  drawn  under  the  assumption  that  air  is  a  perfect 
gas  are  in  close  accordance  with  experience.  If  however  we 
wished  to  know  to  what  degree  of  approximation  air  or  any 
other  gas  obeys  the  laws  of  perfect  gases,  and  what  are  the  laws 
of  kny  variations  that  may  occur  from,  the  conditions  of  a  per- 
fect gas,  then  the  above  mode  of  experiment  is  not  sufficiently 
accurate ;  since  the  mass .  of  the  gas  is  too  small  compared 
with  that  of  the  vessels  and  other  bodies  which  take  part  in 
the  variation  of  heat,  and  therefore  the  sources  of  error 
derived  from  these  have  too  great  an  influence  on  the  result. 
A  very  ingenious  method  of  making  more  accurate  experi- 
ments was  devised  by  W.  Thomson,  and  the  experiments  were 
carried  out  by  him  and  Joule  with  great  care  and  skill. 

Let  us  imagine  a  pipe,  through  which  is  forced  a 
continuous  current  of  gas.  At  one  place  in  this  let  a  porous 
plug  be  inserted,  which  so  impedes  the  passage  of  the  gas, 
that  even  when  there  is  a  considerable  difference  between  the 
pressure  before  and  behind  the  plug,  it  is  only  a  moderate 
amount  of  gas,  suitable  for  the  experiment,  which  can  pass 
through  in  a  unit  of  time.  Thomson  and  Joule  used  as  plug 
a  quantity  of  cotton  wool  or  waste  silk,  which,  as  shewn 
in  Fig.  21,  was  compressed  between  two .  pierced  plates,  AB 
and  CD. 

Let  us  now  take  two  sections,  EF  and  GH,  one  before  and 
one  behind  the  plug,  but  at  such  a  distance  that  the  unequal 
motions  which  may  occur  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  plug 


ON  NON-EEVERSIBLE  PROCESSES. 


221 


H 


Pig.  21. 


are  not  discernible,  and  there  is  only  a  uniform 
current  of  gas  to  deal  with.  Then  the  whole 
process  of  expansion,  corresponding  to  the  differ- 
ence of  pressure  before  and  behind  the  plug,  takes 
place  in  the  small  space  between  these  two  sec- 
tions. If  then  the  current  of  gas  is  kept  uniform 
for  a  considerable  time,  a  state  of  steady  motion 
is  produced,  in  which  all  the  fixed  parts  of  the 
apparatus  keep  their  temperature  unaltered, 
and  neither  take  in  nor  give  off  heat.  Then  if, 
as  was  done  by  Thomson  and  Joule,  we  surround 
this  space  with  a  non-conducting  substance,  so 
that  no  heat  can  either  pass  into  it  from  without 
or  vice  versa,  the  gas  can  only  give  out  or  take 
in  the  quantity  of  heat  expended  or  generated  in  the  process; 
and  thus,  even  where  this  quantity  is  very  small,  a  difference  of 
temperature  may  exist  sufficient  to  be  easily  noticed  and 
accurately  measured. 

§  6.  Development  of  the  Equations  relating  to  the  above 
method. 

In  order  to  determine  theoretically  the  difference  of 
temperature  in  the  above  case,  we  will  first  form  the  general 
equations  determining  the  quantity  of  heat  which  the  gas 
must  have  taken  in,  if  the  temperature  at  the  second  section 
is  to  have  any  required  value.  From  this  we  can  readily 
find  the  temperature  at  which  the  heat  imparted  will  be 
nothing. 

The  separate  parts  of  the  process  in  the  present  case  are 
connected  partly  with  consumption,  partly  with  generation  of 
heat.  Heat  will  be  consumed  in  overcoming  the  frictional 
resistance  due  to  the  passage  through  the  porous  plug;  whilst 
by  the  friction  itself  the  same  amount  of  heat  will  be 
generated.  At  certain  points  in  the  passage  heat  is  consumed 
in  increasing  the  velocity;  whilst  at  other  points  heat  is 
generated  as  the  velocity  decreases.  To  determine  the  quantity 
of  heat  which  on  the  whole  must  be  imparted  to  the  gas,  we  may 
leave  out  of  account  the  parts  of  the  process  which  balance 
each  other ;  since  it  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  know  what 
is  the  work  which  remains  over  as  external  work  done  or  con- 
sumed, and  at  the  same  time  the  actual  perngianent  change  in 


222  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

the  vis  viva  of  the  current.  For  this  we  need  only  consider  the 
work  done  at  the  entrance  of  the  gas  into  the  space  between 
the  sections,  i.e.  at  section  EF,  and  also  at  the  exit  from  that 
space,  i.e.  at  section  GH;  and  similarly  the  velocities  of  the 
current  at  those  two  sections. 

With  regard  to  the  velocities,  the  difference  between  their 
vis  viva  can  readily  be  calculated.  If  however  they  are  at 
each  section  so  small  as  they  were  in  Thomson  and  Joule's 
experiments,  their  vis  viva  may  be  altogether  neglected.  It 
then  remains  only  to  determine  the  work  done  at  the  two 
sections.  The  absolute  values  of  these  quantities  of  work  may 
be  obtained  as  follows.  Let  us  denote  the  pressure  at  section 
ISF  by  Pj,  and  suppose  the  density  of  the  gas  at  this  section  to 
be  such  that  a  unit-weight  at  this  density  has  the  volume  v^. 
Then  the  work  done  during  the  passage  through  the  section  of 
a  unit- weight  of  the  gas  equals  p^v^.  .Similarly  the  work  done 
at  section  GJS  will  be  p.jv^,  where  p^  is  the  pressure  and  v^ 
the  specific  volume  at  that  section.  These  two  quantities 
must  however  be  affected  with  opposite  signs.  At  section 
OH,  where  the  gas  is  escaping  from  the  given  space,  the 
external  pressure  has  to  be  overcome,  in  which  case  the  work 
done  must  be  taken  as  positive ;  while  in  section  SF,  where 
the  gas  is  entering  the  space  and  thus  moving  in  the  same 
direction  as  the  external  pressure,  the  work  must  be  con- 
sidered as  negative.  Thus  the  net  external  work  per- 
formed on  the  whole  will  be  represented  by  the  difference 

We  have  now  further  to  determine  the  quantity  of  heat, 
which  a  unit-weight  of  the  gas  must  take  in  while  it  passes 
through  the  distance  between  the  two  sections;  suppos- 
ing the  gas  to  have  at  the  first  section,  where  the  pressure  is 
p^,  the  temperature  T^,  and  at  the  second  section,  where  the 
pressure  is  p^,  the  temperature  T^.  For  this  purpose  we 
must  use  the  equation  which  applies  to  the  case  in  which  a 
unit-weight  of  the  gas  passes  from  a  condition  determined  by 
the  magnitudes  ^^  and  T^  into  that  determined  by  the 
magnitudes  p^  and  T^,  and  performs  in  so  doing  the  work 
Pi%~Pi"v  ^®  therefore  recur  to  equation  (2),  in  which  the 
symbol  w,  denoting  the  external  work,  must  be  replaced  by 
P-2^2  ~Pi''i  >   l^snce  we  have 

Q=U,-U^+p,v^-p,v^ (10). 


ON  NON-REVERSIBLE  PROCESSES.  223 

Here  we  need  only  to  determine  U^—  U^,  for  which 
purpose  we  can  again  use  one  of  the  differential  equations  for 
U  set  forth  in  the  last  chapter.  In  this  case  it  is  convenient 
to  choose  the  differential  equation  in  which  T  and  p  are  the 
independent  variables,  i.e.  equation  (30)  of  Chapter  IX. : 

In  this  equation  we  may  put 

J3  ^£^2'+  p^  cii?  =pdv  =  d{pv)-vdp. 

It  thus  takes  the  following  form : 

dU=C,dT-(T^-v)dp-d{pv) (11). 

This  equation  must  be  integrated  from  the  initial  values 
T^,  p^,  to  the  final  values  T^,  p^.  The  integration  of  the  last 
term  can  be  performed  at  once,  and  we  may  write  : 

U,-U,==j^C^dT-  {t^-v)  dp']^  -p,v,+p,v,  ....(12). 

Substituting  this  value  of  U^-  U^  in  equation  (10),  we 
obtain 

Q^j^O,dT-{T^^-v)dp'j (13). 

Here  the  expression  under  the  integral  sign  is  the  differ- 
ential of  a  function  of  T  and  p,  since  C^  satisfies  equation  (6) 
of  Chapter  YIII. : 

c  (?<,  _      y  d'v 

d^~      dr- 

And  thus  the  quantity  of  heat  Q  is  completely  determined 
by  the  initial  and  final  values  of  T  and  p. 

If  we  now  introduce  the  condition  corresponding  to 
Thomson  and  Joule's  experiments,  viz.  that  Q  =  0,  then  the 
difference  between  the  initial  and  final  temperatures  is  no 
longer  independent  of  the  difference  between  the  initial  and 
final  pressures,  but  on  the  contrary  the  one  can  be  found 


224  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY   OF  HEAT. 

from  the  other.  If  we  suppose  both  these  differences  indefi- 
nitely small,  we  may  use  instead  of  (13)  the  following 
differential  equation : 

If  we  here  put  dQ  =  0,  we  obtain  the  equation  which 
expresses  the  relation  between  dT  and  dp,  and  which  may  be 
thus  written : 

%-ki'TT-') (-)■ 

If  the  gas  were  a  perfect  gas,  and  therefore  pv  =  It  T,  we 
should  have 

dv      M  _  V 

hence  the  above  equation  would  become 

dT 
dp 

Thus  in  this  case  an  indefinitely  small  difference  of 
pressure  produces  no  difference  of  temperature;  and  the 
same  must  of  course  hold  if  the  difference  of  pressure  is 
finite.  Hence  one  and  the  same  temperature  must  exist 
before  and  behind  the  porous  plug.  If  on  the  contrary  some 
difference  of  temperature  is  observed,  it  follows  that  the  gas 
does  not  satisfy  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac,  and  by 
observing  the  values  of  these  differences  of  temperature 
imder  various  circumstances,  definite  conclusions  may  be 
formed  as  to  the  mode  in  which  the  gas  departs  from  that 
law. 

§  7.  Results  of  the  Experiments,  and  Equations  of 
Elasticity  for  the  gases,  as  deduced  therefrom. 

The  experiments  made  by  Thomson  and  Joule  in  1854* 
shewed  that  the  temperatures  before  and  behind  the  plug, 
were  never  exactly  equal,  but  exhibited  a  small  difference, 
which  was  proportional  to  the  difference  of  pressure  in  each 

*  Phil.  Trans.,  1854,  p.  321.  .     : 


ON  KON-EEVERSIBLE  PROCESSES.         ^  225 

case.  With  air  at  an  initial  temperature  of  about  15V  losses 
of  temperature  were  observed,  which,  if  the  pressure  were 
measured  in  atmospheres,  could  be  expressed  by.  the  equation 

With  carbonic  acid  the  losses  of  heat  were  somewhat 
greater ;  with  an  initial  temperature  of  about  19°  they  satis- 
fied the  equatioii    ... 

The  differential  equations  corresponding  to  these  two  equa- 
tions are  as  follows : 

^=0-26  and  ^  =  1-15  (15.) 

dp  dp  ^     ' 

In  a  later  series  of  experiments,  published  in  1862*, 
Thomson  and  Joule  took  special  pains  to  ascertain  how  the 
cooling  effect  varies  when  different  initial  temperatures  are 
chosen.  For  this  purpose  they  caused  the  gas,  before  reach- 
ing the  porous  plug,  to  pass  through  a  long  pipe  surrounded 
by  water,  the  temperature  of  which  could  be  kept  at  will  to 
anything  up  to  boiling  point.  The  result  showed  that  the 
cooling  was  less  at  high  than  at  low  temperatures,  and  in  the 
inverse  ratio  of  the  squares  of  the  absolute  temperatures. 
For  atmospheric  air  and  carbonic  acid  they  arrived  at  the 
following  complete  formulae,  in  which  a  is  the  absolute 
temperature  of  freezing  point,  and  the  unit  of  pressure  is  the 
weight  of  a  column  of  quicksilver  100  English  inches  high: 

^=0-92^    and  ^  =  4-64  (yj. 

If  one  atmosphere  is  taken  as  unit  of  pressure,  these 
formulae  become 


©■andf.l.a(-;)- C). 


dp  \TJ  dp 

With  hydrogen  Thomson  and  Joule  observed  in  their 
later  researches  that  a  slight  heating  effect  took  place  instead 
of  cooling.   They  have  however  deduced  no  exact  formula 

*  Phil:  Tram.,  1862,  .p.  579, 
C.  13 


226  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOBY  OP  HEAT, 

for  this  gas,  because  tlie  observations  were  not  sufficiently 
accurate. 

dT 
If  in  the  two  formulae  for  -j-  -.  given  in  (16),  we  substi- 
tute for  the  numerical  factor  a  general  symbol  A,   they 
combine  into  one  general  formula,  viz, 

f=^©' ■ (")• 

Substituting  in  equation  (14),  we  obtain 
dv 


r^,-t;  =  ^a(j)    (18). 


According  to  Thomson  and  Joule,  this  equation  should 
be  employed  for  gases  as  actually  existing,  in  place  of  the 
equation  referring  to  perfect  gases, 

T—-v  =  Q 
^  dT    "^     "' 

if  we  wish  to  express  the  relation  which  exists  between 
the  change  of  volume  and. temperature  when  the  pressure  is 
kept  constant. 

If  G^  is  taken  as  constant,  equation  (18)  can  be  integrated 
immediately.  Now  it  is  only  for  perfect  gases  that  it  has 
really  been  proved  that  the  specific  heat  C^  is  independent 
of  the  pressure;  and  similarly  it  is  only  for  perfect  gases 
that  the  conclusion  derived  from  Regnault's  experiments 
is  strictly  true,  viz.  that  G^  is  al'feo  independent  of  the 
temperature.  If  however  a  gas  differs  very  slightly  from 
the  condition  of  a  perfect  gas,  0^,  will  have  values  differing 
very  slightly  from  a  constant,  and  these  differences  may  be 
taken  as  quantities  of  the  same  order.  Since  in  addition 
the  whole  term  containing  G^  is  only  another-  small  quantity 
of  the  same  order,  the  differences  produced  in  the  equa- 
tion by  the  differences  of  G^  will  be  small  quantities  of 
a  higher  order,  and  such  may  in  what  follows  be  neglected ; 
thus  we  may  take  C?,  as  constant.     Then  multiplying  the 

dT 
equation  by  -^ ,  and  integrating,  we  have 


ON  NON-REVERSIBLE  PROCESSES,  227 

«=pr-i^a,(jy (19), 

where  P  is  the  constant  of  integration,  which  in  the  present 
case  may  be  considered  as  a  function  of  the  pressure  p. 

According  to  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac 
we  should  have 

«=f2^- (20); 

and  it  is  therefore  advantageous  to  give  the  function   P 
the  form. 

P=:^  +  7r, 
P 

where  ir  represents  another  function  of  p    which  however 
can  only  be  very  small.     Equation  (19)  then  becomes 

v=^R^+^T-iAC^{^^J (21). 

This  equation  Thomson  and  Joule  further  simplified 
as  fbllows.  The  mode  in  which  the  pressure  and  volume  of 
a  gas  depend  on  each  other  varies  less  from  the  law  of 
Mariotte  according  as  the  temperature  is  higher.  Those 
terms  of  the  foregoing  equation  which  express  this  varia- 
tion must  thus  become  smaller  as  the  temperature  rises. 
The  last  term  is  the  only  one  which  actually  fulfils  this  con- 
dition ;  the  last  but  one,  irT,  does  not  fulfil  it.  Accordingly 
this  term  should  not  appear  in  the  equation,  and  putting 
TT  =  0,  we  obtain 


.  =  i2|-iJC7,(jy  .(22). 


This  is  the  equation  which  according  to  Thomson  and 
Joule  must  be  used  for  gases  actually  existing,  in  place  of 
equation  (20)  which  holds  for  perfect  gases. 

An  exactly  similar  equation  was  previously  deduced 
by  Rankine*,  in  order  to  represent  the  variations  from 
the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac,  found  by  Eegnault 

*■  Phil.  Trans.,  18.54,  p,  336. 

15—2 


228      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

in  the  case  of  carbonic  acid.     This,  equation  in  its  simplest 

form  may  be  written               „™      a  ,an\ 

^  pv  =  BT--^ (23), 

in  which  a  like  M  is  constant. 

If  we  divide  this  equation  by  p,  and  in  the  last  term,  which 
is  yery  small,  replace  the  product  pv  by  the  yery  nearly  equal 

product  BT,  and  finally  write  jS  for  the  constant  „ ,  we  obtain 

which  is  an  equation  of  the  same  form  as  (22). 

§  8.  On  the  Behaviour  of  Vapour  during  Eacpansion  under 
Various  Circumstances. 

As  a  further  example  of  the  different  results-  which 
may  be  produced  by  expansion,  we  will  consider  the  behaviour 
of  saturated  vapour.  We  will  assume  two  conditions :  (1)  that 
the  vapour  expanding  has  to  overcome  a  resistance  equal  to 
its"  whole  force  of  expansion ;  (2)  that  it  escapes  into  the 
atmosphere,  and  thus  has  only  to  overcome  the  atmospheric 
pressure.  Under  the  last  condition  we  may  make  a  distinc- 
tion according  as  the  vapour  is  separate  from  liquid  in  the 
vessel  from  which  it  escapes,  or  is  in  contact  with  liquid, 
which  continually  replaces  by  fresh  evaporation  the  vapour 
which  is  lost.  In  all  three  cases  we  will  determine  the 
quantity  of  heat,  which  must  be  given  to  or  taken  from 
the  vapour  during  expansion,  in  order  that  it  may -continue 
throughout  at  maximum  density. 

First  then  let  us  suppose  a  vessel  to  contain  a  unit- 
weight  of  saturated  vapour,  and  let  this  vapour  expand,  e.  g. 
by  pushing  a  piston  before  it.  In  so  doing  let  it  exert  upon 
the  piston  the  whole  expansive  force  which  it  possesses  at 
each  stage  of  its  expansion.  For  this  it  is  requisite  only  that 
the  piston  should  move  so  slowly  that  the  vapour  which 
follows  should  always  be  able  to  equalize  its  expansive  force 
to  that  of  the  vapour  which  remains  behind  in  the  vessel. 
The  quantity  of  heat  Q,  which  must  be  imparted  to  this 
vapour,  if  it  expands  so  far  as  that  its  temperature  falls  from 
a  given  initial  value  T^  to  a  value  T^,  is  simply  found  by  the 

equation  ..  g^r^j^dT,.,, (24). 


ON  NON-REVERSIBLE  PROCESSES, 


229 


Here  h,  is  the  iiiagnitude  introduced  ia  Chapter  VI.,  and 
named  the  Specific  Heat  of  Saturated  Vapour.  If,  as  is  the 
case  with  jpaost  vapours,  h  has  a  negative  value,  the  foregoing 
integral,  in  which  the  upper  limit  is  less  than  the  lower, 
represents  a  positive  quantity. 

In  tlie  case  of  "water,  h  is  given  by  formula   (31)   of 
Chapter  VI.,  viz.,                          8003 
n  =  I'OU rp—  • 

Applying  this  formula  it  is  easy  to  calculate  the  value  of  Q  for 
any  two  temperatures  7',  and  T^.  For  example  let  us  assume 
that  the  steam  has  an  initial  pressure  of  5  or  of  10  atmospheres, 
and  that  it  expands  until  its  pressure  has  fallen  to  one  atmo- 
sphere; then  by  Regnault's  tables  we  must  put  T^=  a+152"2, 
or  =  a  -1- 180".3  respectively,  and  T^  =  a  + 100;  we  thus  obtain 
the  values  Q  =  52'1  or  =  74"9  units  of  heat  respectively. 

In  the  second  case  we  suppose  that  a  vessel  contains  a 
unit-weight  of  saturated  vapour  apart  from  liquid,  and  at  a 
temperature  T^  which  is  above  the  boiling  point  of  the 
liquid;  and  that  an  opening  is  made  in  the  vessel,  so  that 
the  vapour  escapes  into  the  atmosphere.  Let  us  proceed  to 
a  distance  beyond  the  opening  such  that  the  pressure  of 
the  vapour  is  there  only  equal  to  the  atmospheric  pressure. 
To  insure  that  the  current,  of  vapour  shall  expand  in  the 
proper  manner,  let  the  vessel  be  fitted  at  the  opening  with  a 
trumpet-shaped  mouth  KJPQM  (Fig.  22.)  This  mouth  is  not 
actually  needed  in  order  that  the 
equations  which  follow  may  hold, 
but  merely  serves  to  facilitate  the 
conception.  Let  KLM  be  a  surface 
within  this  mouth,  such  that  the 
pressure  of  the  vapour  is  there  only 
equal  to  atmospheric  pressure,  and 
its  .  velocity .  so  small  that  its  vis 
viva  may  be  neglected.  We  will 
further  assume  that  the  heat  gene- 
rated by  the  friction  of  the  vapour 
against  the  edge  of  the  .opening 
and  the  surface  of  the  mouth  is 
not  dissipated,  but  again  imparted 
to  the  vapour. 

Now  to  determine  the  quantity  " 


230 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 


of  heat  wliich  must  be  imparted  to  the  vapour  during  ex- 
pansion, if  it  is  to  remain  throughout  in  the  saturated  con- 
dition, we  will  again  apply  the  general  equation  (2) ;  which 
gives,  if  in  this  case  we  denote  the  heat  by  ^', 

Q'^U,-U,+  W. (25); 

here  U^  is  the  energy  of  the  vapour  in  its  initial  condition 
within  the  vessel,  If^  the  energy  of  the  vapour  in  its  final 
condition  at  the  surface  KLM,  and  W  the  external  work  done 
in  overcoming  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere. 

The  energy  of  a  unit-weight  of  saturated  vapour  at 
temperature  T  is  given  by  the  value  of  U  in  equation  (37) 
of  Chapter  IX.,  if  we  there  put  m  =  M=l,    It  is , 


P"  [dTj; 


and  yjj 


First  give  to  T  the  initial  value  T^,  and  let 
be  the  values  of  ^,  -^ ,  and  p  corresponding  to  this  tempera- 
ture.   Again  let  T  have  the  final  value  T^,  and  let^^,  (—]  , 

and  Pj  be  the  corresponding  values.     Then  subtracting  these 
two  equations  from  each  other  we  have 


^^-^-/I;(^-^S)^^-^^^ 


1--4- 

^^© 


-Pi 


1- 


A 


^.(S. 


.(26). 


The  external  work  which  results  from  the  overcoming  of 
the  atmospheric  pressure  p^,  during  an  expansion  from 
volume  s,  to  volume  s^,  is  given  by  the  equation 


ON  NON-EEVERSIBLE  PEOCESSE'S.  231 

We  will  give  another  form  to  this  expression.  If,  as  in 
-Chapter  VI.,  we  put  s  =  u  +  a;  where  cr  is  the  specific. volume 
of  the  liquid,  the  equation  becomes 

Substituting  for  tt  the  expression  given  in  equation  (13), 
Chapter  VI.,  we  have 


F=i>, 


^■m.  <^\ 


+pA'^.-'^^) (27). 


Now  substituting  in  (25)  the  value  of  U^~  U^  from  (26), 
iand  of  W  from  (27),  we  arrive  at  the  equation 

+P^iF.-<^d (28). 

Here    the    heat    is    expressed    in    mechanical    units.     To 
express  it  in  ordinary  heat  units  the  right-hand  side  must 

be  divided  hy  E.    As  before  we  wiU  put  ^  =  c;^  =  r.    At 

the  same  time,  since  o-  is  a  small  quantity  and  varies  very 

slightly,   we  will  neglect  the  quantities  -7^  and  (ff*  —  o-^). 

Thus  we  obtain 

g=\^cdT  +  r,-r,^--^^[p,-p,) (29). 

AdT), 

This  equation  is  well  adapted  for  the  numerical  calcula- 
tion of  Q,  since  the  quantities  which  it  contains  have  all 
been  determined  experimentally  for  a  considerable  number 
of  liquids. 

For  water  we  have  according  to  Regnault. 


0+1^=0-305; 
whence 

'"''" cdT+  r^-  r.  =  -  0-305  (2;  -  T^j. 


J  x 


232 


ON  tn^  MECHA]<ncAL  THEOET  OP  HEAT. 


The  quantities  in  the  last  term  of  equation  (29)  are  also 
sufficiently  known,  so  that  the  whole  calculation  is  easy. 
For  example  if  we  take  the  initial  temperature  at  five  or 
ten  atmospheres,  we  have  Q'  =  19'5  or  =  l7"0  units  of  heat 
respectively. 

Since  Q  is  positive,  it  follows  that  in  this  case  also  heat 
must  be  imparted  to  the  vapour,  not  taken  from  it,  if  no 
part  of  it  is  to  be  allowed  to  condense ;  which  condensation 
might  take  pilace  not  only  at  the  opening,  but  equally  well 
inside  the  vessel.  The  quantity  o?  vapour  so  condensed 
would  however  be  less  than  in  the  first  case,  because  Q'  is 
less  than  Q. 

It  may  easily  happen  that  the  above  equations  give  a 
larger  quantity  of  heat  for  .an  initial  pressure  of  five  than 
of  ten  atmospheres.  The  reason  is  that  at  five  atmospheres 
the  volume  of  the  vapour  is  already  very  small ;-  and  tlie 
diminution  of  volume,  when  the  pressure  is  raised  to  ten 
atmospheres,  is  so  small  that  the  corresponding  increase  of 
work  during  the  escape  of  the  vapour  is  more  than  balanced 
by  the  excess  of  the  free  heat  in  the  vapour  at  180"3°  over 
that  in  the  vapour  at  152'2°. 

L  Lastly  let  us  take  the  third  case, 

in  which  the  vessel  contains  liquid 
as  well  as  vapour.  Let  the  vessel 
ABCD  (Fig.  23)  be  filled  to  the  level 
EF  with  liquid,  and  above  this  with 
vapour.  Let  PQ  be  the  opening 
of  escape,  fitted,  as  ijj  the  last  case, 
with  the  trurii  pet -shaped  mouth 
KPQM,  to  regulate  the  spreading 
out  of  the  current  of  vapour.  Let 
there  be  some  source  of  heat  which 
keeps  the  liquid  at  a  constant  tem- 
perature T^,  so  that  it  continually 
gives  off  new  vapour  to  replace  that 
which  escapes,  and  thus  the  condi- 
j,.  .      tions  of  the  escape  remain  always 

the  same. 
This  last  circumstance  makes  an  important  distinction 
between  this  case  and  the  foregoing.     The  pressure,  which 
the  vapour  newly  given  oif  exerts'  on  that  alrea,dy  existing. 


ON  KON-BEVBRSIBLE  PROCESSES.         '  SSS 

performs  work  during  tlie  escape  of  the  vapour,  wMch  must 
be  brought  into  the  calculation  as  negative  external  work. 

Let  OHJ  be  a  sui-face  at  which  the  vapour  which  passes 
through  has  still  the  same  expansive  force  p^  teijipefature  T^, 
and  specific  volume  s,  which  exist  within  the  vessel,  and  at 
which  the  new  vapour  is  given  off.  Again  let  KLM  be  a 
surface  at  which  the  vapour  passing  through  has  simply  the 
expansive  force  equal  to  the  atmospheric  pressure  p^.  At  both 
surfaces  we  shall  assume  the  velocity  to  be  so  small  that 
its,  vis  viva  may  be  neglected.  In  its. passage  from  one 
surface  to  the  other,  the  vapour  must  continually  have  just 
that  measure  of  heat  given  to  it  or  taken  from  it,  which  is 
necessary  in  order  to  keep  it  wholly  in  the  gaseous  condition, 
and  completely  saturated,  and  also-  in  order  that  at  the 
surface  KLM  it  may  have  the  temperature  T^  corresponding 
to  the  pressure  p^  {i.e.  the  boiling  temperature  of  the  liquid), 
and  the  specific  volume  s^  belonging  to  that  temperature. 
We  have  now  to  enquire  how  large  this  quantity  of  heat  Q" 
must  be  for  each  unit-weight  of  the  escaping  vapour. 

To  determine  this  we  may  proceed  as  in  the  last  case, 
remembering  that  we  have  now  a  different  value  for  the 
external  work.  This  value  is  the  difference  between  the 
work  done  at  the  surface  GHJ,  through  which  passes  a 
volume  of  vapour  s^  at  pressure  p^,  and  that  done  at  the 
surface  KLM,  through  which  passes  a  volume  s^  at  pressure 
p^.     It  is  thus  given  by  the  equation 

'W=p.,s^-p,s^. 

Putting  once  more 

p 

dT 
we  have 

If  we  now  form  for  Q"  an  equation  of  the  same  form  as 
(25),  and  in  it  substitute  for  t/^—  E/j  the  expression  given  in 
(26),  and  for  TTthe  expression  given  above,  the  main  terms  in 


234  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

these  two  expressions  cancel  each  other,  and  there  re- 
mains 

Q"=Jl{(^-P%)  ^^+  P^  - P^  +P.'^,-P^<r,....i^l). 

If  we  transform  this  equation  so.  that  it  refers  not,  to 
mechanical  but  to  ordinary  units  of  heat,  and  neglect  the 
terms  containing  cr,  we  arrive  at  the  simple  equation 

Q"  =  r'cdT  +  r,-r, (32). 

For  water  the  equation  takes  the  forni 

Q"  =  - 0-305(7,-2;); 

and  if  we  calculate  the'  numerical  values' of  Q"  for  an  initial 
pressure  of  five  or  of  ten  atmospheres,  we  obtain 

Q"  =  —  15"9  or  =  —  24f5  units  of  heat  respectively. 

Since  the  values  of  Q  are  negative,  it  follows  that  in  this 
case  heat  must  be  taken  out  of  the  vapour,  not  imparted  to 
it.  If  this  withdrawal  of  heat  does  not  take  place  to  a 
sufficient  extent  at  any  place  under  consideration,  then  the 
steam  is  there  hotter  than  100°  and  therefore  superheated. 
Here  it  is  of  course  assumed  that  nothing  but  steam  passes 
through  the  first  surface  GHJ,  and  thus  that  there  are  no 
particles '  of  liquid  mechanically  carried  off  by  the  steam,  as 
may  happen  during  violent  ebullition. 


CHAPTEE  XI. 


Application  of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat  to 

THE  STEAM-EnGINE. 


§  1.  Necessity  of  a  new  Investigation  into  the  Theory  of 
the  Stewm-Engine. 

Since  the  altered  views  as  to  the  nature  and  action  of 
Heat,  which  are  comprised  under  the  name  of  the  Mechanical 
Theory  of  Heat,  had  their  first  origin  in  the  known  fact 
that  heat  can  be  applied  to  produce  mechanical  work,  it 
might  have  been  at  once  expected  that  the  theory  so  formed 
would  conversely  serve  to  place  this  application  of  heat 
in  a  clearer  light.  In  particular  the  more  general  point 
of  view  thus  obtained  would  make  it  possible  to  pass  a  more 
certain  judgment  upon  the  particular  machines  used  for 
this  application,  as  to  whether  they  abeady  completely 
fulfilled  their  purpose,  or  whether  and  how  far  they  failed 
to  do  so. 

To  these  reasons,  which  apply  to  all  thermo-dynamic 
machines,  are  joined  in  the  case  of  the  most  important 
of  them,  the  steam-engine,  certain  special  grounds,  which 
make  it  desirable  to  undertake  a  new  investigation  into 
its  working,  derived  from  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat. 
This  theory  in  fact,  in  the  case  of  steam  of  maximum  density, 
has  brought  to  light  certain  important  departures  from  the 
laws  previously  assumed  as  correct,  or  at  least  generally  used 
for  purposes  of  calculation. 


236      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

On  this  head  we  need  only  refer  to  two  results  given  in 
Chapter  VI.  In  most  of  the  recent  writings  on  the  steam- 
engine,  amongst  others  the  excellent  work  of  de  Pambour, 
the  foundation  of  the  theory  has  been  taken  to  be  the 
law  of  Watt,  viz.  that  saturated  steam  when  contained  in  a 
non-conducting  vessel  remains  during  all  changes  of  volume 
steam  of  maximum  density.  In  some,  later  writings,  after  the 
publication  of  Eegnault's  researches  on  the  heat  required  to 
evaporate  water  at  different  temperatures,  the  assumption  is 
made  that  steam  partly  condenses  during  compression,  and 
during  expansion  cools  in  a  less  degree  than  corresponds 
to  the  reduction  of  density,  and  therefore  passes  into  the 
superheated  condition.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  proved 
in  Chapter  VI.  that  steam  must  behave  in  a  way  which 
is  different  from  the  first  assumption  and  the  exact  oppo- 
site of  the  second  assumption,  viz.  that  it  is  superheated 
during  compression,  and  is  partly  condensed  during  expan- 
sion. 

Further  it  is  assumed  in  the  above  writings,  in  default  of 
more  accurate  means  of  determining  the  volume  of  a  unit- 
weight  of  steam  at  different  temperatures,  that  steam  even  at 
its  maximum  density  still  follows  the  law  of  Mariotte  and 
Gay-Lussac.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  shewn  in  Chapter  VI. 
that  it  departs  widely  from  that  law. 

These  two  points  have  naturally  an  important  influence 
on  the  quantity  of  steam  which  passes  from  the  boiler  into  the 
cylinder  at  each  stroke,  and  on  the  behaviour  of  this  steam 
during  expansion.  It  is  thus  obvious  that  they  are  them- 
selves sufficient  to  make  it  necessary  that  we  should  calculate 
in  a  different  way  from  that  hitherto  adopted  the  amount 
of  work  which  a  given  quantity  of  steam  performs  in  the 
steam-engine. 

§  2.     On  the  Action  of  the  Stea/m-Engine. 

In  order  to  illustrate  more  clearly  the  series  of  processes 
which  make  up  the  action  of  a  condensing  steam-engine, 
and  to  bring  out  clearly  the  fact  that  they  form  a  cyclical 
process,  continually  repeating  itself  in  the  same  manner, 
the  imaginary  diagram  (Fig.  24)  may  be  employed,  A  is 
the  boiler,  the  contents   of  which  are  kept    uniformly  at 


-APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-^ENGINE, 


237 


a  constant  temperature 
T,  by  means  of  a  source  of 
heat.  From  this  boiler  a 
part  of  the  steam  passes 
into  the  cylinder  B,  and 
drives  the  piston  a  cer- 
tain distance  upwards. 
Then  the  cylinder  is  shut 
off  from  the  boiler,  and 
the  enclosed  steam  drives 
the  piston  still  higher  by 
expansion.  The  cylinder 
is  now  put  in  connection 
with  the  vessel  C,  which 
represents  the  condenser. 
It  will  be  supposed  that  * 
this  condenser  iskeptcold,  Pig.  24. 

not  by  injected  water,  but  by  cooling  from  without :  this  makes 
no  great  difference  in  the  results,  but  simplifies  the  treaitment. 
The  constant  temperature  of  the  condenser  we  may  call  T„. 
During  the  connection  of  the  cylinder  with  the  condenser,  the 
piston  returns  through  the  whole  distance  it  has  previously 
traversed ;  and  thereby  all  the  steam  which  has  not  of  itself 
passed  into  the  condenser  is  driven  into  it,  and  there  con- 
denses into  water.  It  remains,  in  order  to  complete  the 
cycle  of  operations,  that  this  condensed  water  should  be 
brought  back  again  into  the  boiler.  This  is  effected  by  the 
small  pump  D,  the  working  of  which  is  so  regulated,  that 
during  the  upward  stroke  of  its  piston  it  draws  out  of  the 
condenser  exactly  as  much  water  as  has  been  brought  into  it 
by  the  condensation  during  the  last  stroke ;  and  this  water  is 
then,  by  the  downward  stroke  of  its  piston,  forced  back  into 
the  boiler.  When  it  has  here  been  heated  once  more  to  the 
temperature  y^' all  is  again  restored  to  its  initial  condition, 
and  the  same  series  of  processes  may  begin  anew.  Thus  we 
have  here  to  deal  with  a  complete  cyclical  process. 

In  the  common  steam-engine  the  steam  passes  into  the 
cylinder  not  at  one  end  only,  but  at  both  ends  alternately, 
The  only  difference  thereby  produced  is,  however,  that  during 
one  up  and  down  stroke  of  the  piston  two  cyclical  processes 
take  place  instead  of  one,  and  it  is  sufficient  in  this  case  to 


238  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

determine  the  work  done  during  one  process,  in  order  to  be 
able  to  deduce  the  whole  work  done  during  any  given  time. 
In  the  case  of  an  engine  without  a  condenser,  we  have  only 
to  assume  that  it  is  fed  with  water  at  100",  and  we  may 
then  suppose  it  replaced  by  an  engine  with  a  condenser,  the 
temperature  of  the  condenser  being  100°, 

§  3.    Assmnptions  for  the  purpose  of  Simplification. 

For  the  purpose  of  this  investigation  we  will  assume,  as 
has  usually  been  done,  that  the  cylinder  is  a  non-conducting 
vessel,  and  so  neglect  the  exchange  of  heat  which  takes  place 
during  each  stroke  between  the  walls  of  the  cylinder  and  the 
steam. 

The  vapour  within  the  cylinder  can  never  be  anything  but 
steam  of  maximum  density  with  a  certain  admixture  of 
water.  For  it  is  evident  from  the  conclusions  of  Chapter  VI., 
that  during  the  expansion  which  takes  place  in  the  cylinder 
after  it  is  shut  off  from  the  boiler  the  steam  cannot  pass  into  the 
superheated  condition,  because  no  heat  is  imparted  to  it  from 
without ;  but  must  rather  partially  condense.  It  is  true  that 
there  are  certain  other  processes,  to  be  mentioned  later,  which 
tend  to  produce  a  slight  super-heating  ;  but  this  is  prevented 
from  taking  place  by  the  fact,  that  the  steam  always  carries 
with  it  into  the  cylinder  a  certain  amount  of  water  in  the 
form  of  spray,  with  which  it  remains  in  contact.  The  exact 
amount  of  this  water  is  of  no  importance ;  and  since  for  the 
most  part  it  is  diffused  through  the  steam  in  fine  drops,  and 
therefore  readily  participates  in  the  changes  of  temperature 
which  the  steam  undergoes  during  expansion,  no  important 
error  will  be  introduced  if  at  each  moment  under  consideration 
we  assume  that  the  tenaperature  of  the  whole  mass  of  vapour 
in  the  cylinder  is  the  same. 

Further,  to  avoid  too  great  complexity  in  the  formulae,  we 
will  first  determine  the  whole  work  done  by  the  steam  pressure, 
without  examining  how  much  of  this  is  actually  useful  work, 
and  how  much  is  expended  on  the  engine  itself  in  overcoming 
friction,  and  in  actuating  the  pumps  required,  besides  the  one 
shewn  in  the  figure,  for  the  proper  working  of  the  machine. 
This  latter  part  of  the  work  may  be  subsequently  determined 
and  deducted  from  the  whole,  in  the  manner  shown  later  oh; 
It  may  further  be  remarked  with  regard  to  the  friction  between 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  239 

the  piston  and  cylinder,  that  the  work  expended  upon  this  is 
not  to  be  regarded  as  wholly  lost.  For  since  heat  is  generated 
by  this  friction,  the  inside  of  the  cylinder  is  thereby  kept 
hotter  than  it  otherwise  would  be,  and  the  power  of  the  steam 
increased  accordingly. 

Lastly,  since  it  is  desirable  to  understand  the  working  of 
the  most  perfect  machine  possible,  before  enquiring  into 
the  influence  of  the  various  imperfections  which  occur  in 
practice,  we  will  in  this  preliminary  investigation  make  two 
further  assumptions,  which  may  afterwards  be  withdrawn. 
The  first  is  that  the  inlet  pipe  from  the  boiler  to  the  cylinder, 
and  the  outlet  pipe  to  the  condenser  or  to  the  atmosphere, 
are  so  large,  or  else  the  speed  of  the  engine  so  slow,  that 
the  pressure  within  the  end  of  the  cylinder  connected  with 
the  boiler  is  always  equal  to  the  pressure  in  the  boiler  itself; 
and  similarly  that  the  pressure  within  the  other  end  is  always 
equal  to  that  in  the  condenser,  or  to  the  atmospheric  pressure 
as  the  case  may  be.  The  second  is  that  there  are  no  clear- 
ance or  waste  spaces  sufficient  to  affect  the  result. 

§  4.  Determination  of  the  Work  done  during  a  single 
stroke. 

Under  the  conditions  just  enumerated  the  amount  of 
work  done  during  the  cyclical  process  corresponding  to  a 
single  stroke  may  be  written  down  by  help  of  the  results 
obtained  in  Chapter  YI.  without  further  calculation,  and 
their  sum  comprised  in  a  simple  expression. 

Let  M  be  the  whole  quantity  of  vapour  which  passes  from 
the  boiler  to  the  cylinder  during  one  stroke  ;  of  this  let  the 
part  OTj  be  in  the  form  of  steam  and  the  remainder  M  —  m^ 
in  the  form  of  water.  The  space  which  this  mass  occupies  will 
be  (by  Ch.  VI.,  §  1)  m, «,  +  Mfr,  where  w,  represents  the  value 
of  u  corresponding  to  T^,  while  o-  is  taken  as  constant  and 
therefore  has  no  suffix.  The  piston  has  therefore  been  raised 
so  far  that  this  amount  of  space  is  left  under  it ;  and  since  this 
takes  place  at  the  pressure  p^  corresponding  to  T„  the  work 
done  during  the  first  pr6cess,  which  we  may  call  W^,  is  given 
by  the  following  equation : 

W,  =  m^u^p,  +  McTp^ (!)• 


240      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

Let  the  expansion  whichi  succeeds  to  this  continue  so  far 
that  the  temperature  of  the  vapour  enclosed  in  the  cylinder 
falls  from  the  value  T^  to  a  value  T^.  The  work  done  during 
this  expansion,  which  we  may  call  W^,  is  given  directly  by 
equation  (62)  of  Chapter  VI.,  if  we  there  take  T^  for  the 
final  temperature,  and  corresponding"  values  for  the  other 
quantities  involved.     Thus 

F,  =  m,  (p, - u,p,)  - m,  {p, - u,p,)  +  MCiT,-T;) (2). 

On  the  return  stroke  of  the  piston,  which  now  begins, 
the  vapour,  which  at  the  end  of  the  expansion  occupied 
the  space  m^  u^  +  Mix,  is  driven  out  of  the  cylinder  into 
the  condenser,  overcoming  the  constant  resistance  jp^  The 
pegative  work  thus  performed  is  therefore  given  by  the 
equation 

F,  =  -»»,Mji)„-if<rp„ (3). 

Now  let  the  piston  of  the  small  pump  rise  until  it  leaves- 
under  it  the  space  Ma;  the  pressure  then  continues  to  be 
the  pressure  p^  of  the  condenser,  and  the  work  done  is 

W.^Map, .-.....(4). 

Finally,  during  the  descent  of  this  piston,  the  pressure  pj 
of  the  boiler  has  to  be  overcome,  and  we  have  therefore  the 
negative  work 

W,  =  -M<Tp, (5). 

Adding  these  five  equations  we  have  for  the  whole  work 
done  during  the  cyclical  process  by  the  steam  pressure,  or  in 
other  words  by  the  heat,  which  work  we  may  call  W,  the 
following  expression : 

W  =  m,p,  -  m,p,  +  MG  {T,  -  T,)  +  m^u,  (p,  -p,). . .  (6). 

From  this  equation  we  must  eliininate  m^.  If  for  m^  we 
substitute  the  value  given  by  equation  (13)  Chapter  VI.,  viz. 

then  wijj  only  occurs  in  ibe;  product  m^p^;  for  which  equation 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  241 

(55)  Chapter  VI.  gives,  if  we  substitute  therein  p  and  C  for  r 
aad  c,  the  expression 

T  T 

Substituting  this  expression  we  obtain  an  equation  in  which 
all  the  quantities  on  the  right-hand  side  are  known,  since 
the  masses  M  and  m^,  and  the  temperatures  2\,  T^,  and  1\  are 
supposed  to  be  known  directly,  and  the  quantities  p,  p,  and 

^  are  assumed  to  be  known  as  functions  of  temperature. 

§  5.  Special  Forms  of  the  Eoopression  found  in  the  last 
section. 

If  in  equation  (6)  we  put  T^=T^,  we  obtain  the  work 
done  in  the  case  where  the  machine  works  without  expan- 
sion, viz. 

W'  =  m^u,{p,-p„) (7). 

If  on  the  other  hand  we  assume  that  the  expansion  con- 
tinues until  the  steam  has  cooled  by  expanding  from  the 
temperature  of  the  boiler  down  to  that  of  the  condenser  (an 
assumption  which  cannot  be  realized  in  practice,  but  forms 
the  limiting  case  to  which  we  may  approach  as  near  as 
is  practicable)  we  have  only  to  put  1\  =  T^ ;  whence  we 
have 

W'  =  m,p,-m,p,  +  MG{T-T,) (8). 

Eliminating  m^p^  from  this  equation  by  means  of  tha 
same  equation  (55)  Chapter  VI.,  in  which  we  must  also  put 
y,  =  T„,  we  have 

W'=m,p,'^j,^^''+  Mc{t,-T,  +  Tm'^^ (9). 

§  6.  Imperfections  in  the  Construction  of  the  Steam- 
Engiiie. 

With  all  steam-engines  as  actually  constructed  the 
expansion  falls  much  below  the  maximum  value  given  at  the 
end  of  the  last  section.  If  for  example  we  take  the  tempera- 
ture of  the  boiler  at  150°,  and  that  of  the  condenser  at  50", 
then  if  the  temperature  of  the  steam  in  the  cylinder  is  to  be 
lowered  by  expansion  to  the  temperature  of  the  condensei-, 

c.  ,        IG 


242  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

the  steam  must  be  expanded  (by  the  table  given  in  §  13 
of  Chapter  VI.)  to  twenty-six  times  its  original  volume.  In 
practice,  on  account  of  the  many  evils  attending  too  high  an 
expansion,  steam  is  not  expanded  beyond  three  or  four  times 
its  volume  in  general,  or  ten  times  at  the  very  utmost.  Such 
an  expansion,  with  an  initial  temperature  of  151°,  is  shewn 
by  the  same  tables  to  lower  the  temperature  to  100°,  or  75° 
at  the  utmost,  instead  of  to  50°. 

Besides  this  imperfection,  which  has  already  been  taken 
account  of  in  the  above  investigation  and  included  in  equation 
(6),  the  steam-engine  is  subject  to  several  others,  two  of 
which  have  been  already  expressly  excluded  from  considera- 
tion. These  are,  first  the  fact  that  the  pressure  in  one  end 
of  the  cylinder  is  less  than  that  in  the  boiler,  and  in  the 
other  greater  than  that  in  the  condenser,  and  secondly  the 
presence  of  waste  spaces.  We  must  now  extend  our  previous 
investigations  so  as  to  include  these  further  imperfections. 

•  The  influence  upon  the  work  done  of  the  difference 
between  the  boiler  and  cylinder  pressures  has  been  investi- 
gated most  fully  by  Pambour  in  his  work  TMorie  des 
Machines  d  Vapeur.  The  author  may  therefore  be  allowed, 
before  himself  entering  on  the  subject,  to  reproduce  the  most 
important  of  these  investigations,  only  making  some  changes 
in  the  notation  and  omitting  the  quantities  which  refer  to 
friction.  It  will  thus  be  easier  to  shew  how  far  Pambour's 
results  are  no  longer  in  accordance  with  our  present  know- 
ledge on  the  subject  of  heat,  and  at  the  same  time  to  connect 
with  it  the  new  method  of  investigation,  which  in  the 
author's  opinion  must  take  its  place. 

§  7.     Pambour's    Formulae    for     the     relation    between 
Volume  and  Pressure. 

Pambour's  theory  has  its  foundation  in  the  two  laws 
already  mentioned,  which  at  that  time  were  generally  applied 
to  the  case  of  steam.  The  first  is  the  law  of  Watt,  viz.  that 
the  sum  of  free  and  latent  heat  is  always  constant.  From 
this  law,  as  already  mentioned,  was  drawn  the  conclusion  that 
if  a  certain  quantity  of  steam  at  maximum  density  were 
inclosed  in  a  non-conducting  vessel,  and  the  contents  of  this 
vessel  then  increased  or  diminished,  the  steam  would  neither 
.be  superheated  nor  partially  condensed,  but  would  remain 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  243 

precisely  at  maximum  density;  and  that  this  would  take 
place  without  any  reference  to  the  way  in  which  the  change 
of  volume  was  produced,  or  to  whether  the  steam  had  to 
overcome  a  resistance  corresponding  to  its  expansive  force, 
or  not.  This  was  the  condition  of  things  which  Pambour 
supposed  to  exist  in  the  steam  cylinder;  and  he  also  assumed 
that  no  clfange  of  importance  would  be  occasioned  by  the 
presence  of  the  particles  of  water  which  are  always  mixed 
with  the  steam. 

Next,  to  determine  more  closely  the  connection  between 
volume  and  temperature,  or  between  volume  and  pressure, 
in  the  case  of  steam  at  maximum  density,  Pambour  applied 
further  the  law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac.  If  we  take  the 
volume  of  a  kilogram  of  steam  at  100°  and  at  maximum 
density  to  be  1*696  c.  ipa.,  as  given  by  Gay-Lussac,  and  if  we 
remember  that  the  corresponding  pressure  of  one  atmo- 
sphere represents  a  weight  of  10333  kilograms  to  the  square 
metre ;  and  if  for  any  other  temperature  T  we  call  v  the 
volume  and  p  the  pressure ;  then  the  law  of  Mariotte  and 
Gay-Lussac  leads  to  the  following  equation: 

,.„-     10333      273 +  r  ,,„. 

«  =  1-696  x-^x  2-73^^:^0 (10). 

Here  we  have  only  to  substitute  for  p  the  value  given  by 
the  table  of  pressures,  and  we  can  then  determine  the  volume 
corresponding  to  any  temperature,  provided  the  foregoing 
assumptions  are  correct. 

Since  in  the  formulae  for  the  work  done  by  the  steam- 

engine  I  pdv  plays  a  principal  part,  it  was  necessary  for  the 

convenient  treatment  of  this  integral,  that  the  simplest 
possible  relation  between  p  and  v  should  be  used.  The 
equations  which  would  have  been  obtained,  if  it  had  been 
sought  to  eliminate  the  temperature  T  from  the  foregoing 
equation  by  means  of  one  of  the  ordinary  empirical  fortnulae 
for  p,  would  have  been  too  complicated :  Pambour  accordingly- 
preferred  to  form  a  special  empirical  formula  for  the  purpose, 
and  following  the  example  of  Navier  he  gave  it  the  following 
general  form : 

"-u^--. ("'■ 

-16—2 


244  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

wtere  B  and  h  are  constants.  These  constants  he  endeavoured 
to  fix  so  that  the  volumes  calculated  by  this  formula  might 
agree  as  nearly  as  possible  with  those  calculated  by  the 
formula  given  above.  As  however  sufficient  accuracy  cannot 
thus  be  arrived  at  in  the  case  of  all  the  pressures  which  are 
met  with  in  the  steam-engine,  he  made  use  of  two  different 
formulae  in  the  cases  of  engines  with  and  without  condensers. 
The  first,  for  condensing  engines,  is  as  follows : 

20000  ,„  , 

"=1200+^ (l^'^)' 

This  agrees  best  with  the  formula  (10)  for  pressures  between 
§  and  3^  atmospheres,  but  may  be  applied  within  somewhat 
wider  limits,  say  ^  and  5  atmospheres.  The  second,  for  non- 
condensing  engines,  is  as  follows : 

21232  ,,,,, 

^  =  3020+^  - (11^>- 

This  is  moSt  accurate  between  2  and  5  atmospheres,  and  may 
be  applied  anywhere  between  1 J  and  10  atmospheres. 

§  8.  Pambour's  Determination  of  the  Work  done  during 
a  single  stroke. 

The  quantities  needed  for  determining  the  work  done,  and 
depending  on  the  dimensions  of  the  engine,  will  be  here 
denoted  in  a  manner  somewhat  differing  from  that  of  Pambour. 
The  whole  space  within  the  cylinder,  including  the  waste 
space,  which  is  left  open  for  steam  during  a  single  stroke, 
we  shall  call  v'.  The  waste  space  we  shall  call  ev'  and  the 
space  swept  through  by  the  piston  (1  —  e) v.  That  part  of 
the  whole  space,  which  is  left  open  for  the  steam  up  to  the 
moment  when  the  cylinder  is  shut  off  from  the  boiler,  again 
inclusive  of  the  waste  space,  we  shall  call  ev'.  Then  the 
space  swept  through  by  the  piston  during  the  entrance  of 
steam  will  be  denoted  by  (e  —  e)  v,  and  that  swept  through 
during  expansion  by  (1  —  e) v. 

First  to  determine  the  work  done  during  the  entrance  of 
the  steam.  For  this  purpose  we  must  know  the  actual 
pressure  in  the  cylinder  at  this  time,  which  must  be  less  than 
that  in  the  boiler,  otherwise  there  would  be  no  flow  from  one 
into  the  other.     The  ampunt  of  this  difference  cannot  how- 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  243 

ever  be  fixed  in  general  terms,  because  it  depends  not  only  on 
the  construction  of  the  engine,  but  also  on  how  widely  the 
valve  in  the  steam  pipe  has  been  opened  by  the  engineer, 
and  on  the  speed  with  which  the  engine  is  moving.  By  a 
change  in  these  circumstances  the  difference  may  be  made  to 
vary  within  wide  limits.  Again  the  pressure  in  the  cylinder 
may  not  remain  constant  during  the  whole  time  the  steam 
is  entering,  because  the  speed  of  the  piston,  and  also  the 
opening  left  by  the  valve,  may  be  made  to  vary  during  this 
time. 

With  reference  to  this  latter  point  Pambour  assumes  that 
the  mean  pressure,  to  be  used  for  determining  the  work  done, 
may  with  sufficient  accuracy  be  taken  to  be  the  same  as  the 
final  pressure  which  exists  in  the  cylinder  at  the  moment 
when  it  is  shut  off  from  the  boiler.  The  author  does  not 
think  it  desirable  to  introduce  into  the  general  formulae  an 
assumption  of  this  kind,  although  in  the  absence  of  more 
exact  data  it  may  fairly  be  resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  actual 
calculations ;  but  he  is  bound  to  follow  Pambour's  method,  in 
order  to  complete  the  exposition  of  his  theory. 

The  actual  pressure  at  the  moment  when  the  steam  is 
shut  off,  Pambour  determines  by  means  of  his  equation, 
as  given  above,  between  volume  and  pressure  ;  assuming  that 
special  observations  have  been  made  to  determine  the  quantity 
of  steam  which  passes  from  the  boiler  to  the  cylinder  during 
an  unit  of  time,  and  therefore  during  each  stroke.  We 
wUl,  as  before,  denote  by  M  the  whole  quantity  which  passes 
into  the  cylinder  during  one  stroke,  and  by  m  the  portion 
which  is  in  the  condition  of  steam.  As  this  quantity  M,  of 
which  Pambour  only  recognizes  the  part  which  is  in  the 
condition  of  steam,  fills  at  the  moment  when  the  cylinder  is 
closed  the  space  ev',  we  have  by  equation  (11), 

e^==^  (12), 

where  p^  is  the  pressure  in  the  cylinder  at  that  moment. 
Hence 

P.-'^-i (12^). 

If  we  multiply  this  equation  by  (e  —  e)  ?;',  which  is  the 


246      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 

space  swept  through  by  the  piston  up  to  this  moment,  we 
have  the  following  equation  for  the  first  part  of  the  wort 
done: 

W.^mBx^-^-i/ie-e)!) ..,,(13). 

The  law  of  Tariation  of  the  pressure  during  the  exp£|,nsion 
is  also  given  by  equation  (11).  If  v  is  the  volume  and  p  the 
pressure  at  any  moment,  then 

mB     , 

This  expression  we  must  substitute  in  fpdv,  and  then 
integrate  this  from  v^ev  to  v  =  v'.  Thence  we  obtain  for 
the  second  part  of  the  work  done 

W^  =  mB\og^-^v'  0.-e)l (14). 

Next,  to  determine  the  negative  work  done  by  the  resis- 
tance during  the  return  stroke,  we  must  know  the  value  of 
that  resistance.  Without  entering  at  present  into  the  ques- 
tion how  this  resistance  is  related  to  the  pressure  in  the 
condenser,  we  will  denote  the  mean  pressure  by  p,;  then  the 
work  done  will  be  given  by. 

Tf,  =  -«'(l-6)^„ (15). 

Finally  there  remains  the  work  which  must  be  expended 
in  forcing  back  into  the  boiler  the  quantity  of  liquid  M. 
Pambour  has  taken  no  special  account  of  this  work,  but 
included  it  with  the  friction  of  the  engine.  Since,  however, 
for  the  sake  of  completing  the  cycle  of  operations,  it  has  been 
included  in  the  author's  formulae,  it  will  be  investigated  here 
in  order  to  facilitate  the  comparison.  If  p^  be  the  pressure 
in  the  boiler,  and  p„  in  the  condenser,  then  equations  (4)  and 
(5)  show,  as-  in  the  example  already  considered,  that  this 
work  is  on  the  whole  given  by 

W,  =  -M<r{p,-p,) (16). 

For  the  present  case,  where  p^  is  not  the  pressure  in  the 
condenser  itself,  but  in  the  end  of  the  cylinder  which  is  open 
.to  the  condenser,  this  equation  is  not  quite  exact ;  but  since 
on  account  of  the  smallness  of  a  the  value  of  the   whole 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  247 

expression  is  almost  too  small  to  be  taken  into  account, 
d  fortiori  we  may  neglect  an  error  which  is  small  even  in 
comparison  with  that  value;  and  we  shall  therefore  retain 
the  expression  in  the  form  given  above. 

Adding  these  four  several  quantities  of  work  together,  we 
obtain  the  following  expression  for  the  whole  work  done 
during  the  cyclical  process : 

W  =  mB  (iZL%iogl)  _^'(l_e)  (J,  +  p^)  ^ Ma (p,- p,) 

(17). 

§  9.  Pamiour's  Value  for  the  Work  done  per  Unit-weight 
of  Steam. 

If  instead  of  the  work  done  in  one  stroke,  during  which 

the  quantity  of  steam  us^d  is  m,  we  prefer  to  find  the  work 

done  per  unit-weight  of  steam,  all  that  is  needed  is  to  divide 

the  foregoing  value  by  m.     Let  us  denote  by  I  the  fraction 

M        .        .  . 

—  ,  which  gives  the  ratio  of  the  whole  mass  which  passes  into 

the  cylinder  to  that  part  of  it  which  is  in  the  form  of  steam, 

and  is  therefore  somewhat  greater  than  1 ;   by  F  the  frac- 

v'    . 
tion  — ,  i.e.  the  space  which  on  the  whole  is  occupied  by  the 

unit-weight  of  steam  in  the  cylinder ;  and  by  W  the  fraction 

W 

— ,  i,e.  the  work  done  per  unit-weight  of  steam.     Then  wo 

have 

W=B(^-^  +  log'^yril-^e)ib+p,)-la(p,-p,) 

(18). 

In  this  equation  there  is  only  one  term  which  involves 
the  volume  F,,  and  this  contains  F  as  a  factor.  Since  this 
term  is  negative,  it  follows  that  the  work,  which  can  be 
obtained  from  one  unit-Tsreight  of  steam,  is  the  greatest,  other 
things  being  equal,  when  the  volume  which  that  steam  occu- 
pies in  the  cylinder  is  the  least  possible.  The  least  value  of 
this  volume,  to  which  we  may  continually  approximate,  but  can 
never  exactly  obtain,  is  that  which  is  given  by  the  assumption 
that  either  the  engine  goes  so  slowly,  or  the  steam-pipe  is  so 


2i8      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OF  HEAT. 

large,  that  the  pressure  in  the  cylinder  is  as  great  as  that  in 
the  boiler.  This  then  gives  the  maximum  quantity  of  work. 
If  with  an  equal  admission  of  steam  the  speed  of  the  engine 
is  greater,  or  if  with  equal  speed  the  admission  of  steam  is 
less,  then  in  each  case  a  less  quantity  of  work  is  obtained 
from'  the  same  quantity  of  steam. 

§  ]  0.  Changes  in  the  Steam  during  its  passage  from  the 
Boiler  into  the  Cylinder. 

Before  we  pass  on  to  treat  the  same  connected  series  of 
processes  on  the  principles  of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat, 
it  will  be  advantageous  to  consider  one  of  them,  which 
requires  a  special  investigation  of  its  own,  in  order  to  fix 
beforehand  the  results  which  refer  to  it.  This  process  is  the 
flow  of  the  steam  into  the  clearance  or  waste  space  and  into 
the  cylinder,  in  the  case  when  it  has  a  smaller  pressure 
to  overcome  than  that  which  forces  it  out  of  the  boiler. 

The  steam  as  it  comes  from  the  boiler  passes  first  into 
the  waste  space  ;  there  it  compresses  the  steam  of  less  density 
which  remains  over  from  the  last  stroke,  fills  up  the  space 
thus  obtained,  and  then  acts  upon  the  piston ;  this,  according 
to  the  assumption,  on  account  of  its  comparatively  lighter 
load  recedes  so  fast,  that  the  steam  cannot  follow  it  quickly 
enough  to  keep  the  density  in  the  cylinder  the  same  as  in  the 
boiler.  Under  such  circumstances,  if  nothing  but  saturated 
steam  escaped  from  the  boiler,  this  would  become  superheated 
in  the  cylinder,  inasmuch  as  the  vis  viva  of  the  flow  would 
be  transformed  into  heat ;  but  since  the  steam  always  carries 
with  it  small  particles  of  water,  the  superabundant  heat 
goes  to  vaporize  a  part  of  these,  and  the  steam  thus  remains 
in  the  saturated  condition. 

We  must  now  consider  the  following  problem :  Given  the 
initial  condition  of  the  whole  mass  under  consideration,  as 
well  that  already  found  in  the  waste  space  as  that  which  is 
newly  received  from  the  boiler;  given  also  the  amount  of 
work  which  is  done  during  the  entrance  of  the  steam  by  the 
pressure  which  acts  on  the  piston ;  lastly  given  the  pressure 
which  exists  at  the  moment  when  the  boiler  is  shut  off  from 
the  cylinder ;  then  to  determine  what  proportion  of  the  mass 
within  the  cylinder  is  at  that  moment  in  the  condition  of  steam. 
Let  fi.  be   the   mass   which   exists   in  the  waste   space 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  249 

before  the  entrance  of  the  steam ;  for  the  sake  of  generality  we 
will  assume  this  to  be  partly  in  the  liquid,  partly  in  the 
gaseous  condition,  and  will  call  the  latter  part  /i^.  The 
pressure  of  this  steam  may  for  the  moment  be  denoted  by  p^, 
and  the  corresponding  absolute  temperature  by  T„,  without 
implying  thereby  that  these  are  exactly  the  same  values  as 
hold  for  the  same  quantities  within  the  condenser.  Let  p^ 
and  Tj  be,  as  before,  the  pressure  and  temperature  in  the 
boiler,  M  the  mass  which  flows  from  the  boiler  into  the 
cylinder,  and  jWj  the  part  of  M  which  is  in  the  condition  of 
steam.  The  pressure  exerted  on  the  piston  during  the 
entrance  of  the  steam  need  not,  as  already  explained,  be 
constant.  We  will  call  p„  the  mean  pressure,  by  which  the 
space  swept  through  by  the  piston  during  the  entrance  of  the 
steam  must  be  multiplied,  in  order  to  obtain  the  same 
amount  of  work  as  is  actually  done  by  the  varying  pressure. 
Let  ^2  be  the  actual  pressure  in  the  cylinder  at  the  moment 
when  the  steam  is  cut  off,  T^  the  corresponding  temperature. 
Lastly  let  m^  be  the  magnitude  we  have  to  determine,  viz. 
the  part  of  the  whole  mass  M+  fi  within  the  cylinder,  which 
is  in  the  condition  of  steam. 

To  determine  this  quantity,  let  us  suppose  the  mass  M+fi 
to  be  brought  back  to  its  initial  condition  in  any  way 
whatever,  e.  g.  the  following.  Let  the  gaseous  part  m^  be 
condensed  in  the  cylinder  by  the  fall  of  the  piston,  it  being 
assumed  that  the  piston  can  force  itself  even  into  the  waste 
space;  at  the  same  time  let  the  mass  have. such  a  quantity  of 
heat  continuously  imparted  to  it,  that  its  temperature  T^  re- 
mains constant.  Then  let  the  part  ilf  of  the  whole  liquid  mass 
be  forced  back  into  the  boiler,  where  it  again  takes  up  its 
original  temperature  T,.  We  have  now  within  the  boiler 
the  same  condition  of  things  as  before  the  flow  of  the  steam, 
since  every  part  of  the  boiler  has  its  original  temperature; 
and  therefore  the  proportions  of  liquid  and  steam  must  be 
the  same  as  at  the  commencement.  Whether  the  individual 
molecules,  which  are  in  the  gaseous  and  in  the  liquid 
condition,  are  exactly  the  same  as  at  the  commencement  does 
not  concern  us ;  we  make  no  'distinction  between  these,  and 
never  enquire  what  molecules,  but  simply  how  many  mole- 
cules, are  in  each  of  the  two  conditions.* 

*  If  it  be  wished  that  exactly  the  same  molecules  should  be  in  the 


250  ON  THE  ]ilECHANICAI<  THEORY  OF  HEAT, 

Let  the  mass  fi,  which  is  not  forced  back  into  the  boiler, 
be  first  cooled  in  the  liquid  condition  from  T^  to  T„,  and  then 
at  this  temperature  let  the  paxt  /*„  be  transformed  into  steam ; 
the  piston  receding  so  far,  that  this  steam  can  again  occupy 
its  original  space. 

Thus  the  mass  M+  /j,  will  have  passed  through  a  complete 
cyclical  process,  to  which  we  may  now  apply  the  principle 
that  the  sum  of  all  the  quantities  of  heat  taken  in  during 
a  cyclical  process  must  be  equal  to  the  total  external 
work  done.  In  this  case  the  following  quantities  of  heat 
have  been  taken  in : 

(1)  In  the  boiler,  where  the  mass  M  has  been  heated 
from  T^  to  T^,  and  at  the  latter  temperature  the  part  m^ 
transformed  into  steam,  we  have  the  quantity  of  heat 

m,p,  +  MCiT,-T;), 

(2)  During  the  condensation  of  m^  at  temperature  T^,  we 
have 

(3)  During  the  cooling  of  the  part  /t  from  T^  to  T^,  we 
have 

(4)  During  the  vaporization  of  the  part  fi^  at  temperature 
T^,  we  have 

The  whole  quantity  of  heat  taken  in,  which  we  may 
call  Q,  is  thus  given  by 

The  quantities  of  work  are  obtained  as  follows : 

(1)  To  determine  the  space  swept  through  by  the 
piston  during  the  entrance  of  the  steam,  we  must  remember 

gaseous  condition  at  tlie  end  as  at  the  beginning,  we  need  only  assume  that 
the  water  forced  back  into  the  boiler  is  not  only  in  quantity,  but  also  in 
its  actual  molecules,  the  same  as  that  which  left  the  boiler  previously;  and 
that  when  this  water  takes  up  the  temperature  Tj,  the  quantity  m,  which  was 
formerly  vapour,  is  again  vaporized,  whilst  an  equal  quantity  of  the  existing 
steam  is  condensed.  Por  this  purpose  there  is  no  need  that  the  whole  mass 
in  the  boiler  should  take  in  or  give  out  any  heat,  because  that  required  for 
the  vaporization,  and  that  generated  by  the  condensation,  exactly  balance 
each  other. 


APPLICATION  TO  T5E  STEAM-ENGINE.  251 

that  the  whole  space  taken  up  hj  M+ fi  at  the  end  of  this 
time  is  given  by 

From  this  we  must  subtract  the  waste  space.  Since  this 
is  filled  at  the  commencement  by  a  mass  fi  at  temperature  T^, 
of  which  the  part  fi^  is  in  the  condition  of  steam,  it  may 
be  represented  by 

fi^%  +  fia-. 

If  we  subtract  this  expression  from  the  former,  and  multiply 
the  remainder  by  the  mean  pressure  p\,  we  obtain  for 
the  first  part  of  the  work  done 

(2)'  The  work  done  in  the  condensation  of  the  mass 
Wjis 

(3)  The  work  done  in  forcing  the  mass  M  back  into  the 
boiler  is 

-Map,. 

(4)  The  work  done  in  vaporizing  the  part  m„  is 

Adding  these  four  quantities  together  we  obtain  the 
following  expression  for  the  whole  work  done : 

TF-m^  {P^-P.)-Ma (p,  -p,') -^ i^MPi'-Po) (20). 

Since  Q  =  W,'we  may  equate  the  expressions  in  (19)  and 
(20) ;  and  bringing  to  one  side  of  the  equation  the  terms 
containing  m^,  we  obtaiA 

m,[p,  +  u,{p:-p,)]  =  m,p,  +  MGiT,-T,)+f.,p,-,iCiT-T,) 

+  fiMP^-Po)+^^(Pi-Pi) (21)- 

By  means  of  this  ecjuation  the  quantity  m^  is  given 
in  terms  of  quantities  assumed  to  be  already  known. 

§  11.  Divergence  of  the  above  Resvlts  from  Fambour's 
Assumption. 

In  cases  where  the  mean  pressure  p/  is  much  larger 
than  the  final  pressure  ^j,— e.g.  if  we  suppose  that  during 
the  greater  part  of  the  time   of  admission   of  the   steam. 


252      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

the  pressure  in  the  cylinder  is  nearly-  the  same  as  in 
the  boiler,  and  that  it  is  only  by  the  expansion  that  .the 
pressure  is  finally  brought  down  to  the  value  p^, — it  may 
happen  that  the  value  found  for  m^  is  less  than  m^  + ji,^, 
and  accordingly  that  a  part  of  the  original  steam  must 
have  condensed.  On  the  other  hand  if  p^  is  only  a  little 
greater  or  even  a  little  smaller  than  p.^,  then  the  value 
of  wij,  will  be  greater  than  m^  +  fi^.  This,  latter  is  in  general 
true  of  the  steam-engine,  and  in  particular  holds  for  the 
case  assumed  by  Pambour,  in  which  p^  =p^. 

Here  as  in  Chapter  VI.  we  have  arrived  at  a  result 
widely  diverging  from  the  views  of  Pambour.  Whereas 
he  assumed  for  the  two  different  kinds  of  expansion,  which 
succeed  each  other  in  the  steam-engine,  one  and  the  same 
law,  according  to  which  the  original  quantity  of  steam 
can  neither  grow  less  nor  greater,  but  must  always  remain 
exactly  at  maximum  density,  we  have  been  led  to  two 
separate  equation",  which  indicate  an  opposite  condition 
of  things.  In  the  first  expansion,  during  the  admission  of 
sbeam,  there  must  by  equation  (21),  be  a  continual  genera- 
tion of  fresh  steam ;  in  the  further  expansion,  after  the 
steam  is  cut  off,  and  while  it  is  doing  the  full  work 
corresponding  to  its  force-  of  expansion,  there  must  by 
equation  (36)  of  Chapter  VI.  be  a  condensation  of  some  part 
of  the  existing  steam. 

Since  these  two  opposite  processes  of  increase  and 
diminution  of  steam,  which  must  also  exert  an  opposite 
influence  on  the  amount  of  work  done  by  the  engine, 
partly  go  to  cancel  each  other,  the  final  result  may  in 
certain  circumstances  be  nearly  the  same  as  under  the 
simpler  assumption  of  Pambour.  We  must  not  however 
on  this  account  cease  to  take  into  consideration  the  difference 
we  have  discovered,  especially  if  our  object  is  to  determine 
what  effect  a  change  in  the  arrangement  or  speed  of  the 
engine  will  have  on  the  amount  of  work  done. 

§  12.  Determination  of  the'Work  done  during  one  stroke, 
taking  into  consideration  the  Imperfections  already  noticed. 

We  may  now  return  to  the  complete  cyclical  process 
performed  by  the  steam-engine,  and  treat  its  several  parts 
one  after  another  in  the  same  way  as  before. 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE,  253 

The  mass  M  flows  from  the  boiler,  in  which  the  pressure 
is  p,,  into  the  cylinder.  Of  this  mass  the  part  m^  is  in 
the  condition  of  steam,  the  remainder  of  water.  The  mean 
pressure  in  the  cylinder  during  this  time  we  will  as  before 
call  p^,  and  the  final  pressure  p^.  The  steam  now  expands, 
until  its  pressure  has  fallen  from  p^  to  p^,  and  its  temperature 
from  jTjj  to  Ty  Then  the  cylinder  is  opened  to  the  condenser, 
the  pressure  in  which  is  p^,  and  the  piston  moves  back 
again  through  the  whole  length  of  the  stroke.  The  back 
pressure  which  it  has  to  overcome  is  on  account  of  its 
comparatively  rapid  motion  somewhat  larger  than^^,  and  the 
mean  value  of  this  back  pressure  we  will  for  the  sake  of  dis- 
tinction call  p^.  The  steam  which  remains  in  the  waste  space 
at  the  end  of  the  return  stroke,  and  must  be  taken  into  ac- 
count for  the  next  stroke,  has  a  pressure  which  may  not  be 
equal  either  to  p^  or  to  p„',  and  therefore  must  be  denoted 
by  />„".  It  may  be  greater  or  less  than  p^,  according  as  the 
steam  is  shut  off  from  the  condenser  a  little  before  or  after 
"the  end  of  the  return  stroke ;  for  in  the  former  case  the  steam 
■will  be  compressed  still  further,  while  in  the  latter  it  will 
have  time  to  escape  partially  into  the  condenser  and  so  to 
expand  again.  Finally  the  mass  M  must  be  returned  from 
the  condenser  into  the  boiler,  during  which  as  before  the 
pressure  p„  assists  the  operation,  and  the  presstire  p^  has  to 
be  overcome. 

The  quantities  of  work  done  during  these  processes  will 
be  represented  by  expressions  very  similar  to  those  in  the 
simpler  case  already  considered  :  a  few  obvious  changes  must 
be  made  in  the  suiBxes  to  the  letters,  and  the  quantities 
added  which  refer  to  the  waste  space.  We  thus  obtain  the 
following  equations : 

During  the  admission  of  steam  we  have,  as  in  §  10, 
only  writing  «,"  instead  of  w„, 

W,  =  {m,u^  +Mcr-  m,u;')  pi (22). 

During  the  expansion  from  pressure  p^  to  p^,  we  have  as 
in  equation  {^^)  of  Chapter  VI.,  writing  M-^yi,  instead  of  M, 

TF',  =  m^ujp^ -  m,uj)^  +  'm^Pi- m^P^  +{M+fi)C (T,  -  T^ 

(2S). 


254 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOfiY  OF  HiiAT. 


During  the  return  stroke  of  the  piston,  where  the  whole, 
space  swept  through  by  the  piston  equals  the  whole  space 
occupied  by  ilf  +  /*  at  pressure  p,,  less  the  waste  space  which 
is  represented  by  /AoMj"  +  /mt,  we  have 


F3  =  -  Km,  +M<r^  fiX')  Po'- 


.(24). 


During  the  forcing  back  of  the  mass  M  into  the  boiler  we 
have 

W,  =  -Mcr(p,^p^ (25). 

Hence  for'  the  total  work-  done  we  have 

W  =  m,p,  -  m,p^  +  {M+,j,)C  {T,  -  T,) 
+  WA  (p/  -  p,)  +  m^u^  (p^  -p,') 
-Mo-  (p.  -p^  +p: - p,)  - i^X'  (p:  -Po')  ■  •  -(26). 

In  this  equation  the  masses  m^  and  m,  are  given  by 
equation  (21)  and  by  equation  (55)  of  Chapter  vl.  respectively; 
substituting  in  the  former  p^"  for  p^,  and  changing  T^,  r^,  m„ 
in  the  same  way,  while  in  the  latter  M  +  fi  is  to  be  sub^ 
stituted  for  M,  p  for  r,  and  G  for  c.  The  elimination  of  m^ 
and  wij,  is  thus  rendered  possible:  here  however  we  shall  only 
make  the  substitution  in  the  case  of  one  of  them,  m^,  as  it  is 
more  convenient  for  purposes  of  calculation  to  combine  the 
equation  so  obtained  with  the  two  named  above.  Thus  the 
system  of  equations  serving  to  determine  the  work  done 
by  the  steam-engine  wiU,  in  its  most  general  form,  be  as 
follows : 


W  =  m,p,  -m^p^  +  MG  {T,  -  T,) 

+  MoPo"  -VC  (T,  -  T:)  +  m,u,  (P3  -p^) 
+  mX  {Po-Po")  -  M<T  (p;  -j5„) 

'^■i\P2-^^^ipl-P.)]=in,p, 

+  l^.<{p:-pn+Ma(^,-p;) 


Y==^+(M+;.)aiog^» 


..(27). 


APPLICATION   TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE,  255 

§  13.  Pressure  of  Steam  in  th6  Cylinder  during  the  dif- 
ferent Stages  of  the  Process,  and  corresponding  Simplifications 
of  the  Equations. 

To  obtain  numerical  values  from  equations  (27),  we 
must  first  determine  more   accurately   the  quantities  p^, 

No  general  law  can  be  laid  down  as  to  the  mode  in  which 
the  pressure  within  the  cylinder  varies  during  the  admission 
of  steam,  because  the  opening  and  closing  of  the  steam  pipe 
is  performed  with  different  engines  in  different  ways.  For 
the  same  reason  no  fixed  general  value  can  be  laid  down  for 
the  relation  between  the  mean  pressure  p^'  and  the  final 
pressure  p^  taking  the  latter  in  its  strictest  meaning.  This 
is  however  possible  if  we  make  a  slight  change  in  the  signifi- 
cation of  ^2- 

The  shutting  off  of  the  cylinder  from  the  boiler  cannot 
of  course  be  instantaneous:  the  necessary  motion  of  the 
valve  or  cock  must  consume  a  certain  time,  less  or  greater 
according  to  the  arrangement  of  the  gear.  During  this  time 
the  steam  in  the  cylinder  expands  somewhat,  because  as  the 
opening  narrows  the  quantity  of  fresh  steam  which  enters  is 
less  than  corresponds  to  the  speed  of  the  piston.  We  may 
therefore  assume  in  general  that  at  the  end  of  this  time  the 
pressure  is  already  somewhat  less  than  p^. 

Again,  if  we  do  not  limit  ourselves  to  taking  the  end  of 
the  time  required  to  close  the  valve  as  the  moment  of  cut-off, 
but  allow  ourselves  some  freedom  in  fixing  this  moment, 
other  values  may  be  obtained  for  p^.  The  moment  may  be 
so  chosen  that,  if  at  this  moment  the  whole  mass  M  had 
already  been  admitted,  a  pressure  would  then  exist  exactly 
equal  to  the  mean  pressure  calculated  for  all  the  time  up  to 
this  instant.  If  we  substitute  for  the  actual  cut-off  the 
instantaneous  cut-off  as  thus  determined,  the  resulting  error 
in  the  calculation  of  the  work  will  be  quite  insignificant. 
With  this  modification  therefore  we  can  fall  in  with  Pamr 
hour's  assumption,  that  _Pi'  =  p„,  but  we  must  then  for  each 
particular  case  make  a  special  investigation  of  the  circum- 
stances, in  order  to  determine  accurately  the  moment  to  be 
fixed  for  the  cut-off. 

As  regards  the  back-pressure  p^,  which  exists  during  the 
return  stroke,  the  difference  Po'—Po  is  obviously  smaller, 


256     ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

other  things  being  equal,  as  p^  is  smaller.  It  is  therefore 
smaller  for  a  condensing  engine  than  for  a  high-pressure 
engine,  where  jo„  equals  one  atmosphere.  In  the  case  of  the 
most  important  high-pressure  engine,  the  locomotive,  there 
is  generally  a  special  circumstance  which  tends  to  increase 
this  difference,  viz.  that  the  steam  is  not  usually  led  into  the 
air  by  the  shortest  and  widest  channel  possible,  but  is  led 
into  the  chimney,  and  there  allowed  to  escape  through  a 
somewhat  contracted  blast-pipe,  in  order  to  increase  the 
draught.  In  this  case  an  accurate  determination  of  this 
difference  is  of  importance  to  obtain  a  trustworthy  result. 
It  must  also  be  remembered  that  this  difference  is  not  con- 
stant even  with  the  same  engine,  but  depends  upon  the 
speed,  and  the  law  of  this  dependence  must  therefore  be 
investigated.  This  subject,  with  the  researches  made  upon 
it,  will  not  however  be  entered  on  here,  since  it  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  present  application  of  the  Mechanical  Theory 
of  Heat. 

In  the  case  of  engines  where  the  exhaust  steam  is  not 
thus  employed,  and  especially  with  condensing  engines,  p„' 
differs  so  little  from  p^,  and  therefore  varies  so  slightly  with 
the  speed,  that  it  is  usually  sufficient  to  assume  a  mean 
value  for^d'.  Moreover,  since  p^  enters  into  equations  (27) 
only  in  terms  which  are  multiplied  by  a;  and  therefore  have 
but  smg,ll  influence  on  the  value  of  the  work  done,  we  may 
also  substitute  for  p,,  the  most  probable  value  for  p„'. 

The  pressure  p^',  which  exists  in  the  waste  space,  depends, 
as  already  mentioned,  on  whether  the  shutting  off  from  the 
condenser  takes  place  before  or  after  the  end  of  the  stroke, 
and  may  therefore  have  very  different  values.  But  this 
pressure,  and  the  quantities  depending  on  it,  occur  in  equa- 
tions (27)  only  in  terms  containing  the  small  factors  /j,  and 
fj,„,  so  that  an  approximate  value  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose. 
In  cases  where  there  are  no  special  circumstances  which 
cause  p^'  to  vary  widely  from  p^',  we  may  neglect  this  differ- 
ence, as  we  did  that  between  p„  and  p/,  and  may  thus  assume 
as  a  general  value  for  all  three  quantities  the  most  probable 
mean  value  for  the  back-pressure  within  the  cylinder.  This 
value  we  may  call  p^. 

These  simplifications  change  equations  (27)  into  the 
following : 


(28). 


APPLICATIDir  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  257 

W  =mj>,  -  m,p,  +  MG  {T,  -  T,)  +  fi^,  -  f,C  {T,-T,)  ] 

m^.  =  «».?.  +  MO (T, -  T,)  +  ^„p„ -,iG{T,-  T,) 
+  /^oWo  {jPi  -P,)  +  Ma-  {p^  -p^ 

§  14.  Substitution  of  the  Volwme  for  the  porresponding 
Temp&rature  in  certain  cases. 

In  the  above  equations  it  is  assumed  that,  besides  the 
masses  M,m^,  fju,  and  /*,,,  of  which  the  two  first  must  be  found 
by  direct  observation,  and  the  two  latter  can  be  approxi- 
mately determined  from  the  size  of  the  waste  space,  we  have 
also  given  the  four  pressures  p^,  p^,  p„  and  p„,  or,  which  is 
the  same  thing,  the  four  temperatures  T^,  T^,- 1\,  and  T^, 
In  practice  however  this  condition  is  only  partially  fulfilled, 
and  we  must  therefore  bring  in  other  data  to  assist  us. 

'  Of  the  four  pressures  here  mentioned,  two  only,  p^  and  p^, 
may  be  taken  as  known :  of  these  the  first  is  given  directly 
by  the  gauge  on  the  boiler,  and  the  latter  can  be  at  least 
approximately  fixed  by  the  gauge  on  the  condenser.  The 
two  others,  p^  and  p^,  are  not  given  directly ;  but  we  know 
the  dimensions  of  the  cylinder  and  the  point  of  cut-ofi",  and 
can  thence  deduce  the  volume  of  the  steam  at  the  moment 
of  cut-off  and  at  the  end  of  the  stroke.  We  may  then  take 
these  volumes  as  our  data  in  place  of  the  pressures  p^  and  p^. 
For  this  purpose  we  must  throw  the  equations  into  a  form, 
which  will  enable  us  to  use  the  above  data  for  calculation. 

Let  us  now,  as  before  in  the  explanation  of  Pambour's 
theory,  denote  by  v'  the  whole  space  within  the  cylinder 
which  is  open  to  the  steam  during  one  stroke,  including  the 
waste  space;  by  ev'  the  space  opened  to  the  steam  up  to  the 
moment  of  cut-off;  and  by  e/  the  waste  space.  Then  in  the 
same  way  as  before  we  have  the  following  equations : 

mijj  ttj  -f-  (i¥-t-  /t)  o-  =  ev', 
c.  17 


258 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOST  OF  HEAT. 


The  quantities  fjb  and  a  are  both  so  small  that  their  pro- 
duct may  be  at  once  neglected ;  whence  we  have 


m^  u^  =  ev'  —  Ma 
m,  u,  =  v'   —  Mcr 


/*o  = 


ev 


.(29). 


Further,  we  have  by  equation  (13)  of  Chapter  VI. 
P  =  Tug, 

writing  the  single  letter  g  for  -^,  which  Vyill  occur  very 

frequently  in  what  follows.  We  can  therefore  replace  p^  and 
Pj  in  equations  (28)  by  u^  and  u^.  Then  the  masses  m,  and 
TWj  occur  only  in  the  products  vn^u^  and  m^u^,  for  which  we 
may  substitute  the  values  given  in  the  two  first  of  equa- 
tions (29).  Again,  by  the  last  of  these  equations  we  may 
eliminate  the  mass  fi^;  and  as  regards  the  qther  mass  n, 
though  this  may  be  somewhat  larger  than  fi^,  yet,  since  the 
terms  which  contain  (i  are  generally  insignificant,  we  can 
without  serious  error  use  the  value  found  for  /t„:  in  other 
words  we  may  drop  for  the  purposes  of  calculation  the  as- 
sumption made  for  the  sake  of  generality,  that  the  original 
mass  in  the  waste  space  is  partly  liquid  and  partly  gaseous, 
and  consider  the  whole  of  it  to  be  in  the  gaseous  form. 

The  above  substitutions  may  be  effected  in  the  more 
general  equations  (27),  as  well  as  in  the  simplified  equations 
(28).  This  substitution  presents  no  difficulty,  and  we  will 
here  confine  ourselves  to  the  latter  set,  in  order  to  have  the 
equations  in  a  form  adapted  for  calculation.  With  these 
changes  they  read  as  follows  : 

W'  =  mJ>,  +  MCC^,-T,)-{v'-M<y){T,g,-p^^p:)^ 


+  SV 


,p^-C(T,-T,) 


{ev'  -  Ma)  T^,  =  m,p,  +  MG  {T,  -  T,) 
{v'-Ma)g,=  (ev'-Ma)g^+(M  +  '£)Clog^ 


(30). 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE. 
§15.     Work  per  Unit-Weight  of  Steam. 


259 


To  adapt  the  above  equations,  which  give  the  work  per 
stroke  or  per  quantity  of  steam  »w,,  to  determine  the  work 
per  unit-weight  of  steam,  we  must  apply  the  same  method 
as  before  in  transforming  equation  (17)  into  (18):  viz.  to 
divide  the  three  equations  by  m,,  and  then  put 

^  =  ?,   ^=F,andI^=F; 


m 


m,. 


TO. 


then  the  equations  become 


M„ 


(p,-C{T,-T,) 


+er 


f 


(31). 


(V-I<T)g,  =  {er-la)g,+  (l+'£)  Clog^ 

§  16.     Treatment  of  the  Equations. 

The  application  of  the  above  equations  to  calculate  the 
work  done  may  be  effected  as  follows.  Assuming  the  pres- 
sure of  steam  to  be  known,  and  also  the  speed  at  which  the 
■engine  works,  we  can  thence  determine  the  volume  V  of  one 
unit-weight  of  steam.  By  help  of  this  value  we  first  calcu^ 
late  the  temperature  T^  from  the  second  equation,  then  T^ 
from  the  third,  and  finally  apply  these  to  determine  the  work 
done  from  the  first  equation. 

Here  however  we  are  met  by  another  difficulty.  In  order 
to  calculate  T^  and  T,  from  the  two  latter  equations,  these 
must  be  solved  for  those  temperatures.  But  they  contaio 
those  temperatures  not  only  explicitly  but  also  implicitly, 
since  p  and  g  are  functions  of  temperature.  If  to  eliminate 
these  quantities  we  use  for  p  one  of  the  ordinary  empirical 
expressions  for  the  pressure  as  a  function  of  tempera- 
ture, and  for  g  the  differential  coefficient  of  the  same  ex- 
pression, then  the  equations  become  too  complicated  for 

17—2 


260      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

further  treatment.  It  would  probably  be  possible  to  adopt 
the  same  method  as  Pambour,  and  to  form  new  empirical 
formulae,  more  convenient  for  the  present  purpose,  and  suffi- 
ciently accurate,  if  not  for  all  temperatures  at  least  "withiA 
certain  limits.  This  however  will  not  here  be  attempted,  but 
another  method  will  be  adopted  instead,  which  makes  the 
calculation  somewhat  extended;  but  easily  performed  in  its 
individual  parts. 

§  17.    Determination  of  -^  or  g,  and  of  the  Product  Tg. 

If  the  range  pf  pressure  of  the  vapour  at  different  tempera- 
tures is  known  with  sufficient  accuracy  ,for  any  liquid,  then 
the  values  of  g  and  Tg  can  also  be  calculated  for  the  same 
temperatures,  and  collected  in  tables,  as  usually  done  with 
the  values  of  p.  For  steam,  which  has  hitherto  been  the 
only  vapour  used  for  the  steam-engine,  the  author  has  per- 
formed such  a  calculation,  by  help  of  Keguault's  tables,  for 
temperatures  from  0°  to  200°.  For  this  purpose  he  differen- 
tiated according  to  t  the  formula  used  by  Regnault  to.  calcu- 
late the  values  of  p  under  and  above  100°;  and  then  calcu- 
lated 5'  by  means  of  the  new  formulse  thus  obtained.  But 
since  these  formulae  did  not  seem  to  answer  the  purpose  so 
well  as  to  repay  the  great  labour  involved,  and  since  the 
forming  and  calculating  of  other  more  suitable  formulae 
proved  still  more  tedious,  the  author  was  contented  to  use 
the  numbers  already  calculated  for  the  pressure  to  determine 
approximately  the  differential  coefficient  of  that  pressure: 
e.g.,  if  the  pressure  for  the  temperatures  146°  and  148°  were 

denoted  by  p^^^  and  p,^,,  it  was  assumed  that  """     ^'"  would 

represent  with  sufficient  accuracy  the  value  of  the  differen- 
tial coefficient  for  the  mean  temperature  ]47°. 

Above  100°  the  same  numbers  were  employed  as  were 
used  by  Regnault*.  With  regard  to  values  under  100°  it  has 
been  recently  pointed  out  by  Moritzf  that  the  formula  used 
by  Regnault  is  somewhat  inaccurate,  especially  in  the  neighr 

*  AKm.  de  VAcad.  des  Sciences,  Vol.  xxi.  p.  625. 

t  Bulletin  de  la  Classe  physico-mathSmatique  de  VAcad.' de  St  Pitershcmra 
Vol.  XIII.  p.  41.  '■ 


-APPLICATIOK  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  261 

bourhood  of  100°,  owing  to  his  having  employed  for  the 
calculation  of  the  constants  logarithms  to  seven  places  of 
decimals  only.  Moritz  has  therefore  recalculated  these  con- 
stants from  the  same  observed  values,  but  using  ten  places 
of  logarithms,  and  has  published  the  values  oip  derived  from 
this  improved  formula,  so  far  as  they  differ  from  Regnault's 
values,  which  first  takes  place  at  40°.  These  are  the  values 
used  by  the  author*. 

When  g  has  been  calculated  for  the  various  temperatures,, 
the  product  Tff  can  be  calculated  without  further  difficulty, 
since  T  is  given  by  the  simple  equation 

■  The  values  of  g  and  Tg  thus  found  are  given  in  a  table 
at  the  end  of  this  Chapter.  To  complete  this  the  corre- 
sponding values  oip  are  added,  those  from  0°  to  40°  and  above 
100°  being  Regnault's  numbers,  and  those  from  40°  to  100° 
being  Moritz's.  By  the  side  of  each  of  these  three  columns  are 
given  the  differences  between  each  two  successive  numbers, 
so  that  this  table  enables  the  values  of  these  thrqe  quantities 
to  be  found  for  any  given  temperature,  and  conversely  the 
temperature  corresponding  to  any  given  value  of  one  of  these 
three  quantities. 

§  18.  Introduction  of  other  Measures  of  Pressure  and 
Heat. 

One  other  remark  is  to  be  made  as  to  the  mode  of  using 
this  table.  In  equations  (31)  it  is  assumed  that  the  pressure  p 
and  its  differential  coefficient  g  are  expressed  in  kilograms 
per  square  metre,  whereas  in  the  table  the  same  unit  of 
pressure  is  employed  as  in  Regnault's  tables,  viz.  a  milli- 
metre of  mercury.  Hence,  if  in  the  formulae  which  follow 
we  are  to  consider  p.  and  g  as  expressed  in  these  latter  iinits, 
we  must  alter  equations  (31)  by  multiplying  p  and  g  by  the 
number  13"596  which  expre3ses  the  specific  weight  of  mercury; 
inasmuch  as  this,  by  Chapter  yi,,  §  10,  is  the  ratio  between 
the  units.  If  we  denote  this  number  by  A;,  we  must  sub- 
stitute hp  and  hg  for  p  and  g,  whenever  these  occur  in  the 
above  equations.  Similarly  for  the  quantities  G  and  p,  which 
express  the  specific  heat  and  the  heat  of  vaporization  in, 

*  See  note  at  end  of  chapter. 


262 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOKY  OF  HEAT. 


mechanical  units,  we  will  use  c  and  r  which,  refer  to  the  ordi- 
nary unit  of  heat.    For  this  purpose  we  must  writers  and- 
Er  for  G  and  p. 

If  we  now  divide  the  equations  by  h,  so  as  to  bring  the  con- 
stants E  and  k  together  as  much  as  possible,  these  equations  , 

W 
take  the  following  form,  from  which  to  calculate  -j- , 

thereby  obtain  W,  the  work  done  : — 

~  =  ~[r,  +  h{T,-TJ\-{V-l<T){T,g,-p,+p,) 


and 


k  M„ 


E, 


{V-W)g,=  {eV-la)9,+  (l  +  '-Pl^\og^ 


(32). 


.(33). 


E 
The  quantity  y  has  the  following  value : 

^_  423-55  _ 
&-l3^  =  ^^^^2^ 

§  19.    Determination  of  the  Temperatures  Tj,  and  T . 
The  second  of  equations  (32)  may  be  written  as  follows : 

T^,=  0+a(t,-t^-b{p,-p^) (34), 

where  C,  a  and  6  are  independent  of  T^,  and  have  the  values 


_E 


6= 


eV-la- 

ev-y 


(34a).  _ 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  263 

Of  the  three  terms  on  the  right-haud  side  of  (34)  the  first 
is  by  far  the  most  important ;  and  it  is  thus  possible  to 
determine  T^g^,  and  thereby  also  the  temperature  t^  by 
successive  approximations.  To  obtain  the  first  approximation 
to  Tg,  -which,  we  may. call  T'g',  we  may  write  t^  for  t^,  and 
Pi  for^j.     Then  we  have 

T'g'^G (35). 

The  temperature  t'  corresponding  to  this  value  of  Tg 
must  be  found  from  the  table.  Then  to  obtain  the  second 
approximation  to  Tg  we  may  write  the  value  H  thus  found 
for  t^  in  equation  (34),  and  the  corresponding  value  p  of  the 
pressure  for  p^.  Thus,  remembering  equation  (35),  we  have 
for  the  second  approximation 

T"g"=  Tg'  +  a{t,~ t')  - h  {p~p') (35a). 

The  temperature  t"  corresponding  to  this  value  of  Tg 
must  be  found  as  before  from  the  table.  If  a  second  ap- 
proximation be  not  sufficient,  the  process  must  be  repeated. 
Writing  in  equation  (34)  t"  andp"  in  the  place  of  i,  andp,, 
and  remembering  equations  (35)  and  (35a),  we  have 

T"'g"'=T'g"  +  a{t'-t")-b{p'  -p") (356). 

The  new  temperature  t'"  can  again  be  found  from  the  table. 

In  this  way  we  may  proceed  to  any  degree  of  approxima- 
tion ;  but  the  third  approximation  only  differs  by  about  -^  of  a 
degree,  and  the  fourth  by  less  than  -j^Vir  °^  ^  degree,  from  the 
true  value  of  t^. 

The  treatment  of  the  third  of  equations  (32)  is  very 
similar.  If  we  divide  by  F—  la,  and  for  convenience  of  calcu- 
lation replace  the  natural  by  common  logarithms  (for  which 
purpose  we  have  to  divide  by  the  modulus  M)  the  equation 
takes  the  form 

g=G+a'Log^.... (36), 

where  C  and  a  have  the  following  values  independent  of  T^ : 


„     eV-la- 
a  =  T-  X 


k     M  ( V-W)  J 


.(3.6a). 


264     ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

In  equation  (36)  the  first  term  is  again  tlie  mosi  im- 
portant, and  we  can  therefore  proceed  hy  successive  approxi- 
mations. First  write  T^  for  1\;  we  then  have  as  the  first 
approximation  for  cr„ 

g'=C (37). 

The  corresponding  temperature  t'  can  be  found  from  the 
table,  and  from  this  we  can  easily  obtain  the  absolute  tem- 
perature T'.    Write  T'  for  T^  in  equation  (36);  then  we  have 

Sr"=5r'  +  aLogp (37a). 

This  gives  T".     Similarly  we  can  obtain  the  equation 

g"'=g"  +  a\og^ (376). 

-virhich  again  gives  T";  and  so  on.  Here  again  a  very  few 
approximations  will  give  a  value  which  very  closely  agrees 
with  the  actual  value  of  2^. 

§  20.    Determination,  of  c  and  r. 

,It  now  only  remains  to  determine  the  quantities  c  and  r, 
before  proceeding  to  the  numerical  application  of  equations 

The  quantity  e,  or  the  specific  heat  of  the  liquid,  has 
hitherto  been  treated  as  constant.  This  is  not  perfectly  correct,- 
since  it  increases  slightly  as  the  temperature  increases.  If 
however  we  take  as  its  general  value  the  correct  value  for 
the  mean  of  the  temperatures  which  occur  in  the  investigation, 
the  divergencies  may  be  neglected.  This  mean  temperature 
in  the  case  of  engines  driven  by  steam  may  be  taken  at  100°, 
which  for  an  ordinary  high-pressure  condensing  engine  is 
about  a  mean  between  the  tempeirature  of  the  boiler  and  that 
of  the  condenser.  Taking  therefore  the  value  of  the  specific 
heat  which  Regnault  gives  for  water' at  100°,  we  may  put 

c  =  l-013 (38). 

To  determine  r  we  start  from  the  equation  which  Regnault 
gives  for  the  whole  quantity  of  heat  required  to  heat  a 
unit-weight  of  water  from  0°  to  the  temperature  t,  and  to 
transform  it  at  that  temperature  into  steam.  This  equation  is 

A,  =  606-5  +  0-305^ 


Jo 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  2&5 

If  here   we  substitute  for  \  the  expression  corresponding 

to  the  foregoing  definition,  viz.  I  cdt  +  r,  we  have 

Jo 

r  =  606-5  +  0-305f- f  cdfc 

Jo 

In  the  integral  we  must  use  for  c  the  function  of  tem- 
perature exactly  detetmined  by  Eegnault*,  if  we  are  to 
obtain  for  r  the  precise  values  which  Regnault  gives.  For 
the  present  purpose  it  is  perhaps  sufficient  here  also  to  use 
for  c  the  constant  above-mentioned.     This  gives 

rt 
odt=l-01St; 

la 

and  the  two  terms  involving  t  in  the  last  equation  can  now 
be  combined  into  one,  viz.  —  O'lOSt.  We  must  at  the  same 
time  make  some  change  in  the  constant  term  of  the  equa- 
tion. This  we  will  so  determine,  that  the  same  value  of  r 
which  is  probably  the  most  accurate  of  all  given  by  observa- 
tion, shall  also  be  correct  as  given  by  the  formula.  Now 
at  100°  Regnault  found  for  \,  as  the  mean  of  38  observations, 
the  value  636  67.  If  from  this  we  subtract  the  quantity  of 
heat  required  to  heat  the  unit-weight  of  water  from  0°  to 
100°,  which  according  to  Regnault  is  lOb'5  heat-units,  there 
remains  to  one  place  of  decimals  only 

r^  =  536-2t. 
Applying  this  value  we  obtain  for  r  the  formula 

r  =  607-0-708« (39). 

This  formula  is  already  laid  down  in  Chapter  VII.,  §  3 ; 
and  a  short  table  is  there  given,  which  exhibits  the  close 
accordance  between  the  values  of  r  as  calculated  by  this 
formula,  and  as  given  by  Regnault  in  his  tables. 

§  21.  Special  Form  of  Equation  (32)  for  an  Engine 
working  without  expansion. 

In  order  to  distinguish  the  effects  of  the  two  different 
kinds  of  expansive  action,  to  which  the  two  latter  of  equa- 

*  Relation  dee  expiriencei.  Vol.  I.  p.  748. 

f  Begnault  himself  used  in  his  tables  the  nnmher  536-5  instead  of  the 
ahdve;  this  simply  arises  from  the  fact  that  he  has  used  the  round  number 
637  for  X  at  100",  instead  of  636-67  as  given  above. 


266      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

tions  (32)  refer,  it  seems  desirable  first  to  consider  an  engine 
in  which  only  one  of  the  two  occurs.  We  will  therefore 
begin  with  an  engine  that  works  without  expansion.  In  this 
case  we  may  substitute  for  e,  or  the  ratio  of  the  volumes 
before  and  after  expansion,  the  value  1 ;  and  may  also  put 
Tj  =  T^.  The  equations  (32)  are  thus  greatly  simplified. 
The  last  becomes  an  identity,  and  is  therefore  useless.  In 
the  second  the  right-hand  side  remains  unaltered,  whilst  the 
left-hand  side  becomes  {V—la)T^^.  Finally  the  first 
equation  takes  the  form 

h  Mj 

If  we  here  replace  {V-la)  T^g^  by  the  expression  on  the 
right-hand  side  of  the  second  equation,  all  the  terms  con- 

.  .      E 
tainmg  ^  as  factor  cancel  each  other,  as  do  two  terms  con- 
taining Zo-  as  factor,  and  the  terms  which  remain  can  be 
collected  together  as  two  products.     Then  the  two  equations 
are 

W 

—  =  F  (1  -  e)  (p,  -jp„)  -  la-  (p,  -p,) 


(V-l<r)T,ff,  =  f{r,  +  lc{T,-T,)] 


+  ^^{f^''°    "^Z     ^'^+P^-Po}+^(P-P^)_ 


(40). 


The  first  of  these  equations  is  exactly  the  same  as  is 

given  by  Pambour's  theory,  if  in  equation  (18)  we  put  e  =  1, 

and  then  by  means  of  equation  (12).  (having  first  put  e  =  l 

v'     ■     . 
and  —  =  F  in  that  equation)  replace  B  by  the  volume   V. 

The  only  difierence  therefore  is  in  the  second  equation,  which 
replaces  the  simple  relation  between  volume  and  pressure 
assumed  by  Pambour. 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  267 

§  22.    Numerical  Values  qf  the  Constants. 

The  quantity  e  which  occurs  in  these  equations,  and  re- 
presents the  ratio  of  the  waste  space  to  the  whole  space  left 
open  to  the  steam,  may  be  taken  as  0"05.  The  quantity  of 
water  which  the  steam  carries  over  with  it  into  the  cylinder 
is  different  in  different  engines.  Pambour  considers  that  it 
averages  0"25  of  the  whole  mass  entering  the  cylinder  in  the 
case  of  locomotives,  but  much  less,  005,  in  the  case  of  station- 
ary engines.  We  will  here  take  the  latter  value,  which  gives 
1 :  0"95  as  the  ratio  of  the  whole  mass  entering  the  cylinder 
to  that  part  of  it  which  is  in  the  form  of  steam.  Further, 
let  the  pressure  in  the  boiler,  or  p^,  be  five  atmospheres,  to 
which  corresponds  the  teiiiperature  152'22°;  and  let  it  be 
supposed  that  the  engine  has  no  condenser,  or,  which  is  the 
same  thing,  a  condenser  at  the  pressure  of  one  atmosphere. 
The  mean  Isack-pressure  in  the  cylinder  is  then  greater  than 
one  atmosphere.  With  locomotives  this  excess  of  back- 
pressure may  be  considerable,  for  the  special  reasons  already 
mentioned ;  with  stationary  engines  it  is  insignificant.  Pam- 
bour, in  his  tables  for  stationary  non-condensing , engines,  has 
altogether  neglected  this  excess;  and  since  our  present  object 
is  to  compare  the  new  formula  with  his,  we  will  follow  his 
example  and  put^^  =  one  atmosphere. 

We  have  then  in  this  case  the  following  values  to  insert 
in  equations  (40) : 

e  =  005 


'=m=^''' 


.(41). 


p,  =  3800 

^0  =  760 

We  may  also  fix  once  for  all  the  following  values : 

k  =  13-596, 

<r  =  0001. 

There  now  remain  only  the  quantities  V  and  jp,  undeter- 
mined in  equations  (40),  in  addition  to  the  quantity  W,  of 
which  we  are  seeking  the  value.  Of  these  V  is  the  volume 
of  steam  in  the  cylinder  per  Unit-weight,  and  p^  is  the  final 
pressure  within  the  cylinder. 


268  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

§  23.  The  least  possible  Value  of  V,  and  the  correspond- 
ing amount  of  Work. 

We  must  first  enquire  what  is  the  least  possible  value 
of  V.  This  value  corresponds  to  the  case  in  which  the 
pressure  in  the  cylinder  is  the  same  as  in  the  boiler,  and  we 
have  therefore  only  to  substitute  p^  for  p^  in  the  last  of 
equations  (40).    Thus  we  obtain 


Er, 
k 

^l<ry.T,g, 

T^ff.- 

\E 

Mo 

+i'r 

-4 

^ W.     «.  -n(T^  -V\  T  •••(42). 


In  order  to  give  an  example  of  the  influence  of  the  waste 
space,  two  values  have  bfeen  calculated  from  this  expression ; 
the  first  that  which  would  exist  if  there  were  no  waste  space, 
and  therefore  e  =  0 ;  the  second  that  which  exists  upon  our 
assumption  that  e  =  0"05.  These  two  values  expressed  in 
cubic  metres  per  kilogram  of  steam  passing  out  of  the  boiler 
are  0-3637  atd  0-3690. 

.  The  reason  why  the  second  value  is  greater  than  the  first 
is  that  the  steam  rushes  at  first  into  the  waste  space  with 
great  velocity;  the  'vis  viva  of  this  motion  is  then  transformed 
into  heat,  and  this  heat  again  evaporates  some  part  of  the 
priming  water.  A  second  reason  is  that  the  steam  already 
existing  in  the  waste  space  before  the  admission  goes  to 
increase  the  whole  quantity  of  steam  during  the  rest  of  the 
process. 

If  we  substitute  these  two  values  of  V  in  the  first  of 
equations  (40),  at  the  same  time  puttitig  e  =  0  in  the  one 
case,  and  e  =  0-05  in  the  other,  the  corresponding  quantities 
of  work,  expressed  in  kilogrammetres,  are  respectively  14990 
and  14450. 

According  to  Pambour's  theory  it  makes  no  difference 
with  regard  to  the  volume,  whether  part  of  it  is  waste  space 
or  not;  in  both  cases  it  is  given  by  the  same  equation  (116), 
if  for  p  is  substituted  the  special  value  p, .  The  value  thus 
obtained  for  the  volume  is  0-3883.  The  fact  that  this  value 
is  greater  than  the  value  0-3637  found  above  for  the  same 
quantity  of  steam,  is  explained  by  the  circumstance  that  it 
has  been  until  now  usual  to  assume  for  steam  at  its  maxi- 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  269 

.niuin  density  a  volume  greater  than  is  allowed  by  the 
mechanical  theory  of  heat;  this  view  finds  its  expression  in 
equation  (116).  If  by  means  of  this  latter  volume  we  deter- 
mine the  work  from  Pambour's  equation  upon  the  two 
assumptions  that  6  =  0  and  that  e  =^'0'05,  the  values  obtained 
are  16000  and  15200.  These  quantities,  as  follows  immedi- 
ately from  the  greater  volume,  are  both  greater  than  those 
found  above,  but  not  in  the  same  ratio,  because  the  loss  of 
steam  due  to  the  waste  space  is  smaller  accojrding  to  our 
equations  than  according  to  Pambour's  theory. 

§  24.     Calculation  of  the  Work  for  other  Values  ofY. 

"With  an  engine  of  the  kind  here  considered,  the  efiS- 
ciency  of  which  was  investigated  by  Pambour,  the  speed 
which  the  engine  actually  assumed  bore  a  proportion  in  one 
case  of  1*275  :  1,  and  in  another,  with  a  lighter  load,  of 
1"70  :  1,  to  the  minimum  speed  as  calculated  by  his  theory 
for  the  same  intensity  of  evaporation,  and  for  the  same 
boiler-pressure.  To  these  speeds  correspond  in  our  case  the 
volumes  0"495  and  0"660  respectively.  We  will  now,  as  an 
example  of  the  mode  of  determining  the  work  done,  choose  a 
speed  which  lies  between  these  two,  say  in  round  numbers 

F=0-6. 

Our  first  business  is  now  to  find  the  value  of  T,^  corre- 
sponding to  this  value  of  V.  For  this  purpose  we  use  equa- 
tion (34),  which  takes  the  following  special  form : 

T,g^  =  26-577  +  56'42  («, - ^  - 0-0483  (p, -p,)  ... (43). 

If  by  means  of  this  equation  we  obtain  successive  approxi- 
mations to  t^,  as  described  in  section  (19),  the  series  of  values 
is  as  follows : 

tf    =13301, 

if'   =134-43, 

r  =134-32, 


Further  approximations  would  differ  only  in  higher  places  of 
decimals,  and  if  we  confine  ourselves  to  two  places  we  may 


270 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OB*  HEAT. 


takB  the  last  number  as  the  true  value  of  t^t    The  corre- 
sponding pressure  is 

^,  =  2308-30. 

If  we  substitute  in  the  first  of  equations  (40)  these  values 
of  V  and  p^,  together  with  the  approximate  values  of  con- 
stants as  fixed  in  §  22,  we  obtain 

pr=  11960. 

By  Pambour's  equation  (18)  we  have  for  the  same  volume  O'C 

W=  12520. 

In  order  to  exhibit  more  clearly  the  dependence  of  the 
work  upon  the  volume,  and  at  the  same  time  the  divergence 
between  Pambour's  theory  and  the  author's  on  this  point, 
calculations  similar  to  that  for  volume  0"6  have  been  made 
for  a  Series  of  other  volumes  increasing  by  equal  intervals. 
The  results  are  given  in  the  following  table.  The  first  hori- 
zontal row  of  numbers,  which  is  separated  from  the  rest, 
contains  the  values  for  an  engine  without  waste  space.  The 
further  arrangement  of  the  table  is  easily  understood. 


Pambour 

's  Values 

V 

W 

's 

r 

W 

0-3637 

isa-sa" 

14  990 

0-3883 

16  000 

0-3690 

152-22" 

14  450 

0-3883 

15  200 

0-4 

149-12 

14100 

0-4 

15  050 

0-6 

140-83 

13  020 

0-5 

13  780 

0-6 

134-33 

11960 

0-6 

12  520 

0-7 

129-03 

10  910 

0-7 

11256 

0-8 

124-55 

9  880 

0-8 

9  980 

0-9 

120-72 

8  860 

0-9 

8  710  1 

1 

117-36 

7  840 

1 

7  440 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  quantities  of  work,  when  calculated 
by  Pambour's  theory,  decrease  more  rapidly  as  the  volume 
increases  than  when  calculated  by  the  author's ;  so  that  whilst 
at  first  they  are  considerably  the  larger  they  get  nearer  and 
nearer  to  the  latter  and  finally  become  smaller.  The  ex- 
planation is  that  by  Pamboui?'s  theory,  whilst  the  expansion 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  271 

is  going  on  during  the  admission,  the  amount  of  steam  re- 
mains al-v^ays  the  same  as  it  was  at  the  commencement; 
while,  according  to  the  author's  theory,  a  part  of  the  priming 
water  is  afterwards  evaporated,  and  this  quantity  is  greater 
the  greater  the  expansion. 

§  25.  Wcyrk  done  for  a  given  Value  of  Y  hy  an  Engine 
working  with  Expansion. 

We  will  now  treat  in  the  same  way  an  engine  working 
with  expansion,  and  will  choose  as  our  example  a  condensing 
engine.  To  fix  the  degree  of  expansion,  we  will  assume  that 
the  steam  is  cut  off  at  one  third  of  the  stroke.  We  then 
have,  to  determine  e,  the  equation 

6-6=^(1-6); 

whence,  giving  to  e  the  value  O'OS,  we  have 

e  =  ?:J  =  0-3666. 
o 

Let  the  boiler-pressure  be  as  before  five  atmospheres.  The 
condenser-pressure  can  with  good  arrangements  be  kept 
below  -j^jj  atmosphere.  But  since  it  is  not  always  so  small, 
and  in  addition  the  back-pressure  in  the  cylinder  somewhat 
exceeds  the  pressure  in  the  condenser,  we  will  assume  the 
mean  back-pressure  p^  to  be  in  round  numbers  \  atmosphere, 
or  152  millimetres.  To  this  corresponds  the  temperature 
ta  —  60-46°.  If  lastly  we  give  to  I  the  same  value  as  before, 
the  constants  to  be  used  in  our  example  will  he  as  follows : 

6  =  0-36667 


e  =  0-05 
i=  1-053 
>,  =  3800 
^^0=152 


(44). 


To  be  able  to  calculate  the  work  done,  we  only  now  need 
id  know  the  value  of  V.  To  assist  us  in  choosing  this, 
we  must  first  know  the  least  possible  value  of  V.  This  is 
found  exactly  as  in  the  case  of  the  engine  without  expansion, 
by  putting  p^^  for  p^  in  the  second  of  equations  (32),  and 


272  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

altering  the  otter  magnitudes,  whicli'  are '  in  combination 
with  Pj,  in  the  same  way.  We  thus  obtain  in  the  present 
case  the  value  1-010.  Starting  from  this,  we  will  first 
suppose  that  the  actual  speed  of  the  engine  exceeds  the  least 
possible  in  the  ratio  3  :  2.  We  may  then  put  in  round 
numbers  V=  15,  and  we  will  calculate  the  work  done  at  this 
speed.    . 

We  first  determine  the  two  temperatures  t^  and  t^,  by 
substituting  this  value  of  V  in  the  two  last  of  equations  (32). 
Of  these  t^  has  already  been  approximately  found  for  the 
non-condensing  engine;  and  since  the  present  case  only 
differs  from  the  former  inasmuch  as  the  quantity  e,  which 
was  there  taken  equal  to  1,  has  here  a  different  value,  we 
need  not  go  through  the  process  again,  but  will  merely  give 
the  final  result,  which  is 

t,  =  137-43», 

To  determine  tg  we  have  equation  (36),  which  takes  in 
this  case  the  form 

^3  =  26-604  + 51-515  Log  ^ (45). 

From  this  we  obtain  the  following  successive  approxima- 
tions : 

t'    =99-24°  T 

t"   =101-93 

t'"  =101-74 

t""  =  101-76  J 

The  last  of  these,  from  which  further  approximations  would 
only  diverge  in  higher  places  of  decimals,  we  will  consider 
to  be  the  correct  value  of  <j,  and  will  apply  it,  together  with 
the  known  values  of  t^  and  i„,  to  the  first  of  equations  (32), 
Thus  we  obtain 

W=  31080. 

If,  taking  the  same  value  for  V,  we  calculate  the  work 
done  by  Pambour's  equation  (18),  remembering  to  determine 
B  and  b  not  from  equation  (115)  as  with  the  non-condensing 
engine,  but  from  equation  (lla)  -which  refers  to  condensing 
engines,  we  find 

TF=  32640. 


APPUCATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  273 

§  26.  Swmmary  of  Various  Cases  relfiting  to  the  Work-', 
ing  of  the  Engine. 

The  work  done  for  the  volumes  1*2,  1'8  and  2'1  has 
been  calculated  in  the  same  way  as  described  above  for  the 
volume  1'5.  Further,  in  order  to  make  clear  by  an  example 
the  influence,  which  the  different  imperfections  of  an  engine 
have  upon  the  amount  of  the  work  done,  the  following  cases 
are  subjoined. 

(1)  The  case  of  an  engine  which  has  no  waste  space, 
and  in  which  the  cylinder  pressure  is  equal  to  the  boiler 
pressure,  and  the  expansion  carried  so  far  that  the  pressure 
has  fallen  from  its  original  value  p^  to  p„.  If  we  only  assume 
further  that  p^  is  exactly  equal  to  the  condenser  pressure, 
this  case  is  that  to  which  equation  (9)  relates,  and  which  gives 
the  greatest  possible  amount  of  work  for  a  given  quantity 
of  heat,  when  the  temperatures  at  which  the  heat  is  taken 
in  and  given  off  are  also  given. 

(2)  The  case  of  an  engine,  where  there  is  again  no  waste 
space,  and  the  cyhnder  and  boiler-pressures  are  equal,  but 
where  the  expansion  is  not  as  before  complete,  but  is  only  in 
the  proportion  of  e  :  1.  This  is  the  case  to  which  equation  (6) 
refers ;  except  that  there,  in  order  to  determine  the  magnitude 
of  the  expansion,  the  change  of  temperature  in  the  steam 
caused  thereby  was  assumed  to  be  known,  whereas  here  the 
expansion  is  fixed  by  the  volume,  and  the  change  of  tem- 
perature must  be  calculated  therefrom. 

(3)  The  case  of  an  engine  having  waste  space  and  in- 
complete expansion,  in  which  the  only  one  of  the  above 
favourable  conditions  which  remains  is  the  fact  that  the 
steam  in  the  cylinder  has  during  admission  the  same  pres- 
sure as  in  the  boiler,  so  that  the  volume  has  its  least  possible 
value.  To  this  are  appended  the  cases  already  mentioned, 
in  which  this  last  favourable  condition  is  also  absent,  and 
the  volume  has  some  other  given  value  instead  of  the  least 
possible. 

For  purposes  of  comparison  Pambour's  theory  has  also 
been  applied  to  all  these  cases  except  the  first,  for  which 
equations  (11a)  and  (llS)  do  not  hold,  inasmuch  as  even 
the  equation  which  he  has  determined  for  low  pressures  can 

C.  18 


274 


ON   THE  MECHANICAL  THEOBT  OF   HEAT. 


only  be  applied  to  ^  or  at  the  lowest  ^-  of  an  atmosphere, 
■whereas  here  the  pressure  has  to  descend  to  ^  of  an  atmo- 
sphere. For  this  first  case  the  numerical  values  given  by  our 
equations  are  as  follows : 

Volume  before  expansion  =  0-3637, 

after.        „         =6-345, 
Work  done =  50460. 

The  result  for  all  the  other  cases  are  contained  in  the 
foUpwing  table ;  in  which  a  line  is  drawn  between  the  values 
for  an  engine  without  waste  space  and  the  remaining  values. 
For  the  volume  are  given  only  the  values  after  expansion, 
because  those  before  expansion,  can  be  at  once  derived  from, 
these  by  diminishing  them  in  the  ratio  1  :  e  or  1  :  0-36667. 


r 

h 

h 

W 

Pambour's  Values 

V 

W 

0-992 

152-22" 

113-71'' 

34300 

-1-032 

36650 

1:010 

1-2 

1-5 

1-8 

2-1 

152-22" 

145-63 

137-43 

131-02 

125-79 

113-68" 

108-38 

101-76 

96-55 

92-30 

32430 
31870 
31080 
30280 
29490 

1-032 

1-2 

1-5 

1-8 

2-1 

34090 
33570 
32640 
31710 
30780 

§  27.  Work  done  per  Unit  of  Heat  delivered  from  the 
source  of  heat. 

The  quantities  of  work  done,  as  given  in  the  above  table, 
and  in  the  previous  table  for  non-condensing  engines,  are 
calculated  per  kilogram  of  steam  received  from  the  boiler. 
It  is  easy  to  deduce  from  this  the  quantity  of  work  done 
per  unit  of  heat  delivered  from  the  source  of  heat,  if  we 
remember  that  for  each  kilogram  of  steam  so  much  heat 
must  be  delivered,  as  is  necessary  to  raise  the  mass  I,  which 
is  somewhat  greater  than  one  kilogram,  from  the  initial 
temperature,  at  which  it  enters  the  boiler,  to  the  boiler 
temperature  itself,  and  transform  it  at  this  latter  temperature 
into  steam.  This  quantity  of  heat  can  be.  calculated  from 
the  data  already  given. 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  275 

§  28.     Friction. 

Something  must  be  said  in  conclusion  on  tlie  subject  of 
friction.  This  will  be  confined  to  a  justification  of  the  course 
adopted  in  leaving  friction  altogether  out  of  account  in  the 
equations  hitherto  developed.  For  this  purpose  we  will  shew 
that  instead  of  introducing,  friction  at  once  into  -the  first 
general  expressions  for  the  work,  as  Pambour  has  done,  the 
same  principles  will  allow  us  to  take  it  into  account  sub- 
sequently, according  to  the  method  already  adopted  by  other 
authors. 

The  forces  which  the  engine  has  to  overcome  during  its 
stroke  may  be  distinguished  as  follows :  (1)  The  resistance 
which  it  meets  with  from  without,  and  in  overcoming  which 
consists  its  useful  work.  Pambour  has  named  this  the  load 
(charge)  of  the  engine.  (2)  The  resistances  which  originate 
within  the  machine  itself,  so  that  the  work  expended  in 
overcoming  them  produces  no  useful  effect.  These  latter 
resistances  we  combine  under  the  name  of  Friction,  although 
in  strictness  they  comprise  other  forces  than  those  of  friction, 
especially  the  resistances  of  the  various  pumps  driven  by  the 
engine,  with  the  exception  of  the  feed-pump,  the  effect  of 
which  has  already  been  considered. 

Both  these  kinds  of  resistances  Pambour  takes  into  ac- 
count as  forces  which  oppose  the  motion  of  the  piston ;  and 
in  order  to  be  able  to  combine  them  readily  with  the  pres- 
sures of  the  steam  on  both  sides  of  the  piston,  he  made  his 
method  of  denotation  agree  with  that  used  in  the  case  of  the 
steam  pressures,  so  that  the  symbol  denotes  not  the  whole 
force,  but  the  force  referred  to  one  unit  of  surface  of  the 
piston.  On  this  understanding  let  the  load  be  represented 
byJi. 

A  yet  further  distinction  must  be  made  with  regard  to 
the  friction.  This  has  not  the  same  constant  value  for  any 
one  engine,  but  increases  with  the  load.  Pambour  divides 
it  therefore  into  two  parts,  that  which  exists  when  the  engine 
runs  unloaded  and  that  which  is  brought  into  action  by 
the  load.  The  latter  he  takes  to  be  proportional  to  the  load 
itself.  He  accordingly  expresses  the  friction  per  unit  of 
surface  by  f+  BR,  where  /  and  S  are  quantities  which 
depend  on  the  construction  and  dimensions  of  the  engine, 

18--2 


276  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

but  for  any  one  engine  may  according  to  Pambour  be  con- 
sidered as  constant. 

We  may  now  refer  the  wort  done  by  the  engine  to  these 
resisting  forces,  instead,  as  hitherto,  to  the  moving  force 
of  the  steam.  The  negative  work  done  by  the  former  must 
equal  thi§  positive  work  done  by  the  latter,  because  otherwise 
an  acceleration  or  retardation  of  the  speed  woiild  take  place, 
and  this  is  against  our  original  assumption  that  the  speed  is 
uniform.  Whilst  one  unit-weight  of  steam  enters  the  cylin- 
der, the  piston  passes  through  the  space  (1  — e)  V,  and  we 
thus  obtain  the  following  expression  for  the  work  W:      ' 

F=(l-e)  V[{l  +  B)B+f]. 

The  useful  part  of  this  work,  which  for  distinction  we  may 
call  {W),  is  expressed  as  follows  : 

(W)  =  {l-e)rxB. 

If  we  eliminate  R  from  this  equation  by  means  of  the  one 
above,  we  obtain 

^^^_w^a^ m 

By  help  of  this  equation,  since  V  is  assumed  to  be  known, 
we  can  deduce  the  useful  work  (W)  from  the  whole  work 
W,  as  soon  as  /  and  S  are  given  us.  The  manner  in  which 
these  are  determined  by  Pambour  will  not  be  entered  upon 
here,  since  that  determination  rests  upon  insecure  grounds, 
and  friction  is  not  the  special  subject  of  this  chapter. 

§  29.  General  Investigation  of  the  Action  of  Thermo- 
dynamic Engines  and  of  its  Relation  to  a  Cyclical  Process. 

We  have  now  so  far  completed  our  treatment  of  the 
steam-engine,  that  we  have  followed  out  all  the  processes 
which  take  place,  determined  the  several  positive  or  nega- 
tive quantities  of  work  performed  therein,  and  combined 
these  into  one  algebraic  expression.  We  will  proceed  to 
consider  thermo-dynamic  engines  from  a  more  general  point 
of  view.  The  expression  that  an  engine  is  driven  by  heat 
must  not  of  course  be  understood  of  the  direct  action  of  the 
heat,  but  only  that  some  substance  within  the  engine  sets 
the  working  parts  in  motion  through  the  changes  which  it 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  277 

undergoes  by  means  of  heat.  This  substance  we  will  call  the 
transmitter  of  the  heat's  action. 

If  a  continuously  working  engine  is  at  uniform  speed, 
all  the  changes  which  occur  must  be  periodic,  so  that  the 
same  condition, in  which  the  engine  and  aU  its  parts  may  be 
found  at  any  given  time,  will  recur  at  regular  intervals. 
Therefore  the  substance  transmitting  the  heat's  action  must 
also  at  such  recurring  moments  exist  within  the  engine  in  the 
same  quantity  and  under  the  same  conditions.  This  may  be 
accomplished  in  two  different  ways.  (1)  The  same  original 
quantity  of  this  substance  may  always  remain  within  the 
engine;  in  which  case'the  changes  which  it  undergoes  during 
the  motion  must  be  such,  that  at  the  end  of  each  period  it 
returns  to  its  original  condition,  and  the  same  cycle  of 
changes  then  begins  anew.  (2)  The  engine  may  get  rid  at 
the  end  of  each  period  of  the  substance  which  during  that 
period  has  served  to  produce  its  action,  and  may  then  take 
in  the  same  quantity  of  the  same  substance  from  without. 

This  latter  method  is  the  more  usual  in  practice.  It  ex- 
ists, e.g.  in  the  hot-air  engine,  as  hitherto  constructed,,  since 
after  every  stroke  the  air  which  has  driven  the  piston  in  the 
working  cylinder  passes  out  into  the  atmosphere,  and  is 
replaced  by  an  equal  quantity  of  air  drawn  from  the  atmo- 
sphere by  the  feeding  cylinder.  The  same  is  the  case  with 
the  non-condensing  steam-engine,  in  which  the  steam  passes 
from  the  cylinder  into  the  atmosphere,  and  is  replaced  by 
fresh  water,  pumped  from  a  reservoir  into  the  boiler.  It 
also  applies,  partially  at  least,  to  the  ordinary  condensing 
steam-engine.  In  this  the  condensed  water  is  indeed  in  part 
pumped  back  into  the  boiler,  but  not  as  a  whole,  because 
it  mixes  with  the  cold  water,  a  part  of  which  also  enters 
the  boiler.  The  part  of  the  condensed  water  which  is  not 
used  again,  together  with  the  remainder  of  the  cold  water, 
must  go  to  waste. 

The  first  method  has  hitherto  been  applied  in  a  few 
engines  only,  amongst  others  in  engines  driven  by  two  dif- 
ferent vapours,  e.g.  steam  and  ether*.  In  these  the  steam 
is  condensed  by  contact  with  metal  pipes  filled  inside  with 
liquid  ether,  and   is  then  wholly  pumped  back   into   the 

*  Anmles;  des  Mines,  1853,  pp.  203,  281. 


S78  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

boiler.  Similarly  the  ether  vapour  is  condensed  in  metal 
pipes  surrounded  by  cold  water,  and  is  then  pumped  back 
into  the  vessel  used  for  evaporating  the  ether.  To  keep  up 
a  uniform  working,  it  is  therefore  necessary  merely  to  add 
so  much  water  and  ether  as  is  lost  by  leakage. 

In  an  engine  of  this  kind,  in  which  the  same  mass  of 
vapour  is  continually  used  anew,  the  different  changes  which 
this  mass  undergoes  during  each  period  must,  as  shewn  above, 
form  a  complete  circuit,  or  in  the  terms  of  this  treatise  a 
cyclical  process.  On  the  contrary  the  engines  in  which  a 
periodical  admission  and  emission  of  vapour  takes  place  are 
not  necessarily  subject  to  this  condition.  Nevertheless  they 
may  fulfil  it,  provided  that  they  emit  the  vapour  in  the  same 
condition  in  which  they  received  it.  This  is  the  case  with  a 
condensing  steam-engine,  in  which  the  steam  passes  away 
from  the  condenser  as  water  and  at  the  same  temperature  at  ■ 
which  it  passed  from  the  condenser  into  the  boiler.  The 
waste  water,  which  enters  the  condenser  cold  and  leaves  it  hot, 
need  not  be  taken  into  account,  because  it  does  not  appertain 
to  the  substance  transmitting  the  heat's  action,  but  merely 
serves  as  a  negative  source  of  heat. 

With  other  engines  the  conditions  at  the  emission  and 
admission  are  different.  For  example,  hot-air  engines,  even 
if  fitted  with  a  regenerator,  send  the  air  back  to  the  atmo- 
sphere at  a  higher  temperature  than  that  at  which  it  enters ; 
and  non-condensing  engines  take  in  water  and  emit  steam. 
In  these  cases  no  complete  cyclical  process  takes  place ;  but 
it  is  always  possible  to  conceive  that  the  actual  engine  has 
another  attached  to  it,  which  receives  the  vapour  from  the 
first,  restores  it  in  some  way  to  its  original  condition,  and 
then  lets  it  escape.  The  two  can  then  be  considered  as  one 
engine  satisfying  the  above  condition.  In  many  cases  the 
process  can  be  completed  in  this  way,  without  making  the 
investigation  too  complicated ;  e.g.  we  may  suppose  that  a 
non-condensing  steam-engine,  assuming  that  the  feed  water 
is  at  100°,  is  replaced  by  an  engine  having  a  condenser,  the 
temperature  of  which  is  100°. 

We  may  thus  apply  to  all  thermo-dynamic  engines  the 
principles  which  hold  for  a  cyclical  process,  if  we  only  sup- 
pose those  engines  which  do  not  of  themselves  fulfil  the  con- 
dition, to  be  completed  in  the  manner  described :  and  we  can 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  279 

thereby  arrive  at  certain  conclusions  whicK  are  independent 
of  the  special  nature  of  the  process  in  each  particular  engine. 

§  30.  Equations  for  the  Work  done,  during  any  Cyclical 
Process. 

For  any  cyclical  process  the  two  equations  hold  which 
have  been  previously  developed  (Chs.  II.  and  IV.)  as  analytical 
expressions  of  the  two  fundamental  principles,  provided  the 
second  is  further  extended  so  as  to  embrace  non-reversible 
changes.     These  equations  are 


!•■ 


■§—n\ (")• 


where  N  denotes  the  uncompensated  transformation  occurring 
during  the  process,  which  is  always  positive,  and  has  for 
reversible  processes  the  limiting  value  zero. 

If  we  apply  these  equations  to  the  cyclical  process  which 
takes  place  during  a  period  of  the  thermo-dynamic  engine, 
we  see  at  once  that  if  the  whole  quantity  of  heat  taken  in  by 
the  substance  transmitting  the  heat's  action  is  given,  then 
the  work  also  is  immediately  given  by  the  first  equation, 
without  our  needing  to  know  the  nature  of  the  process  itself. 
By  combining  the  two  equations  we  may  also  determine  the 
work  from  other  data  in  an  equally  general  manner. 

We  will  suppose  that  the  "quantities  of  heat,  which,  the 
variable  body  receives  successively,  and  its  temperature  at 
the  moment  of  receiving  each,  are  given,  with  the  exception 
of  one  temperature  T„,  at  which  the  body  receives  a  certain 
quantity  of  heat  (or  if  it  is  negative  generates  it)  the  magni- 
tude of  whicb  is  not  at  present  known.  Let  Q^  be  the  sum 
of  all  the  known  quantities,  and  let  Q^  be  the  unknown 
quantity  of  heat.  Now  let  us  divide  the  integral  in  the 
second  of  equations  (47)  mto  two  parts,  one  of  which  relates 
to  the  known  quantity  of  heat  Q^,  and  the  other  to  the  un- 
known quantity  Q„.  In  the  latter  T  has  the  constant  value 
T  ;  it  is  therefore  immediately  integrable,  and  gives  the 
expression 

W' 


280  ON  TBE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

The  second  equation  thus  becomes 


/, 


■whence 

Again,  since  Q=  Q^  +  Q„,  the  first  equation  gives 

or,  substituting  for  Q„  its  value  just  found, 

W=^Q,-T,j^'^-T,N ..(48).. 

If  we  make  the  special  assumption  that  the  whole  process 
is  reversible,  then  N=  0,  and  the  above  equation  becomes 

W=Q,-T,j^'^^9  ^''^- 

This  equation  diflfers  from  the  former  only  in  the  term 
—  T^N.  Since  iVis  always  positive,  this  term  must  be  nega- 
tive ;  whence  we  see,  as  is  easily  proved  directly,  that  under 
the  conditions  fixed  above  with  respect  to  the  imparting  of 
the  heat,  the  greatest  possible  amount  of  work  is  obtained 
when  the  whole  cyclical  process  is  reversible ;  and  that  every 
circumstance,  which  causes  the  changes  in  a  cyclical  process 
not  to  be  reversible,  diminishes  the  amount  of  work  done. 

Equation  (48)  therefore  leads  to  the  required  value  of 
the  work  done  in  a  way  which  is  the  exact  opposite  to  the 
ordinary ;  for  we  do  not,  as  in  other  cases,  determine  the 
several  quantities  of  work  done  during  the  several  changes, 
and  then  add  them  together,  but  we  start  from  the  maxi- 
mum of  work,  and  then  subtract  from  this  the  losses  of  work 
due  to  the  various  imperfections  of  the  process.  This  me- 
thod may  therefore  be  called  the  method  of  subtraction.  If 
we  limit  the  conditions  under  which  the  heat  is  imparted,  by 
supposing  that  the  whole  quantity  Qj  is  imparted  at  a  given 
temperature  T,,  then  the  other  part  of  the  integral  also 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  281 

becomes,  immediately  integrable,  and  gives  -—.    Equation 
(47)  then  takes  the  following  form  for  the  maximum  work  : 

T  -T 

§  31.    Application  of  the  above  Equations  to  the  Limiting 
Case  in  which  the  Cyclical  Process  in  a   SteamrMngine  is 


Among  the  cases  considered  above  with  regard  to  the 
action  of  the  steam-engine,  there  is  one  which  cannot  indeed 
be  attained  in  practice,  but  which  it  is  desirable  to  approach 
as  nearly  as  possible,  viz.  the  case  in  which  there  is  no  waste 
space,  in  which  the  cylinder-pressure  is  the  same  as  in  the 
boiler  or  condenser  respectively,  and  in  which  the  expansion 
extends  so  far,  that  the  steam  is  thereby  cooled  from  the 
temperature  of  the  boiler  to  that  of  the  condenser.  In  this 
case  the  cyclical  process  is  reversible  in  all  its  parts.  Let  us 
suppose  that  evaporation  takes  place  in  the  condenser  at  the 
temperature  T^ ;  that  a  mass  M,  of  which  the  part  m^  is  in  the 
gaseous,  and  the  part  M—m^  in  the  liquid  form,  passes  into 
the  cylinder  and  drives  the  piston  upwards ;  that  by  the  fall 
of  the  piston  the  steam  is  first  compressed  until  its  tempera- 
ture rises  to  T^ ,  and  then  at  that  temperature  forced  into  the 
boiler ;  and  that  lastly  the  mass  M  is  again  brought  out  of 
the  boiler  in  the  liquid  form  into  the  condenser,  by  means  of 
the  small  pump,  and  there  cools  to  the  initial  temperature  T„. 
Here  the  steam  passes  through  the  same  series  of  conditions 
as  before,  but  in  the  reverse  order.  The  various  quantities 
of  heat  are  imparted  or  withdrawn  in  the  opposite  sense,  but 
to  the  same  amount  and  at  the  same  temperature  of  the 
mass ;  and  all  the  quantities  of  work  have  the  opposite  signs 
and  the  same  numerical  values.  Hence  it  follows  that  in 
this  case  there  is  no  uncompensated  transformation  in  the 
process.  We  may  therefore  put  iV=0  in  equation  (48), 
thereby  obtaining  an  equation  similar  to  (49),  but  in  which, 
for  the  sake  of  distinction,  we  will  write  W  instead  of  W, 
viz. 


^'=«.-<'f- 


282      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

Here  Q,  is  in  our  case  the  heat  imparted  within  the  boiler  to 
the  mass  M,  whereby  M  is  heated  as  liquid  from  T^  to  Z\, 
and  then  the  part  m^  transformed  into  steam.     Hence 

Q,  =  m,p,  +  MC{T,-T,) (51). 

To  determine  |      -^  we  must  consider  separately  the 

two  quantities  contained  in  Q^,  viz.  MG  (T^  —  T^  and  »»,Pj. 
To  integrate  for  the  first  of  these,  let  us  write  the  element 
dQ  in  the  form  MCdT:  then  this  part  of  the  integral 
becomes 


MO       ^  =  MClog^. 


Whilst  the  latter  quantity  of  heat  is  being  imparted,  the 
temperature  remains  constant  at  Tj,  and  the  integral  in  this 
case  is  simply 

Substituting  these  values,  the  expression  for  W  becomes 

This  is  the  exact  expression  given  in  equation  (9),  and  found 
in  sections  4  and  5  by  the  successive  determination  of  the 
several  quantities  of  work  done  during  the  cyclical  process. 

§  32,     Anothei"  Form  of  the  Last  Expression. 

It  was  observed  in  the  last  section  with  reference  to 
equation  (51)  that  the  two  quantities  of  heat  which  make  up 
Q^,  viz.  m^p,  and  MG  (T,  —  r„),  must  be  treated  differently 
in  the  calculation  of  the  work  done ;  inasmuch  as  the  one  is 
imparted  to  the  substance  which  transmits  the  heat's  action 
at  a  fixed  temperature  T^,  and  the  other  at  temperatures 
rising  continuously  from  T^  to  Tj.      Similarly  these  two 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  283 

quantities  of  heat  occur  also  in  different  forms  in  the  expres- 
sion for  the  work,  as  is  more  clearly  shewn  if  we  write  our 
last  equation  as  follows : 

W  =  m,p,^^''  +  MG{T,-T,)  (l  +  ^^^^bg  Jo)...(52). 
Here  m^pj^  is  multiplied  by  the  factor 

which  occurs  in  equation  (50),  while  MO  (T^  —  T^  is  multi- 
plied by  the  factor 

T  T 

l  +  TrfvTlog-^. 

In  order  to  compare  these  factors  better  with  each  other, 
we  will  throw  the  latter  into  another  form.  If  for  brevity 
we  write 

T  -T 

«=-V-"   (^3)' 

and  we  thus  obtain 

-       l  —  zfz      z^     z^        ,    \ 
=  l-^(l  +  2+-3  +  ^*°-) 

Z       ,      1^      ,      z^ 

+  75 — iT  +  j^ — 7+ etc. 


1x22x33x4 
Equation  (52)  or  (9)  thus  becomes 

F'  =  m^,x.-Filfa(T,-r„)x.(i+2^H-3?^+etc.) 

(54). 

The  value  of  the  infinite  series  in  the  bracket,  which 
makes  the  difference  between  the  factor  oiMC  (T^  —  Tq)  and 
the  factor  of  m^  p,,  varies,  as  is  easily  shewn,  between  ^  and  1, 
whilst  z  increases  from  0  to  1. 


284      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

§  S3.  Influence  of  the  Temperature  of  the  Source  of 
Heat. 

Since,  under  the  assumptions  we  have  made,  the  cyclical 
process  passed  through  periodically  by  the  engine  during  its 
motion  is  reversible  in  all  its  parts,  as  shewn  in  §  31,  and 
since  a  reversible  process  gives  the  maximum  work  attain- 
able, we  are  able  to  lay  down  the  following  principle : — 

If  the  temperatures  at  which  the  substance  transmitting 
the  heat's  action  takes  in  the  heat  from  the  source,  or  gives 
it  out  externally,  are  taken  as  given  beforehand,  then  the 
steam-engine,  under  the  assumptions  made  in  the  develop- 
ment of  equations  (9)  or  (52),  is  a  perfect  engine,  inas- 
much as  with  a  given  quantity  of  heat  imparted  to  it,  it 
performs  the  greatest  quantity  of  work,  which  according  to 
the.  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat  it  is  possible  to  perform  at 
those  temperatures. 

It  is  otherwise,  if  we  consider  these  temperatures  not  as 
given  beforehand,  but  as  a  variable  element  which  must  be 
taken  into  account  in  our  estimate  of  the  engine. 

The  fact  that  the  water,  whilst  being  heated  and  evapo- 
rated, has  a  much  lower  temperature  than  the  fire,  and  there- 
fore the  heat  imparted  to  it  passes  from  a  higher  temperature 
to  a  lower,  produces  an  uncompensated  transformation  which 
is  not  included  in  JV  of  equation  (47),  but  which  greatly 
diminishes  the  useful  effect  of  the  heat  We  see  by  equa- 
tion (54)  that  the  work  obtained  by  the  steam-engine  from 
the  quantity  of  heat  m,p,  -1-  MG  (T,  —  T^)  =  Q,,  is  somewhat 

T  —T 

less  than  Q^  —^ — -" .     But  if  we  assume  that  the  substance 

i 

transmitting  the  heat's  action  could  have,  throughout  the  time 
when  it  is  taking  in  heat,  the  same  temperature  as  those  parts 
of  the  fire  which  furnish  that  heat;  and  if  we  denote  the 
mean  value  of  this  temperature  by  T,  and  the  temperature  at 
which  the  heat  is  given  off,  as  before,  by  T^;  then  under  these 
circumstances  the  work  which  it  is  possible  to  obtain  from 
the  quantity  of  heat  Q,  will  by  equation  (50)  be  expressed 

T  —  T 
^y  Qi  — Tpr-^  •     To  compare  the  values  of  this  expression  in 

various  cases,  let  f„,  the  condenser  temperature,  be  fixed  at 
50°,  and  let  us  take  for  the  boiler  temperatures  110°,  150°,  and 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  285 

180°;  the  two  first  of  wliich  about  correspond  to  those  of  the 
low-pressure  and  ordinary  high-pressure  engines,  while  the 
last  may  be  considered  the  limit  of  temperature,  which  has 
as  yet  been  practically  attempted  for  the  steam-engine.     In 

T  —T 

these  cases  —^ — '  has  the  following  values  (adding  in  each 

case  the  number  273  to  give  absolute  temperatures) : 
When  T,  =  110°  -»^^»  =  0-157, 
....150°  ! 0-236, 


180"  0-287. 


On  the  other  hand  if  for  example  we  assume  t'  at  1000°, 

,  T'  —  T  . 

the  corresponding  value  of  — ™ — -  is  0-746. 

Hence  it  is  easy  to  see,  as  already  observed  by  Carnot 
and  subsequent  authors,  that  in  order  to  get  the  greatest 
advantage  from  engines  driven  by  heat,  the  most  important 
point  is  to  increase  the  temperature  interval  T  —  JJ, . 
For  example  the  hot-air  engine  can  only  be  expected  to 
shew  a  decided  advantage  over  the  steam-engine,  when 
the  possibility  is  established  of  its  being  worked  at  de- 
cidedly higher  temperatures,  such  as  are  forbidden  to  the 
steam-engine  for  fear  of  explosion.  The  same  advantage 
may  however  be  obtained  by  the  use  of  superheated  steam, 
since,  as  soon  as  the  steam  is  separated  from  the  water,  it 
may  be  heated  with  no  more  risk  than  a  permanent  gas. 
Engines  which  use  the  steam  in  the  superheated  condition 
ought  to  unite  many  advantages  of  the  steam-engine  with 
those  of  the  air-engine,  and  may  therefore  be  expected  to 
achieve  a  practical  success  much  sooner  than  the  latter. 

In  the  class  of  engines  mentioned  above,  in  which  besides 
the  water  another  more  volatile  substance  is  used,  the  inter- 
val T^  —  Tq  is  widened,  inasmuch  as  T^  is  lowered.  It  has 
been  already  suggested  that  the  interval  might  be  widened 
at  the  higher  limit  in  the  same  manner,  by  adding  yet  a 
third  liquid  less  volatile  than  water.  The  fire  would  then 
directly  evaporate  the  first  of  the  three  only ;  this  in  con- 
densing would  eva,porate  the  second,  and  this  in  like  manner 
the  third.    As  far  as  principle  goes  this  combination  would 


286  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY   OF  HEAT. 

undoubtedly  be  advantageous ;  the  practical  difficulties,  whicli 
might  hinder  its  being  carried  out,  cannot  be  conjectured 
beforehand. 

§  34;    Example  of  the  application  of  the  Method  of  Sub- 
traction. 

The  ordinary  steam-engine,  besides  the  imperfection 
described  above,  which  is  inherent  in  its  nature,  possesses 
many  other  imperfections,  which  are  rather  due  to  its  con- 
struction in  practice :  some  of  these  have  already  been  taken 
into  account  in  our  investigations  to  determine  the  work  done. 
We  will  now  in  conclusion  exhibit  the  method  in  which,  with 
engines  possessing  such  imperfections,  the  work  done  may 
be  determined  by  the  method  of  subtraction  given  in  §  30. 
In  order  that  we  may  not  extend  this  investigation,  which 
is  merely  an  example  of  the  mode  of  applying  this  method,  to 
too  great  a  length,  we  will  only  take  into  account  two  of 
these  imperfections,  viz.  the  existence  of  the  waste  space  and 
the  difference  of  the  pressures  in  the  cylinder  and  boiler, 
during  the  admission  of  steam.  On  the  other  hand  we  will 
suppose  the  expansion  to  be  complete,  so  that  the  final  tem- 
perature Tj  equals  the  condenser  temperature  T^;  and  we 
will  also  take  T„' and  y„"  as  equal  to  ?"„. 

The  process  is  founded  on  equation  (48),  which,  calling 
the  work  W,  is  as  follows : 

Here  Q^  —  T^\  -^  represents  the  maximum  work,  cor- 
responding to  the  case  when  the  cyclical  process  is  reversible; 
and  T^  represents  the  loss  of  work  due  to  the  imperfections 
which  arise  from  the  process  not  being  reversible.  For  this 
maximum  work  we  have  in  the  case  of  the  steam-engine  the 
expression  already  given  at  the  end  of  §  31,  viz. 

It  only  remains  to  determine  JV,  the  uncompensated 
transformation  which  occurs  in  the  cyclical  process.  This 
transformation  arises  when  the  steam  is  passing  into  the 
waste  space  and  into  the  cylinder,  and  the  data  for  its  deter" 


APPLICATION  TO  THK  STEAM-ENGINE.  287 

mination  are  already  given  in  §  10.  There,  by  assuming 
that  the  mass  of  steam  admitted  was  at  once  forced  back 
again  into  the  boiler,  and  also  that  everything  was  brought 
back  by  a  reversible  path  to  its  initial  condition,  we  arrived 
at  a  special  cyclical  process,  for  which  we  determined  all  the 
quantities  of  heat  imparted  to  the  variable  mass,  and  to 
which  we  can  now  apply  the  equation 


^=-jf 


These  quantities  of  heat,  some  positive  some  negative,  are  as 
follows : 

7n,p„  -mj>„  f,,p„,  MG{T,-  T,)  and  -/*C7(2;-  T,). 

The  three  first  of  these  are  imparted  at  the  constant 
temperatures  T^,  T^  and  T^  respectively :  and  the  correspond- 
ing parts  of  the  integral  are  ^\  -"^  and  ^.    The 

two  last  are  imparted  at  temperatures  which  vary  contmu- 
ously  between  T^  and  T^,  and  between  T^  and  T^  respectively; 
and  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  integral  are 

T  T 

MC log-™' ,    and  - fiC log -^^ . 

If  we  substitute  the  sum  of  these  quantities  for  the  integral, 
the  last  equation  becomes- 

jVr  =  _^.  +  ?M»_if01og|-^»  +  /^Clog|...(55). 

Multiplying  this  expression  for  JV  by  Tj,  and  subtracting 
the  product  from  the  expression  given  above  for  the  maxi- 
mum work,  we  obtain  finally  for  W'  the  equation 

W  =  mj>,-^ m^,  +  MC (T, - T,)  -  (M+fj)  GT„ log |  +  ^L,p 

(56). 

To  compare  this  expression  for  W  with  that  given  in  the 
first  of  equations  (28),  we  have  only  to  substitute  in  the 
latter  the  value  of  m^pg  given  in  the  last  of  those  equations, 
and  then  put  T,  =  r„.  The  expression  thus  obtained  agrees 
exactly  with  that  in  equation  (56). 


288      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

In  the  same  way  we  may  also  deduct  the  loss  of  work 
due  to  incomplete  expansion.  For  this  purpose  we  must  cal- 
culate the  uncompensated  transformation  which  arises  during 
the  passagejof  steam  from  the  cylinder  to  the  condenser,  and 
then  include  this  in  the  expression  for  W.  By  this  calcula- 
tion, which  we  shaiU  not  here  perform  at  length,  we  arrive 
at  the  same  expression  for  the  work  as  is  given  in  equation 
(28). 


NOTE  ON  THE  VALUES  OF  ^. 

at 

Since  the  differential  coefficient  ■—  occurs  frequently  in  researches 

upon  steam,  it  is  important  to  know  how  far  the  convenient  method  of 
determination  employed  by  the  author  is  allowable ;  and  for  this 
purpose  a  few  values  are  here  placed  side  by  side  for  comparison. 

The,  formula  employed  by  Eegnault  to  calculate  the  pressiures  of 
steam  in  his  tables,  for  temperatures  above  100°,  is  the  following : 

Log^ =a-ba'  -  c^, 

where  Log  denotes  the  common  system  of  logarithms,  m  denotes  the 
temperature  from  -20"  to  the  value  under  consideration,  so  that 
a;=t  +  20,  and  the  five  constants  have  the  following  values : 

a =6-2640348, 

Log  6=0-1397743, 

Log  0=0-6924351, 

Log  0=9-994049292  - 10, 

Log  yS= 9-998343862  - 10. 

From  this  formula  we  obtain  the  following  equation  for  -^ : 

where  .a  and  /3  have  the  same  values  as  before,  and  A  and  B  have  the 
following  values : 

Log  4=8-5197602 -10, 

Log  5=  8-6028403  - 10. 

Suppose  tbat  from  this  equation  we  calculate  the  value  of  ^  for  the 

dt 
temperature  147°,  then  we  obtain 


m  = 

\dtjw 


90-115. 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.  .289 

Next  for  the  approximate  mettod  of  determination,  we  obtain  .from 
Begnault's  tables  the  pressures 

^iffi=3392'98, 
^i6=3214'74, 

whence  £yiZ£L«  =  l!2^ =90.13. 

2  2 

This  approximate  valiie  agrees  so  closely  with  the  exact  value  deduced 
above,  that  it  may  be  safely  used  for  it  in  all  investigations  upon  the 
steam-engine. 

With  regard  to  temperatures  between  0"  and  ,100°,  the  formula  used 
by  Begnault  to  calculate  the  pressures  of  steam  between  these' limits  is 
the  following : 

log^=a  +  6a'-c|3'. 

Here  the  constants,  by  Morjtz's  improved  tables,  have  the  following 
values : 

a=4-7393707, 

Log  6=8-13199071I2  -;10, 

Logc=0-6X174Q7675, 

Log  0=^0-006864937152, 

Log  i3= 9-996726536856  - 10. 

From  this  formula  we  can  again  obtain  for  -^  an  equation  of  the  form 

where  the  values  of  a  and  ^  are  the  same  as  given  above,  and  those  of 
A  and  B  are  as  follows : 

Log.4  =  6-6930586-10, 
Log  5= 8-8513123 -10. 

If  we  calculate  from  this  equation  the  value  of  ~  corresponding  to  a 
temperature  of  70",  we  obtain 

=10-1112. 


By  the  approximate  method  of  determination  we  obtain 
p„  -io^_  243-380- 223-154 _^^. 
2  2 

This  result  again  agrees  sufficiently  closely  with  that  obtained  from 
the  more  exact  equation. 

c.  19 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OP  HEAT. 


Table  giving  the  values  for  steam  of  the  pressure  p,  its 

differential  coefficient  -^  =  g,  and  the  product  Tg,  for 

different  temperatures:  all  expressed  in  millimetres  of 
mercury. 


t  in 
degrees 
Oiinti- 
grade. 

P 

Difi. 

3 

Diff. 

Tg 

Difi. 

0» 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

33 

4-600 

4-940 

5-302 

5-687 

6-097 

6-534 

6-998 

7-492 

8-017 

8-574 

9-165 

9-792 

10-457 

11-162 

11-908 

12-699 

13-536 

14-421 

15-357 

16-346 

17-391 

18-495 

19-659 

20-888 

22-184 

23-550 

24-988 

26-505 

28-101 

29-782 

31-548 

33-406 

35-359 

37-411 

0-340 
0-362 
0-385 
0-410 
0-437 
0-464 
0-494 
0-525 
0-557 
0-591 
0-627 
0-665 
0-705 
0-746 
0-791 
0-837 
0-885 
0-936 
0-989 
1-045 
1-104 
1-164 
1-229 
1-296 
1-366 
1-438 
1-517 
1-596 
1-681 
1-766 
1-858 
1-953 
2-052 

0-329 
0-351 
0-373 
0-397 
0-423 
0-450 
0-479 
i      0-5«9 
,      0-541 
0-574 
0-609 
0-646 
0-685 
0-725 
0-768 
0-814 
0-861 
0-910 
0-962 
1-017 
1-074 
1-134 
1-196 
1-262 
1-331 
1-402 
1-477 
1-556 
1-638 
1-723 
1-812    . 
l-'9d5 
2-002 
2103 

0-022 
0-022 
0-024 
0-026 
0-027 
0-029 
0-030 
0-032 
0-033 
0-035 
0-037 
0  039 
0-040 
0-043 
0-046 
0-047 
0-049 
0-052 
0-055 
0-057 
0-060 
0062 
0-066' 
0O69 
0O71 
0-075 
0O79 
0-082 
0-085 
0-089 
0-093 
0-097 
0-101 

90 

96 

103    ' 
110 
117 
125 
134 
143 
152   ■ 
162 
172 
183 
195 
207 
220 
234 
249 
264 
280 
297 
315 
333 
353 
374 
395 
418 
442 
467 
493 
520 
549 
579 
611 
644 

6 

7 
7 
7 
8 
9 
9 
9 
10 
10 
11 
12 
12 
13 
14 
15 
15 
16 
17 
18 
18 
20 
21 
21 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
29 
30 
32 
33 

APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE. 


291 


t  in 

degrees 

centi- 

P 

grade. 

33 

37-411 

34 

39-565 

35 

41-827 

36 

44-201 

37 

46-691 

38 

49-302 

39 

52-039 

40 

54-906 

41 

57-909 

42 

61-054 

43 

64-345 

44 

67-789 

45 

71-390 

46 

75-156 

47 

79091 

48 

83-203 

49 

87-497 

50 

91-980 

51 

96-659 

52 

101-541 

53 

106-633 

54 

111-942 

55 

117-475 

56 

123-241 

57 

129-247 

58 

■  135-501 

59 

142-011 

60 

148-786 

61 

155-834 

62 

163-164 

63 

170-785 

64 

178-707 

65 

186-938 

66 

195-488 

67 

204-368 

68 

213-586 

69 

223-154 

70 

233-082 

71 

243-380 

72 

254-060 

73 

265-132 

74 

276-608 

75 

288-500 

DifE. 


2-154 
2-262 
2-374 
2-490 
2-611 
2-737 
2-867 
3-003 
3-145 
3-291 
3-444 
3-601 
3-766 
3-935 
4-112 
4-294 
4-483 
4-679 
4-882 
5-092 
5-309 
5-533 
5-766 
6-006 
6-254 
6-510 
6-775 
7-048 
7-330 
7-621 
7-922 
8-231 
8-550 
8-880 
9-218 
9-568 
9-928 
10-298 
10-680 
11-072 
11-476 
11-892 


2-103 
2-208 
2-318 
2-432 
2-550 
2-674 
2-802 
2-935 
3-074 
3-218 
3-367 
3-522 
3-683 
3-850 
4-023 
4-203 
4-388 
4-581 
4-780 
4-987 
5-200 
5-421 
-  5-649 
5-886 
6-130 
6-382 
6-642 
6-911 
7-189 
7-475 
7-771 
8-076 
8'390 
8-715 
9-049 
9-393 
9-748 
10-113 
10-489 
10-876 
11-274 
11-684 
12-106 


DifE. 


Tg 


0-105 
0-110 
0-114 
0-118 
0-124 
0-128 
0-133 
0-139 
0-144 
0-149 
0-155 
0161 
0-167 
0-173 
0-180 
0-185 
0-193 
0-199 
0-207 
0-213 
0-221 
0-228 
0-237 
0-244 
0-252 
0-260 
0-269 
0-278 
0-286 
0-296 
0-305 
0-314 
0-325 
0-334 
0-344 
0-355 
0-365 
0-376 
0-387 
0-398 
0-410 
0-422 


644 
678 
714 
751 
791 
832 
874 
919 
965 
1014 
1064 
1116 
1171 
1228 
1287 
1349 
1413 
1480 
1549 
1621 
1695 
1773 
1853 
1936 
2023 
2112 
2205 
2301 
2401 
2504 
2611 
2722 
2836 
2954 
3077 
3203 
3334 
3469 
3608 
3752 
3901 
4054 
4213 


19—2 


292 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 


t  iw 

degrees 

centi- 

P 

grade. 

75 

.      288-500 

76 

300-820 

77 

313-579 

78 

326-789 

79 

340-464 

80 

354-616 

81 

369-258 

82 

384-404 

83 

400-068 

84 

416-262 

85 

433-002 

86 

450-301 

87 

468-175 

88 

486-638 

89 

•  505-705 

90 

525-392 

91 

545-715 

92 

566-690 

93 

588-333 

94 

610-661 

95 

633-692 

96 

657-443 

97 

681-931 

98 

707-174 

99 

733-191 

100 

760-00 

101 

787-59 

102 

816-01 

103 

845-28 

104 

875-41 

105 

906-41 

106 

938-31 

107 

971-14 

108 

1004-91 

109 

1039-65 

110 

1075-37 

111 

1112-09 

112 

1149-83 

113 

1188-61 

114 

1228-47 

,115 

1269-41 

116 

1311-47 

117 

1354-66 

Difi. 


Diff. 


Tg 


12-320 

12-759 

13-210 

13-675 

14-152 

14-642 

15-146 

15-664 

16-194 

16-740 

17-299 

17-874 

18-463 

19-067 

19-687 

20-323 

20-975 

21-643 

22-328 

23-031 

23-751 

24-488 

25-213 

26-017 

26-809 

27-59 

28-42 

29-27 

30-13 

31-00 

31-90 

32-83 

33-77 

34-74 

35-72 

36-72 

37-74 

38-78 

39-86 

40-94 

42-06 

43-19 


12-106 
12-539 
12-984 
13-442 
13-913 
14-397 
14-894 
15-405 
15-929 
16-467 
17-019 
17-586 
18-168 
18-765 
19-377 
20-005 
20-649 
21-309 
21-985 
22-679 
23-391 
24-119 
.24-865 
25-630 
26-413 
27-200 
28-005 
28-845 
29-700 
30-565 
31-450 
32-365 
33-300 
34-255 
35:230 
36-220 
37-230 
38-260 
39-320 
40-400 
41-500 
42-625 
43-775 


0-433 
0-445 
0-458 
0-471 
0-484 
0-497 
0-511 
0-524 
0-538 
0-552 
0-577 
0-582 
0-597 
0-612 
0-628 
0-644 
0'660 
0-676 
0'694 
0'712 
0-728 
0-747 
0-765 
0-783 
0-787 
0-805 
0-840 
0-855 
0-865 
0-885 
0-915 
0-935 
0-955 
0-975 
0-990 
1-010 
1-030 
1-060 
1-080 
1-100 
1-125 
1-150 


4213 

4376 

4544 

4718 

4897 

5082 

5272 

5469 

5671 

5879 

6093 

6313 

6540 

6774 

7014 

7262 

7516 

7778- 

8047 

8323 

8608 

8900 

9200 

9509 

9826 

10146 

10474 

10817 

11167 

11523 

11888 

12266 

12654 

13051 

13458 

13872; 

14296 

14730 

15178 

15635 

16102 

16581 

17072 


APPLICATION  TO  THE  STEAM-ENGINE. 


293 


tin 

degrees 

centi- 

V 

grade. 

117 

1354-66 

118 

1399-02 

119 

1444-55 

120 

1491-28 

121 

1539-25 

122 

1588-47 

123 

1638-96 

124 

1690-76 

125 

1743-88 

126 

1798-35 

127 

1854-20 

128 

1911-47 

129 

1970-15 

130 

2030-28 

131 

2091-90 

132 

2155-03 

133 

2219-69 

134 

2285-92 

135 

2353-73 

136 

2423-16 

137 

2494-23 

138 

2567-00 

139 

2641-44 

140 

2717-63 

141 

2795-57 

142 

2875-30 

143 

2956-86 

144 

3040-26 

145 

3125-55 

146 

3212-74 

147 

3301-87 

148 

3392-98 

149 

3486-09 

150 

3581-23 

151 

3678-43 

152 

3777-74' 

153 

3879-18 

154 

3982-77 

155 

4088-56 

156 

4196-59 

157 

4306-88 

158 

4419-45 

159 

4534-36 

Difl. 


44-36 

45-53 

46-73 

47-97 

49-22 

50-49 

51-80 

53-12 

54-47 

55-85 

57-27 

58-68 

60-13 

61-62 

63-13 

64-66 

66-23 

67-81 

69-43 

71-07 

72-77 

74-44 

76-19 

77-94 

79-73 

81-56 

83-40 

85-29 

87-19 

89-13 

91-11 

93-11 

95-14 

97-20 

99-31 

101-44 

103-59 

105-79 

108-03 

110-29 

112-57 

114-91 


43-775 

44-945 

46-130 

47-350 

48-595 

49-855 

51-145 

52-460 

53-795 

55-160 

56-560 

57-975 

59-405 

60-875 

62-375 

63-895 

65-445 

67-020 

68-620 

70-250 

71-920 

73-605 

75-315 

77-065 

78-835 

80-645 

82-480 

84-345 

86-240 

88-160 

90-120 

92-110 

94-125 

96-170 

98-255 

100-375 

102-515 

104-690 

106-910 

109-160 

111-430 

113-740 

116-085 


Difi. 


1-170 

1-185 

1-220 

1-245 

1-260 

1-290 

1-315 

1-335 

1-365 

1-400 

1-415 

1-430 

1-470 

1-500 

1-520 

1-550 

1-575 

1-600 

1-630 

1-670 

1-685 

1-710 

1-750 

1-770 

1-810 

1-836 

1-865 

1-895 

1-920 

1-960 

1-990 

2-015 

2-045 

2-085 

2-120 

2-140 

2-175 

2-220 

2-250 

2-270 

2-310 

2-345 


la 


17072 

17574 

18083 

18609 

19146 

19693 

20253 

20827 

21410 

22009 

22624 

23248 

23881 

24533 

25199 

25877 

26571 

27277 

27997 

28732 

29487 

30252 

31030 

31828 

32638 

33468 

34312 

35172 

36048 

36939 

37850 

38778 

39721 

40680 

41660 

42659 

43671 

44703 

45757 

46830 

47915 

49022 

50149 


Difl. 


1012 
1032 
1054 
1073 
1085 
1107 
1127 


294' 


ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 


t  lU 


centi- 
grade. 


159 

4534-36 

160 

4651-62 

161 

4771-28 

162 

4893-36 

163 

5017-91 

164 

5144-97 

165 

5274-54 

166 

5406-69 

167 

5541-43 

168 

5678-82 

169 

5818-90 

170 

5961-66 

171 

6107-19 

172 

6255-48 

173 

6406-60 

174 

6560-55 

175 

6717-43 

176 

6877-22 

177 

7039-97 

178 

7205-72 

179 

7374-52 

180 

7546-39 

181 

7721-37 

182 

7899-52 

183 

8080-84 

184 

8265-40 

185 

8453-23 

.186 

8644-35 

187 

8838-82 

188 

9036-68 

189 

9237-95 

190 

9442-70 

191 

9650-93 

192 

9862-71 

193 

10078-04 

194 

10297-01 

195 

10519-63 

196 

10745-95 

197 

10976-00 

198 

11209-82 

199 

11447-46 

200 

11688-96 

Diff. 


117-26 

119-66 

122-08 

124-55 

127-06 

129-57 

132-15 

134-74 

137-39 

140-08 

142-76 

145-53 

148-29 

151-12 

153-95 

156-88 

159-79 

162-75 

165-75 

168-80 

171-87 

174-98 

178-15 

181-32 

184-56 

187-83 

191-12 

194-47 

197-86 

201-27 

204-75 

208-23 

211-78 

215-33 

218-97 

222-62 

226-32 

230-05 

233-82 

237-64 

241-50 


116-085 

118-460 

120-870 

123-315 

125-805 

128-315 

130-860 

133-445 

136-065 

138-735 

141-420 

144-145 

146-910 

149-705 

152-535 

155-415 

158-335 

161-270 

164-250 

167-275 

170-335 

173-425 

176-565 

179-735 

182-940 

186-195 

189-425 

192-795 

196-165 

199-565 

203-010 

206-490 

210-005 

213-555 

217-150 

220-795 

224-470 

228-185 

231-935 

235-730 

239-57b 

243-455 


Diff. 


2-375 

2-410 

2-445 

2-490 

2-510 

2-545 

2-585 

2-620 

2-670 

2-685 

2-725 

2-765 

2-795 

2-830 

2-880 

2-920 

2-935 

2-980 

3-025 

3-060 

3-090 

3-140 

3-170 

3-205 

3-255 

3-280 

3-320 

3-370 

3-400 

3-445 

3-480 

3-515 

•3-550 

3-595 

3-645 

3-675 

3-715 

3-750 

3-795 

3-840 

3-885 


Tg 


50149 
51293 
52458 
53642 
54851 
56073 
57317 
58582 


61182 
62508 
63856 
65228 
66618 
68030 
69470 
70934 
72410 
73912 
75441 
76991 
78561 
80160 
81779 
83421 
85091 
86779 
88493 
90236 
91999 
93791 
95605 
97442 
99303 
101192 
103111 
105052 
107018 
109009 
111029 
113077 
115154 


Diff, 


1144 

1165 

1184 

1209 

1222 

1244 

1265 

1286 

1314 

1326 

1348 

1372 

1390 

1412 

1440 

1464 

1476 

1502 

1529 

1550 

1570 

1599 

1619 

1642 

1670 

1688 

1714 

1743 

1763 

1792 

1814 

18S7 

1861 

1889 

1919 

1941 

1966 

1991 

2020 

2048 

2077 


CHAPTER  XII. 


ox     THE     CONCENTRATION     OF    KAYS    OF    LIGHT    AND    HEAT 
AND   ON  THE  LIMITS  OF  ITS  ACTION. 


§  1.     Object  .of  the  Investigation. 

The  principle  assumed  by  the  author  as  the  ground  of 
the  second  main  principle,  viz.  that  heat  cannot  of  itself,  or 
without  compensation,  pass  from  a  colder  to  a  hotter  body, 
corresponds  to  everyday  experience  in  certain  very  simple 
cases  of  the  exchange  of  heat.  To  this  class  belongs  the 
conduction  of  heat,  which  always  takes  place  in  such  a  way 
that  heat  passes  from  hotter  bodies  or  parts  of  bodies  to" 
colder  bodies  or  parts  of  bodies.  Again  as  regards  the  ordi- 
nary radiation  of  heat,  it  is  of  course  well  known  that  not  only 
do  hot  bodies  radiate  to  cold,  but  also  cold  bodies  conversely 
to  hot ;  nevertheless  the  general  result  of  this  simultaneous 
double  exchange  of  heat  always  consists,  as  is  established  by 
experience,  in  an  increase  of  the  heat  in  the  colder  body 
at  the  expense  of  the  hotter. 

Special  circumstances  may  however  occur  during  radia- 
tion, which  cause  the  rays,  instead  of  continuing  in  the  same 
straight  line,  to  change  their  direction ;  and  this  change  of  di- 
rection may  be  such,  that  all  the  rays  from  a  complete  pencil 
of  finite  section  meet  together  in  one  point,  and  there  combine 
their  action.  This  can  he  accomplished,  as  is  well  known,  by 
the  use  of  a  burning-mirror  or  burning-glass ;  and  several 
mirrors  or  glasses  may  even  be  so  an-anged,  that  several 
pencils  of  rays  from  different  sources  of  heat  meet  together  iii 
one  point. 


296  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

For  cases  of  this  kind  there  is  no  experimental  proof  that 
it  is  impossible  for  a  higher  temperature  to  exist  at  the  point 
of  concentration  than  is  possessed  by  the  bodies  from  which 
the  rays  emanate.  Rankine*  accordingly,  on  a  special  occasion, 
of  which  we  shall  speak  in  another  place,  has  drawn  a  parti- 
cular conclusion,  which  rests  entirely  on  the  assumption  that 
rays  of  heat  can  be  concentrated  by  reflection  in  such  a  way, 
that  at  the  focus  thus  produced  a  body  may  be  raised  to  a 
higher  temperature  than  is  possessed  by  the  bodies  which 
emit  the  rays.  If  this  assumption  be  correct,  the  principle 
enunciated  above  must  be  false,  and  the  proof,  deduced  by 
means  of  that  principle,  of  the  second  fundamental  principle 
of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat  would  thus  be  overthrown. 

As  the  author  was  anxious  to  secure  the  principle  against 
any  doubt  of  this  kind,  and  as  the  concentration  of  rays  of 
heat,  with  which  is  immediately  connected  that  of  rays  of 
light,  is  a  subject  which,  apart  from  this  special  question,  is 
of  much  interest  from  many  points  of  view,  he  has  attempted 
a  closer  mathematical  investigation  of  the  laws  which  govern 
the  concentration  of  rays,  and  of  the  influence  which  this  con- 
centration can  have  on  the  exchange  of  heat  between  bodies. 
The  results  are  contained  in  the  following  sections. 

I.  Reasons  why  the  ordinary  method  of  deter- 
mining THE  mutual  radiation  OF  TWO  SURFACES 
does   NOT  EXTEND   TO   THE   PRESENT   CASE. 

§  2.  Limitation  of  the  treatment  to  perfectly  black  bodies, 
and  to  homaffeneous  and  unpolarized  rays  of  heat. 

When  two  bodies  are  placed  in  a  medium  permeable  to 
heat  rays,  they  communicate  heat  to  each  other  by  radiation. 
Of  the  rays  which  fall  on  one  of  these  bodies,  part  is  in  gene- 
ral absorbed,  part  reflected,  part  transmitted;  and  it  is  known 
that  the  power  of  absorption  stands  in  a  simple  relation  to 
the  power  of  emission.  As  it  is  not  here  our  object  to  inves- 
tigate the  differences  between  these  relations  and  the  laws 
to  which  they  conform,  we  wiU  take  one  simple  case,  viz. 
that  in  which  the  bodies  are  such  that  they  completely  ab- 
sorb all  the  rays  which  fall  upon  them,  either  actually  on  the 

•  On  the  Ee-concentration  of  the  Meehanioal  Energy  of  the  Universe, 
P/iiJ.  Mag.,  Series  iv.,  Vol.  it.  p.  358. 


CONCENTEATION  OF  BATS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.      297 

surface,  or  in  a  layer  so  thin  that  its  thickness  may  be  neg- 
lected. Such  bodies  have  been  named  by  Kirchhoff,  in  his 
well-known  and  excellent  paper  on  the  relation  between 
emission  and  absorption,  "perfectly  black  bodies*." 

Bodies  of  this  kind  have  also  the  maximum  power  of 
emission.  It  was  formerly  assumed  to  be  beyond  question 
that  their  intensity  of  emission  depended  only  on  their  tem- 
perature; so  that  all  perfectly  black  bodies,  at  the  same 
temperature  and  with  the  same  extent  of  surface,  would 
radiate  exactly  the  same  quantity  of  heat.  But  as  the  rays 
emitted  by  the  body  are  not  homogeneous,  but  differ  accord- 
ing to  the  scale  of  colours,  the  question  of  emission  must  be 
studied  with  special  reference  to  this  scale ;  and  Kirchhoff  has 
extended  the  foregoing  principle,  by  laying  down  that  per- 
fectly black  bodies  at  equal  temperatures  send  out  not  only 
the  same  total  quantity  of  heat,  but  also  the  same  quantity 
of  each  class  of  ray.  As  the  distinctions  between  the  rays 
according  to  colour  have  no  place  in  our  investigation,  we 
will  assume  throughout  that  we  have  to  do  with  only  one 
known  class  of  ray,  or,  to  speak  more  accurately,  with  rays 
whose  wave-length  only  vaaries  within  indefinitely  small 
limits.  Whatever  is  true  of  this  class  of  rays  must  similarly 
be  true  of  any  other  class;  and  thus  the  results  obtained 
from  homogeneous  heat  may  easily  be  extended  to  heat 
which  contains  a  mixture  of  different  classes  of  rays. 

With  the  same  object  of  avoiding  unnecessary  complica- 
tions, we  will  abstain  from  discussing  polarization,  and  assume 
that  we  have  only  to  do  with  unpolarized  rays.  The  mode 
of  taking  polarization  into  account  in  such  cases  has  already 
been  explained  by  Helmholtz  and  Kirchhoff. 

§  3.  Kirchhoff' s  formula  for  the  mutwil  Radiation  of 
two  Elements  of  Swface. 

Let  Sj  and  s,  be  the  surfaces  of  two  perfectly  black 
bodies  of  the  same  given  temperature ;  and  let  us  consider 
two  elements  of  these  surfaces  ds^  and  ds^,  in  order  to 
determine  and  to  compare  the  quantities  of  heat  which  they 
mutually  send  to  each  other  by  radiation.  If  the  medium, 
which  surrounds  the  bodies  and  fills  the  intervening  space, 

•  Pogg.  Ann.,  Vol.  oix.  p.  275. 


298      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 

is  homogeneous,  so  that  the  rays  simply  passin  straight  lines 
from  one  surface  to  the  other,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  quan- 
tity of  heat  which  ds^  sends  to  ds^  must  be  the  same  as  that 
which  ds^  sends  to  ds^ ;  if  on  the  contrary  this  medium  is 
not  homogeneous,  but  there  are  variations  in  it  which  cause 
the  rays  to  be  broken  up  and  reflected,  the  process  is  less 
simple,  and  a  closer  investigation  is  needed  to  prove  whether 
the  same  perfect  reciprocity  holds  in  this  case  also.  This 
investigation  has  been  performed  in  a  very  elegant  manner 
by  Kirchhoff;  and  his  results  will  be  briefly  stated  here,  so 
far  as  they  relate  to  the  ease  in  which  the  rays  on  their 
way  from  one  •element  to  the  other  suffer  no  diminution  of 
strength ;  in  other  words  in  which  the  breakings  up  and  re- 
flections of  the  ray  take  place  without  loss  of  power,  and 
there  is  no  absorption  during  its  passage.  A  few  variations 
will  alone  be  made  in  the  denotation  and  in  the  system  of  co- 
ordinates, to  produce  a  better  accordance  with  what  follows. 

If  two  points  are  given,  only  one  of  the  infinitely  large 
number  of  rays  sent  out  by  one  point  can  in  general  attain 
the  other*;  or  if  the  rays  are  so  broken  up  and  reflected, 
that  several  of  them  m^et  in  the  other  point,  yet  they  form  in 
general  only  a  limited  number  of  separate  rays,  each  of  which 
can  be  treated  by  itself.  The  path  of  such  a  ray  from  one 
point  to  the  other  is  determined  by  the  condition  that  the 
time  expended  in  traversing  this  path  is  a  minimum,  com- 
pared with  the  times  which  would  be  expended  in  traversing 
all  other  neighbouring  paths  between  the  same  points.  This 
minimum  time  is  determined,  if  where,  several  separate  rays 
meet  we  investigate  only  one  at  a  time,  by  the  position  of 
the  two  points  between  which  it  passes ;  and  we  will  denote 
it,  as  Kirchhoff  has  done,  by  T. 

*  The  form  of  expression  tliat  a  point  sends  out  an  infinitely  large  num- 
ber of  rays  is  perhaps,  in  the  strict  mathematical  sense,  inaccurate,  since  heat 
and  light  can  only  be  sent  forth  from  a  surface,  and  not  from  a  mathematical 
point.  It  would  be  more  accurate  to  refer  the  sending  out  of  the  heat  or  light 
not  to  the  point  itself,  hut  to  the  element  of  area  at  the  point.  As,  however,  the 
conception  of  a  ray  is  itself  only  a  mathematical  abstraction,  we  may,  without 
fear  of  misconception,  retain  the  statement  tiat  an  infinitely  large  number  of 
rays  proceed  from  each  point  of  the  surface.  K  it  were  our  objeet  to  determine 
quantitatively  the  heat  or  light  radiated  by  a  surface,  it  is  evident  that  the 
size  of  the  surface  must  be  taken  into  account,  and  that  its  elements  must  he 
considered,  not  as  points,  but  as  indefinitely  small  surfaces ;  the  area  of 
which  must  appear  as  a  factor  in  the  formula  expressing  the  quantity  of  heat 
or  light  radiated  from  ah  element  of  surface. 


CONCENTRATION   OF  rAtS   OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.      299- 

Returning  now  to  the  elements  of  surface  ds^  and  dSj,  we 
will  suppose  a  plane  tangential  to  the  surface  to  be  drawn' 
through  one  point  of  each  element;  and  we  will  treat  ds^  and 
ds^  as  elements  of  these  planes.  In  each  of  these  planes  let  us 
take  any  system  of  rectangular  co-ordinates,  which  we  will 
call  aTj,  2/1  in  the  one  case,  and  os^,  y^  in  the  other*.  If  we 
now  take  a  point  on  each  plane,  the  time  T^,  expended  by 
the  ray  in  passing  from  one  point  to  the  other,  is  determined, 
as  stated  above,  by  the  position  of  the  two  points;  and  this 
time  may  therefore  be  treated  as  a  function  of  the  four  co- 
ordinates of  the  two  points. 

On  these  assumptions  Kirchhoffs  expression  for  the 
quantity  of  heat,  which  the  element  ds-^  sends  to  the  element 
rfsjj  per  unit  of  time,  is  as  follows  i"; 


•7r\i 


d^'T         d'T         d'T         d'T 


dx^dx^     dy^dy^     dx^dy^     dy^dxj     '    "' 

where  ir  is  the  well-known  ra.tio  between  the  circumference, 
and  diameter  of  a  circle,  and  e,  is  the  intensity  of  emission 
of  the  surface  Sj,  in  the  locality  of  the  element  ds^,  so  that  e^  dsj^ 
represents  the  whole  quantity  of  heat  radiated  by  ds^  per  unit, 
of  time. 

Conversely  to  express  the  quantity  of  heat  which  ds^ 
sends  to  ds^,  we  need  only  substitute  for  e^  in  the  above, 
expression  the  quantity  e,,  which  is  the  intensity  of  emission 
of  the  surface  s,.  Everything  else  remains  unaltered,  as 
being  symmetrical  with  regard  to  the  two  elements ;  for  the 
time  T,  which  a  ray  expends  in  traversing  the  path  between 
two  points  of  the  two  elements,  is  the  same  in  whichever 
direction  it  is  moving.  If  we  now  assume  that  the  surfaces, 
which  are  supposed  to  be  at  the  same  temperature,  radiate  eqi^al 
quantities  of  heat  in  the  same  time,  then  61  =  e^ ;  and  there- 
fore the  quantity  of  heat  sent  by  ds^  to  ds^  is  exactly  the  same 
as  that  sent  by  ds^  to  ds^. 

*  Kirohhoff  has  chosen  two  planes  at  right  angles  to  the  directions  of  the 
rays  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  two  elements;  he  has  taken  axes  of  00-' 
ordinates  in  these  planes,  and  has  projected  the  elements  of  surface  upon 
them. 

t  Pogg.  Ann.,  Vol.  oix.  p.  286. 


300      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

§  4.  Indeterminateness  0/  the  Formula  in  the  case  of  the 
Concentration  of  Rays. 

We  have  already  observed  that  in  general  only  one  ray,  or 
a  limited  number  of  separate  rays,  can  pass  between  two  given 
points.  In  special  cases,  however,  it  may  happen,  that  an  in- 
definitely large  number  of  rays,  forming  a  pencil  in  either  two 
or  three  dimensions  (i.e.  in  the  latter  case  forming  a  cone), 
and  starting  from  the  first  point,  may  again  unite  in  the 
second.  This  of  course  holds  with  rays  of  light  as  well  as 
of  heat,  and  it  is  usual  in  Optics  to  call  such  a  point,  in 
which  all  the  rays  of  a  certain  conical  pencil  sent  out  from 
a  given  point  unite  agairi)  the  image  of  the  given  point ;  or, 
since  conversely  the  first  point  may  become  the  image  of  the 
second,  the  two  points  are  called  conjugate  foci.  When  what 
is  here  described  in  the  case  of  two  particular  points  holds 
of  all  the  points  of  two  surfaces,  so  that  every  point  of 
the  one  surface  is  the  conjugate  focus  of  some  poinff  on  the 
other  surface,  then  the  one  surface  is  called  the  optical  image 
of  the  other. 

We  may  now  ask  how  the  exchange  of  rays  takes  place 
between  the  elements  of  two  such  surfaces;  whether  the 
above-mentioned  reciprocity  holds,  so  that  at  equal  tempera- 
tures any  element  of  the  one  surface  sends  to  any  element 
of  the  other  exactly  the  same  amount  of  heat  as  it  received 
from  it,  and  therefore  one  body  cannot  heat  the  other  to  a 
higher  temperature  than  its  own ;  or  whether  in  such  cases 
the  concentration  of  the  rays  makes  it  possible  for  one  body 
to  heat  another  to  a  higher  temperature  than  it  possesses 
itself. 

To  this  case  Kirchhoff's  expression  does  not  directly  apply. 
For  let  the  surface  s^  be  an  optical  image  of  the  surface  s-^. 
Then  all  the  rays,  which  a  point  p^,  lying  upon  s^,  sends  out 
within  a  certain  cone,  unite  on  some  point  j)^  of  the  surface  s^, 
and  all  the  surrounding  points  of  s^  receive  no  rays  whatever 
from^i.  Hence  if  the  co-ordinates  x^,  y^  of  the  point  ^^  are 
given,  then  the  co-ordinates  x^,  3/,  of  the  point  p^  are  no 
longer  to  be  taken  at  pleasure,  but  are  also  fixed ;  and 
similarly,  if  x^,  y^  are  given,  then  x-^,  y^  are  also  determined. 

A  differential  coefficient  of  the  form   ,     .    ,  where  x^  is  con- 


CONCENTRATION  OF  RATS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.      301 

sidered  as  variable  when  difFerentiating  according  to  «!, 
whilst  the  second  co-ordinate  y^  of  the  same  point,  and  the 
co-ordinates  x^,  y^  of  the  other,  are  assumed  to  be  constant, — 
and  wh^re  similarly  in  differentiating  according  to  x^,  this  is 
taken  as  the  only  variable — can  thus  represent  no  real  quan- 
tity of  finite  value.  Therefore  in  this  case  we  must  find  an 
expression  of  somewhat  dififerent  form  from  Kirchhoff 's ;  and 
for  this  purpose  we  must  first  consider  some  questions  similar 
to  those  considered  by  Kirchhoff  in  arriving  at  his  expres- 
sion. 


II.    Determination  of  corresponding  points  and  coRr 

RESPONDING   ELEMENTS    OF    SURFACE   IN   THREE   PLANES 
CUT  BY  THE  RAYS. 

§  5.    Equations  between  the  co-ordinates  of  the  points  in 
which  a  ray  cuts  three  given  planes. 

Let  there  be  three  given  planes  a,  b,  c  (Fig.  25),  and  in 
each  of  them  let  there  be  a  system 
of  rectangular  co-ordinates,  which 
we  may  call  respectively  oo^ya,  x^y^, 
and  x^^.  Let  us  take  a  point  p^ 
in  plane  a,  and  a  point  p^  in  plane  b, 
and  consider  a  ray  as  passing  from 
one  of  these  to  the  other ;  then  to 
determine  its  path  we  have  the  con- 
dition that  the  time,  which  the  ray 
expends  in  traversing  it,  must  be 
less  than  it  would  expend  in  travers- 
ing any  other  neighbouring  path. 
Call  this  minimum  time  T^y  It  is 
a  function  of  the  co-ordinates  of  p^ 

and  Pi,  i.e.  of  the  four  quantities  x^y^,  x^y^.  Similarly  let 
T^  be  the  time  of  the  ray's  passage  between  two  points  p^ 
and  p„,  in  planes  a  and  c ;  and  let  T^^  be  the  time  of  its  pas- 
sage between  two  points  p^  and  p^,  in  planes  b  and  c.  T^  is  a 
function  of  the  co-ordinates  x^y^,  x^^;  and  T^^  is  a  function 
of  the  co-ordinates  x^y^,  x^y^. 

Now  as  a  ray,  which  passes  between  two  of  these  planes, 
will  in  general  cut  the  third  plane  also,  we  have  for  each  ray 


302  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

three  points  of  section,  which  are  so  related  to  each  other 
that  any  one  of  them  is  in  general  determined  by  the  other 
two.  The  equations  which  serve  for  this  determination  may 
be  easily  deduced  from  the  above-mentioned  condition.  Let 
us  first  suppose  that,  points  p^  andp„  are  given  beforehand,  and 
that  the  point  is  still  unknown  in  which  the  ray  cuts  the 
intermediate  plane  h.  This  point,  to  distinguish  it  from 
other  points  in  the  plane,  we  will  call  p\.  Take  any  point 
whatever  p^  in  this  plane,  and  consider  two  rays,  which  we 
may  call  auxiliary  rays,  passing  the  one  from  p^  to  p^,  and 
the  other  from  p^  to  p„.  In  Eig.  25  these  rays  are  shewn  by 
dotted  lines,  and  the  primary  ray,  which  goes  direct  from  p^ 
to  p^,  by  a  full  line*.  If,  as  before,  we  call  the  times  ex- 
pended by  these  two  rays  T^^  and  T^^,  the  value  of  the  sum 
of  these  times  T„j  +  T^^  will  depend  on  the  position  of  jjj,  and 
therefore,  since  the  points  p^  and  p^  are  assumed  to  be  given, 
it  may  be  considered  as  a  function  of  the  co-ordinates  x^y^ 
of  point  Pj.  Among  all  the  values,  which  this  sum  may 
assume  if  we  give  to  point  p^  various  positions  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  p  5,  the  minimum  value  must  be  that  which  is 
obtained  by  making  p^  coincide  with  p\,  in  which  case  the 
auxiliary  rays  merely  become  parts  of  the  direct  ray.  We 
therefore  have  the  following  two  equations  to  determine  the 
co-ordinates  of  this  point  p\ : 

i(2kt^  =  0-      ^i^kt^U^O  (1) 

As  T^  and  T^^,  in  addition  to  the  co-ordinates  of  the  un- 
known point  Pj,  contain  also  the  co-ordinates  of  the  known 
points  p^  and  p^,  we  may  consider  the  two  equations  thus 
established  as  being  simply  two  equations  between  the  six 
co-ordinates  of  the  three  points  iu  question.  These  equations, 
therefore,  can  be  applied,  not  merely  to  determine  the  co- 
ordinates of  the  point  in  the  intermediate  plane  from  those 

*  These  lines  are  shewn  canred  in  the  figure,  to  indicate  that  the  path 
taken  by  a  ray  between  two  given  points  need  not  be  simply  the  straight  line 
drawn  between  the  two  points,  but  a  different  Une  determined  by  the  re- 
fractions or  reflections  which  the  ray  may  undergo:  it  may  thus  be  either  a 
broken  bne,  made  up  of  several  straight  lines,  or  (if  the  medium  through 
which  it  passes  changes  its  character  continuously  instead  of  suddenly)  a 
continuous  curve. 


CONCENTEATION  OF  BAYS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.      303 


of  the  two  other  points,  but  generally  to  determine  any  two 
of  the  six  co-ordinates  from  the  other  four. 

Next  let  us  assume  that  the  points  p^  a,ndp^  (Fig,  26),. in 
which  the  ray  cuts  planes  a  and  h,  are 
given,  and  that  the  point  is  yet  un- 
known in  which  it  cuts  plane  c.  This 
point  let  us  call  p""^,  to  distinguish  it 
from  other  points  in  the  same  plane. 
Take  any  point  p^  in  plane  c,  and  con- 
sider two  auxiliairy  rays,  one  of  which 
goes  from  p^  to  p^,  and  the  other  from 
Pi  to  p^.  In  Fig.  26  these  are  again 
shewn  dotted,  while  the  primary  ray 
is  shewn  full.  Let  T^^  and  T^„  be  the 
times  of  passage  of  these  auxiliary 
rays.  Then  the  value  of  the  differ- 
ence T^^  —  Tj^  depends  on  the  position 
of  p^  in  plane  c.     Among  the  various 

values  obtained  by  giving  to  p„  various  positions  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  p\,  the  maximum  must  be  that  obtained  by 
making  p^  coincide  with  p\.  For  in  that  case  the  ray  passing 
from  j?^  to  p^  cuts  the  plane  b  in  the  given  point  jp^,  and  is  there- 
fore made  up  of  the  ray  which  passes  from  p^  to  p^  and  of 
that  which  passes  from  p^  to  p^.    Accordingly  we  may  put 

Hence  the  required  difference  is  given  in  this  special  case  by 
T  —T  =T 

■'■as        -'■Sc        -^aS* 

If  on  the  other  hand  p^  does  not  coincide  with  p'^,  then 
the  ray  which  passes  from  p^  to  p^  does  not  coincide  with 
the  two  which  pass  from  p^  to  p^  and  from  p^  to  p^ ;  and 
since  the  direct  ray  between  p„  and  p^  travels  in  the  shortest 
■  time,  we  must  have 

and  therefore  we  have  in  general  for  the  required  difference 
the  inequality  - 

T  — T  <iT 

■'■an         -^Sc^-^Bl' 


304      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

This  difference  is  thus  generally  smaller  than  in  the 
special  case  where  p^  lies  in  the  continuation  of  the  ray 
which  passes  from  'p^  to  'p^,  and  this  special  value  of  the 
difference  thus  forms  a  maximum*.  Hence  we  have  the 
two  following  conditions : 

d^.  '  dy,  ^>- 

If  we  lastly  assume  that  the  points  p^  and  p^  in  the 
planes  h  and  c  are  given  beforehand,  while  the  point  in  which 
the  ray  cuts  the  plane  a  is  still  unknown,  we  obtain  by  an 
exactly  similar  procedure  the  two  following  conditions : 

d  \Tm  ~  TJ)  _  ^  _     a[I^~-  l^i)  _  »  f,„^ 

dx^  '  dy. 

In  this  way  we  arrive  at  three  pairs  of  equations,  each 
of  which  serves  to  express  the  corresponding  relation  bet-^een 
the  three  points  in  which  a  ray  cuts  the  three  planes  a,h,c; 
so  that  if  two  of  the  points  are  given  the  third  can  be 
found,  or,  more  generally,  if  of  the  six  co-ordinates  of 
the  three  points  four  are  given  the  other  two  may  be  deter- 
mined. 

§  6.  Belation  between  Corresponding!  Elements  of  Sur- 
face. 

We  will  now  take  the  following  case.  Given  on  one 
of  the  planes,  say  a,  a  point  p^,  and  on  another,  say  b,  an 
element  of  surface  ds'^;  then  if  rays  pass  from  pa  to  the 
different  points  of  ds^,  and  if  we  suppose  these  rays  produced 
till  they  cut  the  third  plane  c,  they  will  all  cut  that  plane 
in  general  within  another  indefinitely  small  element  of 
surface,  which  we  will  call  dsg  (Fig.  27).  Let  us  now  deter- 
mine the  relation  between  ds^  and  dso. 

*  In  KirchhofE's  paper  (p.  285)  it  ia  stated  of  the  quantity  there  con- 
sidered, which  is  essentially  the  same  as  the  difference  here  treated  of,  except 
that  it  refers  to  four  planes  instead  of  three,  that  it  must  be  a  minimum. 
This  may  possibly  be  a  printer's  error,  and  in  any  case  an  interchange  of  max- 
imum and  minimum  in  this  place  would  have  no  further  influence,  because 
the  principle  used  in  the  calculations  which  follow,  viz. ,  that  the  dierential 
coefficient  =:0i  holds  equally  for  a  maximum  or  a  minimum. 


CONCENTRATION  OF  KAYS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.       305 


Fig.  27, 


In  this  case,  of  the  six  co-ordinates  which  relate  to  each 
ray  (viz.  those  of  the  three  points 
in  which  the  ray  cuts  the  three 
planes)  two,  viz.  x^  and  y^,  are 
given  beforehand.  If  we  now 
take  any  values  we,  please  for 
00^  and  y^,  the  co-ordinates  x^  and 
y^  are  in  general  thereby  deter- 
mined. Thus  in  this  case  we 
may  consider  x„  and  y^  as  two 
functions  of  x^  and  y^.  As  the 
form  of  the  element  ds,,  may  be 
any  whatever,  let  it  be  a  rect- 
angle da?5,  dy„,  and  let  us  find  the 
point  in  plane   c   correspondisng 

to  every  point  in  the  outline  of  this  rectangle.  We  shall 
then  have  on  plane  c  an  indefinitely  small  parallelogram 
which  forms  the  corresponding  element  of  surface. 

The  magnitude  of  this  parallelogram  is  determined  as 
follows.  Let  \  be  the  length  of  the  side  which  corresponds 
to  the  side  dx„  of  the  rectangle  in  plane  h,  and  let  (Xa;„)  and 
(\y„)  be  the  angles  which  this  side  makes  with  the  axes 
of  co-ordinates.     Then 

\  cos  (\a:.)  =  £^  dx^ ;    \  cos  l^y^)  =  ^dx^. 

Again,  let  /*  be  the  other  side  of  the  parallelogram,  and  let 
(>*%„)  and  (jiy^  be  the  angles  it  makes  with  the  axes.  Then 
we  have 

li  cos  {^uc,)  =  -£j  dy, ;    fi  cos  {fiyc)  =  ^  '^3'^  • 

Let  (V)  be  the  angle  between  the  sides  X  and  /*.  Then  we 
have 

cos  (V)  =  cos  {\x,)  cos  i/ix,)  +  cos  {\y,)  cos  (fiy,) 


'dx,  dx      dy,  dy\  dx.dy^ 


\d£t  dyt     dx^  dyj 


dyt     dx^dyj     X/* 


C. 


20 


306    -  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OP  HEAT. 

Now  to  determine  the  area  cfo,  of  the  parallelogram,  we 
may  write 

ds^  =  \fi  sin  (\/i) 

=  \fijl—  cos'  (\/t) 

=  ^\y-cos'(X/i)\y. 

Here  we  may  substitute  for  cos  (X/i)  the  expression  just 
given,  and  for  X"  and  fi"  the  following  expressions  derived 
from  the  above  equations  : — 


,_{fdfoX 


Then  several  terms  under  the  root  caricel  each  other,  and 
the  remainder  form  a  square  as  follows  : . 

V  \dx^  dy^     dy^  dxj      " ' 

This  quadratic  equation  can  therefore  be  solved  at  once. 
But  it  must  be  observed  that  the'  difference  within  the 
brackets  may  be  either  positive  or  negative,  and,  as  we 
have  only  to  do  with  the  positive  root,  we  will  denote  this 
by  putting  the  letters  v.n.  (valor  numericus)  before  this 
difference.    We  can  then  write 

To  ascertain  how  a;„  and  y„  depend  upon  ir^  and  y^,  we 
must  apply  one  of  the  three  pairs  of  equations  in  §  5.  We 
will  first  choose  equations  (1).  If  we  differentiate  those 
equations  according  to  ss^  and  ^j,  remembering  that'eacli  of 
the  quantities  denoted  by  T  contains  two  of  the  three  pairs 
of  co-ordinates  x^,  y^,  x^,  y^',  x^,  y„,  as  denoted. by  the  indices; 
and  if  in  differentiating  we  treat  x,  and  .y.-as  functions  of 


CONCENTRATION  OF  BAYS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.        307 

ajj  and  y„  -whilst  we  take  x^  and  y^  as  constant;  then  we 
obtain  the  following  four  equations ; 


{dx,f 


X  ?  _L  

dx^dx^      tfoj      dx^dy, 


+ 


(fr.. 


+ 


dx^dy^ 

d'(T^.+T,:) 


(.dy>T 


+ 


dy^dx 


dx„ 

dy^      dx^dy, 


dXi 
dy. 


dx. 


dy^dy, 
dy^dx^      dy^      dy^dy^ 


dyi 

dxt 

x^  =  0 
dy^ 


.(5). 


If  by  help  of  these  equations  we  determine  the  four 

differential   coefficients  -j^° ,   z^' ,  -p ,  ^  and   subsititute 

toj     dy^    dx^    dy,, 

the  values  thus  found  in  equation  (4),  we  obtain  the  required 

relation  between  ds^  and  ds„.    To  be  able  to  write  the  result 

more  briefly,  we  will  use  the  following  symbols : 


A 


=  v.n.(^ 


dx^dx^ 


d^Z, 


d'Z, 


dy^dy,     dx^dy. 


E=  v.n. 


.      idx,r        ""       {dy,Y 


dy.dxj W. 


dx^dy^ 


•in 


Then  the  required  relation  may  be  written  as  follows : 


dsg 


E 
'A' 


■(8). 


Again,  if  we  suppose  in  like  manner  that  a  point  p^  is 
given  on  plane  c  (Fig.  28),  and  find  on  plane  a  the  element 
da^,  which  corresponds  to  the  given  element  ds^  on  plane  b, 
then  the  result  can  be  derived  frofla  that  last  given  by  simply 
interchanging  the  indices  a  and  c.     If  for  brevity  we  write 


a  =  vn  fi^x^^ 
■  Kdx^dXi     dyjiy„ 


dxj,y^     dyM\ 


-)...(9). 
20—2 


308  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT, 

then  we  have 

ds,      C 


.(10). 


ib 


Pig.  28. 

Lastly,  suppose  a  point  p^  to  be  given  on  plane  h  (Fig.  29) 


Fig.  29 


and  choose  any  element  of  surface  ds^  on  plane  a.  Let 
us  suppose  that  rays  from  different  points  of  this  element 
pass  through  p^,  and  that  they  are  produced  to  the  plane  c. 
Then  the  magnitude  of  the  element  of  surface  dse,  in  which 
all  these  rays  meet  plane  c,  is  found,  using  the  same  symbols 
as  before,  to  be  as  follows : 


q 

A' 


.(11). 


From  this  we  see  that  the.  two  corresponding  elements  in 
this  case  bear  exactly  the  same  relation  to  each  other,  as  the 


CONCENTRATION   OF  BATS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.     309 

two  elements  which  are  obtained  when  we  have  an  element 
rfSj  given  in  plane  b,  and  then,  having  assumed  as  the 
origin  of  the  rays  a  point  first  in  plane  a,  and  secondly 
in  plane  c,  determine  in  each  case  the  element  of  surface 
in  the  third  plane  corresponding  to  the  element  da^, 

§  V.  Fractions  formed  out  of  six  qucmtities  to  express 
the  Relations  between  Corresponding  Elements. 

In  the  last  section  we  have  only  employed  the  first  of  the 
three  pairs  of  equations  in  §  5.  We  can  however  employ  the 
two  other  pairs  (2)  and  (3)  in  the  same  manner.  Each  pair 
leads  us  to  three  quantities  of  the  same  kind  as  those  already 
denoted  by  A,  G,  and  E.  These  quantities  serve  to  express 
the  relations  between  the  elements  of  surface.  Of  the  nine 
quantities  thus  obtained,  hoTvever,  there  are  four  which  are 
equal  to  each  other,  whereby  the  actual  number  is  reduced  to 
six.  The  expressions  for  these  six  are  here  placed  together 
for  the  sake  of  convenience,  although  three  of  them  have  been 
already  given. 

'{dx^dx^     dyjiy^     dx^dij,     dy„dxj 

'\dx^dx^     dyjiy^     dxjiy^     dyJ^J 

\dxjx^     dyj,y^     dxjdy^     dyjxj 
n     ^„  {^{T^-TJ)^^d^{T^-T^)     \d^{T.-TJY\ 
^~         l~~W^  (dyj^  L      ^ady.     J  I 

^-^•^i       [dx:f       ""   .     {dy,r  L      dx,dy,      J  J 

^  =  ^-°i       {dx:f  (dyj  L      dx^y,      j] } 

(I-). 

By  help  of  these  six  quantities  every  relation  between 
two  elements  of  surface  can  be  expressed  by  three  different 
fractions,  .as  may  be  shewn  in  "tabular  form  as  foUows : 


310      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 


E     A     G 
A     F~B 

0     B     D 
~E-A"C 

A     F    B 
~G~  B     D 

.(II.). 


It  is  easily  seen  that  the  three  horizontal  rows  relate  to  the 
three  cases,  in  which  the  given  point  through  which  the 
rays  must  pass  is  taken  either  in  plane  a,  plane  c,  or  plane  b. 
Of  the  three  vertical  rows  of  fractions,  which  express  the 
relations  between  the  elements  of  surface,  the  first  is  deduced 
from  equation  (i)  of  §  5,  the  second  from  (2)  and  the  third 
from  (3). 

Since  the  three  fractions,  which  express  a  given  relation 
between  two  elements  of  surface,  must  be  equal  to  each 
other,  we  have  the  following  equations  between  the  six 
quantities  r 

BG_  GA^  AB 

A'  =  EF;   B'  =  FD;    G'=DE (13). 

Our  further  investigations  will  be  performed  by  means  of 
these  six  quantities ;  and  since  every  relation  between  two 
elements  of  surface  is  expressed  by  three  different  fractions, 
we  can  always  choose  amongst  these  the  fraction  most  suit- 
able for  each  special  case. 

III.      DeTEBMINATION    of   the   mutual    EADLiTION,   WHEN 
THERE  IS  NO  CONCENTRATION  OF  EATS. 

§  8.  Magnitvde  of  the  Element  of  Surface  corresponding 
to  ds„  on  a  plane  in  a  particular  position. 

We  will  first  consider  the  case  to  which  Kirchhoff's  ex- 
pression refers,  and  seek  to  determine  how  much  heat  two 
elements  send  out  to  each  other,  on  the  assumption  that 
every  point  of  one  element  receives  from  every  point  of  the 
other  one  ray  and  only  one  ;  or  at  most  a  limited  number  of 
particular  rays,  which  may  be  considered  separately. 


CONCENTRATION  OF  RATS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.      311 

Given  two  elements  ds^  and  ds^  lA  planes  a  and  c  (Fig. 
30),  we  will  first  determine  the  heat 
which  ds^  sends  to  ds^.  For  this  pur- 
pose let  us  suppose  the  intermediate 
plane  h  to  lie  parallel  to  plane  a  at  a 
distance  p,  which  is  so  small,  that 
the  part  which  lies  between  these 
two  planes  of  any  ray  passing  from 
ds^  to  ds^  may  be  considered  as  a 
straight  line,  and  the  medium  through 
which  it  passes  as  homogeneous.  Let 
us  now  take  any  point  in  element 
ds^,  and  consider  the  pencil  of  rays 
which  passes  from  this  point  to  the 
element  ds^.  This  pencil  will  cut 
plane  h  in  an  element  ds^  whose  magnitude  is  given  by  one 
of  the  three  fractions  in  the  uppermost  horizontal  row  of 
equations  (II.).  Choosing  the  last  of  these  we  have  the 
equation 


,  Fig.  30. 


^ds. 


(14). 


The  quantity  G  may  in  this  case  be  brought  into  a 
specially  simple  form,  on  account  of  the  special  position  of 
plane  h.  For  this  purpose  let  us  follow  Kirchhoff  in  choos- 
ing the  system  of  co-ordinates  in  h  so  as  to  correspond 
exactly  with  that  in  the  parallel  plane  a;  i.e.  let  the  origins 
of  both  lie  in  a  common  perpendicular  to  the  two  planes 
and  let  each  axis  of  one  system  be  parallel  to  the  correspond- 
ing axis  of  the  other.  Let  r  be  the  distance  between  two 
points  lying  on  the  two  planes,  and  having  co-ordinates  x^, 
y^  and  x^,  y^  respectively.     Then 


r^Jp'+ix.-xS  +  iy-yJ' 


.(15). 


Let  us  now  suppose  a  single  ray  to  pass  from  one  of  these 
points  to  the  other ;  then,  since  its  motion  between  the  two 
planes  is  supposed  to  be  rectilinear,  the  length  of  its  path 
will  be  simply  represented  by  r ;  and  if  we  denote  by  v^  its 
velocity  in  the  neighbourhood  of  plane  a,  which  by  the 
assumption,  will  remain  nearly  constant  between  a  and  b, 


312     ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  Ot   HEAT. 

then  the  time  which  the  ray  expends  in  the  passage  will  be 
given  by  the  equation 

"'     v.- 

The  expression  for  C  may  therefore  be  written 

1  /    d'r     ^^     cPr  ^V    ^^     CPr    \ 

~^'^' v^Kdx^dx^     dy^dy^     dx^dy^     dy^dxj' 

Substituting  for  r  its  value  as  given  by  (15),  we  obtain 

G  =  l-^^'? W 

Hence  equation  (14)  becomes 


ds,  =  v:x-,Bds^ .(17). 

r 

If  we  denote  by  0  the  angle  which  the  indefinitely  small 
pencil  of  rays,  which  starts  from  a  point  on  ds^,  makes  with 

the  normal  at  that  point,  then  cos  ^  =  - ;  and  the  last  equa- 
tion also  takes  the  form 

'        "'""''^.Bds, (18). 


""'     cos=^^ 

§  9.  Expressions  for  the  quantities  of  Heat  which  ds„  and 
ds„  radiate  to  each,  other. 

When  the  magnitude  of  the  element  of  surface  ds^  is 
determined,  the  quantity  of  heat  which  ds^  sends  to  ds,  can 
be  easily  expressed.  ^ 

From  every  point  of  ds^  an  indefinitely  small  pencil  of 
rays  goes  to  .d&/,  and  the  solid  angle  of  the  cone  made  by  the 
pencil  from  each  of  these  points  may  be  taken  as  the  same. ' 
The  magnitude  of  this  angle  is  determined  by  the  magnitude 
and  position  of  that  element  ds^  in  which  the  cone  cuts 
plane  b.  To  express  this  angle  geometrically,  let  us  suppose 
that  a  sphere  of  radius  p  is  drawn  round  the  point  from 
which  the  rays  start,  and  that  within  this  sphere  we  may 
consider  the  path  of  the  rays  as  being  rectilinear.     If  da  is 


CONCENTRATION  OF  RATS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.      313 

the  element  of  surface  in  -which  this  sphere  is  cut  by  the 

pencil  of  rays,  then  — ^  represents  the  angle  of  the  cone.    But 

since  the  element  ds^  is  at  the  distance  r  from  the  vertex  of 
the  cone,  and  since  the  normal  to  the  surface  at  ds^,  which 
is  parallel  to  the  already  mentioned  normal  to  the  surface  at 
ds^,  forms  with  the  indefinitely  small  cone  of  rays  the 
angle  6,  we  have  the  equation 

da-  _  cos  0  X  ds^  .    . 

— T i \1"J' 

If  we  substitute  for  «?«,  its  value  from  (18),  we  obtain 

d^^^Bds^ (20). 

We  have  now  to  determine  the  magnitude  of  that  part  of 
the  heat  sent  from  ds^  which  corresponds  to  this  indefinitely 
small  cone;  or  in  other  words,  how  much  heat  ds^  sends 
through  the  given  element  da-  upon  the  spherical  area.  This 
quantity  of  heat  is  proportional  (1)  to  the  magnitude  of  the 
radiating  element  ds^,  (2)  to  the  angle  of  the  cone,  or  to 

-^,  and  (3),  according  to  the  well-known  law  of  radiation,  to 

r 

the  cosine  of  the  angle  6,  which  the  indefinitely  small  cone 

makes  with  the  normal.    It  may  therefore  be  expressed  by 

e  cos  ^  -^  ds^, 
P 

where  e  is  a  factor  depending  on  the  temperature  of  the 
surface.  To  determine  this  factor  we  have  the  condition 
that  the  whole  quantity  of  heat  which  tfe„  radiates,  or  which 
it  sends  to  the  whole  surface  of  any  hemisphere  above  plane 
a,  must  equal  e^ds^  where  e„  is  the  intensity  of  emission  from 
plane  a  at  the  position  of  ds^.    Hence  we  have 


?!' 


^ !  cos  0da-  =  e^ 

The  integration  extends  over  the  whole  of  the  hemisphere, 
and  gives 


314      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

Substituting  this  value  of  e  in  the  above  expression,  we 
obtain  for  the  quantity  of  heat  which  ds^  sends  through  da 
the  formula 

—  cos  a  —2  ds^. 

TT  ft 

We  have  only  to  substitute  in  this  formula  the  value  for 
—J  given  in  equation  (20),  and  we  obtaiin  the  required  expres- 
sion for  the  quantity  of  heat  which  ds^  sends  to  ds^,  viz.: 

If  conversely  we  require  the  quantity  of  heat  which  ds^ 
sends  to  ds^,  and  if  we  denote  by  e„  the  intensity  of  emission 
from  plane  c  at  the  position  of  ds^,  and  by  t'^the  velocity  of  the 
rays  in  the  neighbourhood  of  ds^,  we  obtain  the  expression : 

in 
§  10.    Radiation  as  dependent  on  the  surrovrndingMediwrn. 

The  expressions  obtained  in  the  last  section  are  in  general 
the  same  as  Kirchhotf's  expression  given  in  §  3,  and  differ 
only  inasmuch '  as  they  contain  as  factor  the  square  of  the 
velocity,  which  does  not  occur  in  Kirchhoff's  expression, 
because'  he  considers  nothing  but  the  velocity  in  vacuo,  and 
takes  this  as  unity.  Since  however  the  bodies,  whose  mutual 
radiation  we  are  considering,  may  often  be  in  different  media, 
where  the  velocity  of  the  rays  is  different,  this  factor  is  not 
without  importance;  and  its  introduction  leads  also  to  a 
special  conclusion  of  some  theoretical  interest. 

As  mentioned  in  §  2,  it  has  been  hitherto  assumed  that 
with  perfectly  black  bodies  the  intensity  of  emission  depends 
only  on  the  temperature,  so  that  two  such  bodies  of  equal 
temperature  would  radiate  equal  quantities  of  heat  from 
equal  areas  of  surface.  As.  far  as  the  author  knows,  the  ques- 
tion whether  the  surrounding  medium  has  also  an  influence 
on  the  intensity  of  emission  has  never  been  considered. 
Since  however  the  two  expressions  given  above  for  the 
mutual  radiation  of  two  elements  contain  a  factor  which 


CONCENTEATIOlJ  OF  EATS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT,      315 

depends  on  the  nature  of  the  medium,  it  becomes  necessary 
to  consider  this  medium,  and  the  method  of  determining  its 
influence. 

If  from  the  above  two  expressions  we  omit  the  factor 

which  is  common  to  both,  viz.  —  ds^ds^,  we  have  the  result 

that  the  quantity  of  heat,  which  the  element  ds^  sends  to  the 
element  ds^,  bears  to  that  which  ds^  sends  to  ds„  the  ratio 
^a^a  '•  ^a"-  If  ■w^e  now  assume  that  at  equal  temperatures 
the  radiation  is  always  equal,  even  when  the  media  in  contact 
with  the  two  elements  are-  different,  then  for  equal  tempera- 
tures we  must  put  e^=e^',  and  the  quantities  of  heat,  which 
the  two  elements  radiate  to  each  other,  would  then  not  be 
equal,  but  would  be  in  the  ratio  u/  :  v^.  It  would  follow 
that  two  bodies  which  are  in  different  media,  e.g.  one  in 
water  and  the  other  in  air,  would  not  tend  to  equalize 
their  temperatures  by  mutual  radiation,  but  that  one  would 
be  able  by  radiation  to  raise  the  other  to  a  higher  temperature 
than  that  which  itself  possesses. 

If  on  the  other  hand  we  maintain  the  universal  correct- 
ness of  the  fundamental  principle-  laid  down  by  the  author, 
viz.  that  heat  cannot  of  itself  pass  from  a  colder  to  a  hotter 
body,  then  we  must  consider  the  mutual  radiations  of  two 
perfectly  black  elements  of  equal  temperature  as  being 
themselves  equal,  and  must  therefore  put 

eav:  =  e,v:^ (21). 

Hence 

e,,  :c,  ::^;/^^^/ (22). 

Since  the  ratio  of  the  velocities  is  the  reciprocal  of  that 
of  the  coefficients  of  refraction,  which  we  m&y  call  n,  and  m„, 
this  proportion  may  be  written 

e.:c„  ::«/:< (23). 

Hence  the  radiation  of  perfectly  black  bodies  at  equal 
temperatures  is  different  in  different  media,  and  varies  in- 
versely as  the  squares  of  the  velocities  in  those  media,  or 
directly  as  the  squares  of  the  coefficients  of  refraction.  Thus 
the  radiation  in  water  must  bear  to  that  in  air  the  ratio 
{^y  :  1,  nearly. 


316  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OP  HEAT.       > 

We  have  also  to  temember  that  in  the  heat  radiated  frofia 
perfectly  black  bodies  there  are  rays  of  very  different  wave- 
lengths; and  if  we  assume  that  the  equality  of  mutual 
radiation  holds,  not  merely  for  the  heat  ais  a  whole,  but  also 
for  each  wave-length. in  particular,  we  must  have  for  each 
of  these  a  proportion  similar  to  (22)  and  (23)  but  in  which 
the  quantities  in  the  right-hand  ratio  have  somewhat  dif- 
ferent values. 

Lastly,  instead  of  perfectly  black  bodies,  let  us  consider 
bodies  in  which  the  absorption  of  the  rays  received  is  partial 
only.  We  must  then  introduce  in  the  formula,  in  place  of 
the  emission,  a  fraction  having  the  emission  as  numerator  and 
the  coefficient  of  absorption  as  denominator.  For  this  fraction 
we  can  obtain  relations  similar  to  those  obtained  for  the 
emission  alone.  This  generalization,  in  which  the  influence 
of  the  direction  of  the  rays  upon  the  emission  and  absorption 
must  also  be  taken  into  account,  need  not  here  be  entered 
upon. 


IV.    Determination    of    the    mutual    radiation    of 

TWO    ELEMENTS    OF   SURFACE,   IN    THE    CASE   WHEN  ONE 
IS  THE  OPTICAL  IMAGE  OP  THE  OTHER, 

§  11.    Relations  between  B,  T>,  F  and  E, 

We  have  hitherto  assumed  that  the  planes  a  and  c,  so 
far  as  we  are  concerned  with  them,  give  out  their  rays  in 
such  a  way,  that  one  ray  and  one  only,  or  at  most  a  limited 
quantity  of  individual  rays,  pa^ss  from  any  point  in  the  one 
to  any  point  in  the  other.  We  will  now  pass  on  to  the  case  in 
which  this  does  not  hold.  The  rays  which  diverge  from  points 
in  the  one  plane  may  be  made  to  converge  by  reflections 
or  refractions,  and  to  meet  again  on  the  other  plane ;  so  that 
for  any  point  p^  on  plane  a  there  may  be  one  or  more  points 
or  lines  on  plane  c,  in  which  an  indefinitely  large  number 
of  the  rays  coming  from  p^  cut  that  plane,  whilst  other  parts 
of  the  same  plane  receive  no  rays  whatever  from  p^.  The 
same  of  course  holds  of  the  rays  which  start  from  plane  e 
and  arrive  at  plane  a,  since  the  rays  passing  to  and  fro  be- 
tween the  same  points  describe  the  same  paths. 

Among  the  innumerable  cases  of  this  description  we  will, 


CONCENTRATION  OF  RAYS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.      317 


Kg.  31. 


for  the  sake  of  clearness,  consider 
fixst  the  extreme  case  illustrated 
in  Fig.  31.  In  this  case  all  the 
rays  sent  out  by  J3„  within  a  cer- 
tain definite  cone  meet  again  in  a 
single  point  p^  of  plane  c.  This 
case  occurs  for  example,  when  the 
deflection  of  the  rays  is  effected 
by  a  lens,  or  by  a  spherical  mirror, 
or  by  any  system  of  concentric 
lenses  or  mirrors.  We  are  here 
supposed  to  neglect  the  spherical 
and  chromatic  aberration,  which 
we  have  a  right  to  do  with  regard 
to  the  latter,  inasmuch  as  we  have  confined  ourselves  to 
homogeneous  rays.  Two  points  thus  corresponding  to  each 
other,  as  the  points  of  starting  and  of  re-union  of  the  rays, 
are  called,  as  already  mentioned,  conjugate  foci.  For  each 
ray  in  such  a  case  the  co-ordinates  «„,  y„  of  the  point  p^  in 
which  it  strikes  plane  c,  are  determined  by  the  co-ordinates 
x^  y„  of  the  starting  point  p^.  The  other  points  on  plane  c 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  p^  receive  no  rays  from  p^;  for 
there  is  no  path  to  them  which  has  the  property  that  the 
time  in  which  the  ray  would  traverse  it  is  a  minimum,  as 
compared  with  the  time  in  which  it  would  traverse  any  other 
adjacent  path.  Hence  the  quantity  T^  which  expresses 
this  minimum  time,  can  have  a  real  value  only  for  p^,  and 
not  for  any  of  the  points  round  it.  The  differential  coeffi- 
cients of  2'^,  in  which  the  co-ordinates  x^,  y^  are  assumed  to 
be  constant  and  one  of  the  co-ordinates  x^  y^  to  be  variable, 
(or  conversely  x^,  y^  to  be  constant  and  one  of  the  co-ordinates 
x^  2/o  *o  be  variable)  can  thus  have  no  real  finite  values. 
It  follows  that  of  the  six  quantities  A,  B,  G,  D,  E,  F,  which 
have  been  determined  by  equations  (I.),  the  three  B,^  D,  F 
are  not  applicable  to  the.  present  case,  inasmuch  as  they 
contain  differential  coefficients  of  r„;  whilst  the  three 
others  A,  G,  E  contain  only  differential  coefficients  bf 
T^  and  T^„.  Let  us  now  assume  that  plane  h  is  so  chosen 
that  between  it  and  the  planes  a  and  c,  so  far  as  we  are 
concerned  with  them,  the  radiation  takes  place  on  the 
former  system,  so  that  one  ray  and  one  only,  or  at  most  a 


318      OK  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

limited  number  of  rays,  pass  from  any  point  on  plane  b 
to  any  point  on  plane  a  or  c.  Then  for  all  the  points  with 
which  we  are  concerned,  the  quantities  T^  and  Tj„  and  their 
differential  coefficients  have  real  values  not  indefinitely  large. 
The  quantities  A,  C  and  E  are  then  as  applicable  in  this  case 
as  in  the  former. 

One  of  these  quantities,  E,  takes  in  this  case  a  special 
value,  which  may  at  once  be  found.  For  -the  three  points 
in  which  the  ray  cuts  the  three  planes  a,  h, «,  the  two  equa^ 
tions  given  in  (1)  must  hold,  viz. : 

In  the  present  case  the  position  of  the  poirCt  in  which  the 
ray  cuts  plane  h  is  not  determined  hj  the  position  of  the  two 
points  p^  and  p^,  but  plane  h  may  be  cut  in  all  points  of 
a  certain  finite  area.  Hence  the  two  equations  above  must 
hold  for  all  these  points,  and  therefore  the  equations  obtained 
by  differentiating  these  according  to  ajj  and  y^  must  also  hold, 
viz. : 

cP  (?:.+  rj  _..d'  (T,,+  TJ  _       d'  (T^+  TJ  _  ^ 

da,:        -"'       dx,dy,      -"'         d^^        -U...C^4;.    ■ 

If  we  apply  this  to  the  equation  determining  E  in  equa--, 
tions  (I.),  we  obtain 

E  =  Q (25). 

The  two  other  quantities  A  and  C  have  in  general  finite 
values,  which  differ  in  different  circumstances,  and  which  we 
must  now  use  in  our  further  investigation,  '  • 

§  12.  Application  of  A  and  O  to  determine  the  Relation 
bstween  the  Elements  of  Surface. 

Let  us  suppose  that  the  element  ds^  on  plane  a  has  an 
optical  image  ds^  on  plane  c,  so  that  every  point  of  ds^  has 
a  -point  on  ds^  as  its  conjugate  focus,  and  vice  vers^.  We 
have  now  to  enquire  whether  the  quantities  of  heat,  which 
these  elements  send  to  each  other,  when  taken  as  elements 
of  the  surfaces  of  two  perfectly  blaclc  bodies  of  equal  tem- 
peratures, are  equal  or  not,. 


CONCENTBATION  OF  RAYS  OP  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.      319^ 

First, to  determine  tlie  position  and  magnitude  of  the 
image  ds„  corresponding  to  the  given  element  ds^.  Take 
any  point  p^  on  the  intermediate  plane  h,  and  consider  all 
the  rays  starting  from  points  on  ds^,  which  pass  through 
p^.  Each  of  these  rays  strikes  plane  c  in  the  conjugate  focus 
to  that  from  which  it  starts ;  and  therefore  the  element  of 
surface  in  which  this  pencil  of  rays  cuts  plane  c  is  pre-i 
cisely  the  optical  image  ds„  of  the  element  ds^.  Therefore, 
to  express  the  ratio  between  the  ^reas  of  ds„  and  ds^,  we 
may  use  one  of  the  three  fractions  in  the  lowest  row  of 
equations  (II.)>  which  express  the  relation  between  the  two 
elements  of  surface,  in  which  an  indefinitely  small  pencil, 
passing  through  a  single  point  ^j  of  plane  b,  cuts  the  two 
planes  a  and  c.  Of  these  three  fractions  the  first  is  alone 
applicable  in  this  case,  since  the  other  two  are  undetermined. 
We  have  thus  the  equation 

1=^ ••• -f^^)- 

.  This  equation  is  interesting  also  from  an  optical  point 
of  view,  as  being  the .  most  general  equation  which  can  be 
given  to  determine  the  ratio  between  the  area  of  an  object 
and  that  of  its  optical  image.  It  should  be  remarked  that 
the  intermediate  plane  h,  to  which  the  quantities  A  and  G 
are  related,  may  be  any  whatever,  and  can  therefore  in  any 
particular  case  be  chosen  as  is  most  convenient  for  calcula- 
tion. 

§  13.  Relation  between  the  Quantities  of  Heat  which 
ds^  and  dSj  radiate  to  each  other. 

Having  thus  determined  the  element  of  surface  ds^  which 
forms  the  image  of  ds^,  let  us  take  on  plane  b,  instead  of  a 
single  point,  an  element  of  surface  ds^,  and  let  us  con-^ 
sider  the  rays  which  the  two  elements  ds„  and  ds^  send 
through  this  element  dsy  All  the  rays,  which  start  from 
one  point  of  ds^  and  pass  through  ds^,  unite  again  in  on^ 
point  of  ds^ ;  and  thus  all  the  rays  which  ds„  sends  through? 
dsj  exactly  strike  the  element  ds,i  and  vice  yers^.  The 
two  quantities  of  heat  which  ds^  and  ds„  send  to  ds^  are  thus 
the  same  as  the  quantities  of  heat. which  ds^  and  ds^  sea^ 


320      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT, 

to  each  other  through  the  intermediate  element  ds^.  These 
quantities  of  heat  are  therefore  given  at  once  by  what  has 
gone  before.  Thus  for  the  quantity  of  heat  which  ds^ 
sends  to  ds^,  the  same  expression  will  hold,  as  held  in 
§  9  for  the  quantity  of  heat  which  ds^  sends  to  ds^,  provided 
we  substitute  G  for  B  and  ds^  for  ds^.  The  expression  thus 
becomes 

eji^^  —  ds^  ds^. 

IT 

Similarly  for  the  quantity  of  heat  which  ds^  sends  to  ds^, 
the  expression  will  be  the  same  as  that  for  the  quantity  of 
heat  which  ds^  sends  to  ds^,  provided  we  substitute  A  for  5 
and  dsj  for  ds^,  or  will  be 

e„«/  —  dsjds^. 

IT 

Kemembering  that  by  equation  (26) 

Gds^  =  Ads^, 

we  see  that  these  two  expressions  stand  to  each  other  in  the 
ratio  e„w/  :  e,v'. 

We  obtain  precisely  the  same  result,  if  we  take  any  other 
element  ds,,  on  plane  b,  and  consider  the  quantities  of  heat 
which  the  two  elements  ds^  and  ds^  send  to  each  other 
through  this  new  element.  These  will ,  always  be  found  to 
stand  to  each  other  in  the  ratio  e^t;/  :  e„i;/.  Since  the  quan- 
tities of  heat,  which  ds^  and  ds„  send  to  each  other  on  the 
whole,  are  made  up  of  those  which  they  send  to  each  other 
through  all  the  different  elements  of  the  intermediate  plane, 
the  same  ratio  "must  hold  for  the  whole ;  and  we  thus  obtain 
the  final  result,  that  the  total  quantities  of  heat  which  ds^  and 
ds^  radiate  to  each  other,  stand  in  the  ratio  ej!^  :  e^vf. 

This  is  the  same  relation  as  was  found  in  sections  8  and  9 
for  the  case  where  there  is  no  concentration  of  rays ;  it  thus 
follows  that  the  concentration  of  rays,  however  much  it  alters 
the  absolute  magnitudes  of  the  quantities  of  heat  which  two 
elements  radiate  to  each  other,  leaves  the  ratio  between  them 
exactly  the  same. 

It  was  shewn  in  §  10,  that  if  in  the  case  of  ordinary  un- 
concentrated  radiation  the  principle  holda  that  heat  cannot 
pass  from  a  colder  to  a  hotter  body,  then  the  radiation  must 


CONCENTRATIOK  OF  RAYS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.      321 

differ  in  different  media,  and  must  be^uch  that  for  perfectly 
black  bodies  of  equal  temperatures 

If  this  equation  is  satisfied,  then  in  the  present  ease  also, 
where  the  elements  ds^  and  ds^  are  images  one  of  the  other, 
the  quantities  of  heat  which  they  mutually  radiate  must  be 
equal;  and  therefore,  in  spite  of  the  concentration  of  the  rays, 
one  element  cannot  raise  the  other  to  a  higher  temperature 
than  its  own. 


V.    Relation  between  the  increment  of  area  and  the 

RATIO    or  THE    TWO   SOLID  ANGLES  OP  AN  ELEMENTARY 
PENCIL  OF  RAYS. 

§  14.     Statement  of  the  Proportions  for  this  Case, 

As  an  immediate  result  of  the  foregoing  we  may  here 
develope  a  proportion,  which  appears  to  have  some  general 
interest,  inasmuch  as  it  illustrates  a  peculiar  difference  in  the 
behaviour  of  a  pencil  of  rays  in  the  case  of  an  object  and  of 
its  image.  This  difference'  must  always  exist  and  have  a  de- 
terminate value,  when  the  object  and  the  image  have  differ- 
ent areas. 

Consider  an  indefinitely  small  pencil  of  rays,  which  starts 
from  a  point  on  ds^,  passes  through  the  element  ds^  on  the 
intermediate,  plane,  and  then  unites  again  in  a  point  on  cfo„. 
We  may  compare  the  divergence  of  the  rays  at  their  starting 
point  with  the  convergence  of  the  same  at  their  point  of  re- 
union. This  divergence  and  convergence  (or,  to  use  the 
ordinary  phrase,  the  solid  angles  of  the  indefinitely  small  cones, 
which  the  pencil  forms  at  its  points  of  starting  and  re-union) 
are  given  directly  by  the  same  method  which  we  have  used 
in§  9,  d,g  follows:—  •'  ■     • 

Suppose  that  round  each  of  the  points  there  is  described 
a  sphere  of  so  small  a  radius,  that  we  may  consider  the  i ays' 
as  going  in  straight  lines  as  far  as  the  surface  of  this  sphere: 
and  then  consider  the  element  of  surface  in  which  the  pencil 
bif  rays  cuts  the  sphere.  Let  do-  be  this  element  and  let  p  be 
the  radius  of  the  sphere;  then  the  angle  of  the  indefinitely 
small  cone,  which  contains  the  rays  so  far  as  they  are  recti- 

c.  21 


322      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 

linear,  will' be  expressed  by —^  .  This  fraction  we  have  de- 
termined for  a  similax  case  in  §  9  by  equation  (20),  and  in 
the  expression  there  given  we  have  only  to  alter  the  letters 
in  order  to  transform  it  into  the  expression  for  the  present 
case.  In  order  to  express  the  angle  of  the  cone  for  that 
starting;  point  of  the  rays  which  lies 4n  pl^ie  a,  we  have  only 
to  substitute  in  that  expression  ds^  for  ds^  and  G  for  B.  In 
addition,,  ;the  symbol  ^,. which  expresses  the  angle  between 
the  pencil  of  rays  and  the  normal  to  the  surface  of  ds^,  may 
be  changed  to  6^ ,  so  as  to  express  more  clearly  that  it  relates 
to  plane  a;  and  for  the  same  reason  the  suffix  a  may  be 

added  to  — j, .,    Thus  we  obtain 

^4]=^Gds, (27), 

To  obtain  the  other  equation,  which  gives  the  angle  of  the 
cone  at  the  point  of  re-union  on  plane  c,  we  have  only  to 
change  the  S'uffia^  a  into  c  throughout,  and  also  to  substitute 
A  for  G.     Thus  we  have  , 

^°'^         ""     Ads^ (28). 


!da 


./)V„      cos^, 

From  these  two  equations  we  obtain  the  proportion, 
cos  5„  (d<T\     cos  B  /da- 


since  by  equation  (26)      Gds^=  Ads^., 

If  we  substitute  for  the  velocity  the  coefficient  of  refraction, 
this  proportion  becomes 

n^  cos  e„  [ -?)  . :  K  cos  0,  (-^  j    ::  ds,  :  ds„ (30). 

Here  the  ratio  on  the  right-hand  side  is  the  ratio  between 
the.  area  of  an  element  of  surface  of  the  image,  and  the  area  of 
the.  corresponding  element  of  the  object,  or  in  short  the  propor- 
tionate increment  of  area ;  and  we  thus  obtain  a  simple  rela- 
tion between  this  increment  and  the  ratio  of  the  angles  of  the 
cones  made,  by  an  elementary  pencil  of  rays.  It  is  easily  seen 


CONCENTEATION  OF  EAYS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.     323 

that  it  is  not  necessary  for  the  truth  of  this  proportion  that  the 
rays  should  finally  converge,  and  meet  at  one  point,  but  they 
may  also  be  divergent,  in  which  case  their  directions  meet  in 
one  poiiit  when  produced  backwards,  and  form  what  is  called 
in  optics  a  virtual  image. 

If  we  take  the  special  case  in  which  the  medium  at  the 
point  of  starting  and  of  re-union  is  the  same  (e.g.  where 
the  rays  issue  from  an  object  which  is  in  air,  and,  after  cer- 
tain refractions  or  reflections,  form  an  image  which  really 
or  virtually  is  also  in  air),  then  v^  =  v„  and  w^  =  «„ ;  whence 
we  have 

cos0„f-^j    :  cos0j-?j   ::  ds^  :  ds^. 

If  we  add  the  further  condition,  that  the  pencil  of  rays 
makes  equal  angles  with  the  two  elements  of  surface  (e.g. 
that  both  are  right  angles),  then  we  have 

/dcr\.      fdi 


{?) At);- ''■■■''' 


In  this  case  the  angles  of  the  cones  formed  by  the  pencil 
of  rays  at  the  object  and  at  the  image  stand  simply  in  the 
inverse  ratio  of  the  areas  of  the  corresponding  elements  of 
object  and  image. 

In  the  valuable  demonstration  which  Helmholtz  has  given 
in  his  "Physiological  Optics"*  of  the  laws  of  refraction  in 
the  case  of  spherical  surfaces,  he  seeks  to  connect  with  these 
the  case  of  the  refractions  which  take  place  in  the  eye ;  and 
he'  finds  in  page  50,  and  extends  further  in  page  54,  an  equa- 
tion which  expresses-  the  relation  between  the  size  of  the 
image  and  the  convergence  of  the  rays,  for  the  case  in  which 
the  change  of  direction  of  the  rays  takes  place  by  refraction 
or  by  reflection  at  the  surface  of  co-axial  spheres,  and  in  which 
the  rays  are  approximately  perpendicular  to  the  planes  which 
contain  the  object  and  the  image.  The  author  however  be- 
lieves that  the  relation'  has  not  before  been  given  in  its 
general  form,  as  in  proportions  (29)  and  (30). 

•  Karsten's  Universal  Eneyelopedia  of  Physics. 

21—2 


32-l!      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 


VI.    General  determination  of  the  mutual  radiation 

BETWEEN    TWO    SURFACES,     IN     THE     CASE    WHERE'  ANY 
CONCENTRATION  WHATEVER  MAY  TAKE  PLACE. 

§  15.     General  View  of  the  Concentration  of  Rays. 

We  must  now  extend  our  investigation  so  as  to  embrace 
not  only  the  extreme  case,  in  which  all  the  rays  which  issue 
from  a  point  on  plane  a  within  a  certain  finite  cone  unite 
again  in  one  point  forming  a  conjugate  focus  on  plane  c,  but 
also  every  conceivable  case  of  the  concentration  of  rays. 

To  obtain  a  closer  view  of  the  phenomena  of  concentration, 
we  may  use  the  following  definition.  If  rays  issue  from  any 
point  p^  and  fall  on  plane  c,  and  if  these  rays  when  close  to 
that  plane  have  such  directions  that  on  one  part  of  the  plane 
the  density  of  the  impinging'  rays  is  indefinitely  great  com- 
pared to  the  mean  density,  then  at  this  part  there  is  concen- 
tration of  the  rays  which  issue  from  p^.  With  this  definition 
we  may  easily  treat  mathematically  the  case  of  concentration. 
Between  point  p^  and  plane  c  take  any  intermediate  plane  h, 
which  is  so  placed  that  there  is  no  concentration  in  it  of  the 
rays  issuing  from  p^ ;  and  also  that  its  relation  to  plane  c  is 
such,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  that  the  pencils  of  rays  issu- 
ing from  points  on  one  of  those  planes  suffer  no  concentration 
on  the  other.  Now  consider  an  indefinitely,  small  pencil, 
which  starts  from  p^  and  cuts  the  planes  h  and  c.  Let  us 
compare  the  areas  of  the  elements  ds^  and  ds^  in  which  these 
planes  are  cut.  If  ds^  vanishes  in  comparison  to  ds^,  so  that 
we  may  put 

|-° (5'). 

this  is  a  sign  that  there  is  a  concentration  of  rays,  in  the 
sense  defined  above,  at  plane  c. 

Let  us  now  return  to  equations  (II.)  of  §  7.  The  equations 
in  the  first  horizontal  row  are  those  that  refer  to  the  present 
case :  and  of  the  three  fractions,  which  there  represent  the 
ratio  of  the  elements  of  surface,  the  first  applies  to  our  case, 
because  under  the  assumption  made  as  to  the  position  of  the 
intermediate  plane  we  may-  determine  A  and  E  in  the  ordi- 


CONCENTRATION  OF  BAYS  OF  LIGET  AND  HEAT.      325 
nary  manner.     "We  have  thus  the  equation 

ds^     A' 

This  fraction  can  only  equal  zero  if  the  numerator  E  is 
zero,  since  under  the  assumption  made  as  to  the  position  of 
the  intermediate  planes  the  denominator  A  cannot  be  indefi- 
nitely large.  We  have  then  as  a  mathematical  criterion, 
whether  the  rays  issuing  from  p^  suffer  concentration  at  plane 
c  or  not,  the  condition 

E=Q (32),. 

which  must  be  fulfilled  where  there  is  concentration. 

Now  assume  conversely  that  on  plane  c  a  point  p^  is  given, 

and  that  we  have  to  decide  whether  the  rays  issuing  from 

this  point  suffer  concentration  at  any  part  of  plane  a.     Then 

ds 
we  have  in  the  same  way  the  condition  t-"  =  0 ;  and  since  by 

(II.)  -T^  =  ^ ,  we  arrive  at  the  same  final  condition 

i;=o. 

It  is  in  fact  easy  to  see  that  when  the  rays  issuing  from  a 
point  on  plane  a  suffer  concentration  at  plane  c,  then  con- 
versely the  rays  issuing  from  the  latter  point  must  suffer  con- 
centration on  plane  a. 

Since  equations  (13)  express  the  relations  which  hold  be- 
tween the  six  quantities  J,  B,  G,  3,  E,  F,  we  may  apply 
those  equations  to  ascertain  what  becomes  of  B,  D  and  F, 
in  the  case  where  E  =  0,  whilst  A  and  0  have  finite  values. 
By  those  equations 

^=§-'  ^=?'   ^=i" ••■••(^^)- 

Hence  it  follows  that  all  three  quantities  must  in  the  present 
case  be  indefinitely  great. 

§  16.  Mutual  Radiation  of  an  Element  of  Surface  and 
of  a  Finite  Surface,  through  an  Element  of  an  Intermediate 
Plane. 

We  will  now  attempt  so  to  determine  the  ratio  between 
the  quantities  of  heat  which  two  surfaces  radiate  to  each 


326  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

other,  that  the  result  must  hold  in  all  cases,  independently 
of  the  question  whether  there  is  any  concentration  of  heai 
or  no. 

For  greater  generality  we  will  substitute  for  the  planes  a 
and  c,  as  hitherto  considered,  two  surfaces  of  any  kind,  which 
we  may  call  s„  and  s„.  Between  them  let  us  take  any  third 
surface  Sj,  which  need  only  fulfil  the  condition  that  the  rays 
which  pass  from  s„  to  s„,  or  vice  versS,,  suffer  no  Qoncentration 
in  Sj.  Now  choose  in  s„  any  element  ds^,  and  in  s^  an  ele- 
ment dsj,  so  situated  that  the  rays,  which  pass  through  it 
from  ds^  will  when  produced  strike  the  surface  s„.  Then  we 
will  first  determine  how  much  heat  ds^  sends  through  ds^  io 
the  surface  s„,  and  how  much  heat  it  receives  back  from  s„ 
through  the  same  element  of  the  intermediate,  plane.  To 
ascertain  the  first  mentioned  quantity  of  heat,  we  have  only 
to  determine  how  much  heat  ds^  sends  to  ds^,  since,  by  our 
assumption  as  to  the  position  of  ds^,  all  this  heat  after  pass- 
ing dsj  must  strike  the  surface  s„.  This  quantity  of  heat  may 
be  expressed  at  once  by  means  of  our  previous  formulae. 
Suppose  a  tangent  plane  to  be  drawn  to  s^  at  a  point  of  the 
element  ds^,  and  similarly  a  tangent  plane  Sj  at  a  point  oids^; 
and  consider  the  given  elements  of  surface  as  elements  of 
these  planes.  If  in  these  tangent  planes  we  take  two  sys- 
tems of  co-ordinates  a;„,  y^,  and  x^,  y„,  and  if  we  form  the 
quantity  G  by  means  of  the  third  of  equations  (I.),  then  the 
required  quantity  of  heat,  which  ds^  sends  through  ds^  to  the 
surface  s^,  is  given  by  the  expressions 

ej]^  —  ds^dSi. 

IT 

Next  with  regard  to  the  quantity  of  heat  which  ds^  re- 
ceives through  dsj  from  the  surface  s„,  the  relations  of  the 
points  in  s^,  from  which  these  rays  issue,  are  not  in  general 
so  simple  as  that  which  holds  in  the  special  case,  where  ds, 
has  an  optical  image  ds„  lying  on  s„,  and  therefore  is  also 
itself  the  optical  image  of  ds„.  If  we  choose  a  known  point 
p^  on  the  intermediate  element  ds^,  and  consider  the  rays 
which  pass  through  this  point  from  all  points  of  ds^,  we  have 
an  indefinitely  small  pencil  of  rays,  cutting  s^  in  a  certain 
element  of  surface.  It  is  this  element  which  sends  rays  to 
ds^  through  the  selected  point  p^.    But  if  we  now  choose 


CONCENTRATION  OF  RATS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT,      327 

.another  point  of  ds^  as  the  vertex  of  the  pencil,  we  arrive 
at  a  somewhat  different  element  on  the  surface  s^.    Thus 

.  the  rays,  which  ds^  receives  from  s^  through  different  points 
on  ds^,  do  not  all  issue  from  one  and  the  same  eleinent 
of  s,. 

Since  however  the  area  of  ds^  may  be  any  whatever, 
nothing  hinders  us  from  supposing  it  so  small,  that  it  is  an 
indefinitely  small  quantity  of  a  higher  order  than  ds^  In 
this  case,  if  the  vertex  of  the  pencil  changes  its  position 
within  dsf,  then  the  element  of  «„  which  corresponds  to  ds^ 
will  change  its  position  through  a  distance  so  small  that 
in  comparison  with  the  dimensions  of  the  element  it  is 
indefinitely  small  and  may  be  neglected.  Hence  in  this 
case  the  'element  ds^,  which  we  obtain  when  we  choose  any 
point  whatever  p^  on  element  ds„i  and  make  it  the  vertex  of 
the  pencil  of  rays  issuing  from,ds„,  may  be  considered  as  the 
part  of  ds^  which  exchanges  rays  with  ds^  through  ids^.  The 
area  of  this  element  ds^  is  easily  found  from  what  precedes. 
Let  us  suppose  as  before  that  a  tangent  plane  to  the  surface  s, 
is  drawn  at  p^,  and  that  tangent  planes  to  the  surfaces  s„  and 
s„  are  drawn  at  points  on  the  elements  ds^  and  ds^  respectively; 
and  let  us  consider  the  two  latter  elements  as  elements  of 
the  tangent  planes.  Take  systems  of  co-ordinates  on  these 
three  tangent  planes,  and  form  the  quantities  A  and  C,  as 
given  by  the  first  and  third  of  equations  (I.).  Then  by 
equation  (II.)  we  have 

'   ds,=  -^d8^. 

The  quantity  of  heat  which  <i5„, sends  to  ds„  and  which, 
as  mentioned  above,  may  be  considered  as  the  quantity  which 
ds^  receives  from  the  surface  s,  through  ds„  is  expressed,  by 

IT 


or,  substituting  for  ds^  its  value  given  above. 


S28     .         ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOKT  OF  HEAT. 

If  we  Compare  this  expression  with  that  found  above, 
which  expresses  the  quantity  of  heat  sent  by  ds^  through  ds, 
to  s„,  we  see  that  the  two  stand  to  each  other  in  the  ratio 
e^v^  :  efi^.  If  we  now  suppose  that  «„  and  s„  are  the  sur- 
faces of  two  perfectly  black  bodies  of  equal  temperature,  and 
make  for  such  surfaces  the  assumption  (which  we  have  al- 
ready seen  to  be  necessary  in  the  case  of  radiation  without 
concentration),  that  the  two  products  e„v/  and  e^^  are  equal, 
then  the  quantities  of  heat  given  by  the  two  expressions  above 
are  also  equal. 

§  17.    Mutucd  Radiation  of  Entire  Surfaces. 

If  on  the  intermediate  surface  s^  we  take,  instead  of  the 
element  hitherto  considered,  another  element  which  is  also 
supposed  to  be  an  indefinitely  small  quantity  of  a  higher 
order,  then  the  element  of  s^,  which  exchanges  rays  with  ds^ 
through  this  element  of  s^,  has  a  different  position  from  that 
in  the  last  case  ;  but  the  two  quantities  of  heat  thus  ex- 
changed are  again  equal  to  each  other ;  and  the  same  holds 
of  all  other  elements  of  the  intermediate  surface. 

To  obtain  the  quantity  of  heat  which  ds^  sends  to  s„,  not 
through  a  single  element  of  the  intermediate  surface,  but  as 
a  whole,  and  similarly  the  quantity  of  heat  which  as  a  whole 
it  receives  from  s„,  we  must  integrate  the  twp  expressions 
found  above  over  the  surface  s„  so  far  as  this  surface  is  cut 
by  the  rays  which  pass  from  ds^  to  s„,  and  vice  verset.  It  is 
evident  that  if  for  each  element  of  surface  ds^  the  two 
differentials  are  equal,  then  the  whole  integrals  must  also 
be  equal. 

Lastly,  to  find  the  quantities  of  heat,  which  the  whole 
surface  s^  exchanges  with  s„,  we  must  integrate  both  these 
expressions  over  the  surface  *,.  This  process  again  will  not 
disturb  the  equality,  which  exists  for  each  of  the  separate 
elements  ds^. 

Thus  the  principle  previously  discovered  in  a  special  case, 
viz.  that  two  perfectly  bla,ck  bodies  of  equal  temperatures  ex- 
change equal  quantities  of  heat  with,  each  other,  so  far  as  the 
equation  ejD^  —^^^  holds  for  them,  appears  also  as  the  result 
of  an  investigation,  which  in  no  way  depends  upon  whether 
the  rays  issuing  from  s,  suffer  a  concentration  at  s„  and  vice 
vers^,  or  not;  since  the  only  condition  was,  that  the  rays 


CONCENTRATION  OF  EATS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.      329 

issuing  from  s^  and  s„  suffer  no  concentration  at  the  inter- 
inediate  surface  Sj,  a  condition  which  may  be  always  fulfilled, 
since  this  surface  may  be  chosen  at  pleasure. 

It  follows  further  from  this  result  that,  if  a  given  black 
body  exchanges  heat  not  only  with  one  but  with  any  number 
of  black  bodies,  it  receives  from  all  of  them  exactly  the  same 
quantity  of  heat  as  it  sends  to  them. 

§  18.     Consideration  of  Various  Collateral  Circumstances. 

The  previous  investigation  has  been  made  throughout 
under  the  assumption  that  any  reflections  and  refractions 
take  place  without  loss,  or  that  there  is  no  absorption  of 
heat.  We  can,  however,  easily  go  on  to  shew  that  the  results 
are  not  altered,  if  this  condition  is  dropped.  For  consider 
any  one  of  the  different  processes,  by  which  a  ray  may  be 
weakened  on  its  way  from  one  body  to  another ;  say  that  at 
a  place  where  the  ray  cuts  the  boundary  of  two  media,  one 
part  passes  into  the  further  medium  by  refraction,  and  the 
other  is  reflected.  Then  whether  we  consider  the  one  part 
or  the  other  as  the  continuation  of  the  original  ray,  we  have 
in  both  cases  a  weakened  ray  to  deal  with.  The  same  holds 
if  a  ray  be  partially  absorbed  by  entering  a  medium.  But 
in  each  of  these  cases  we  have  the  law  that  two  rays  which 
traverse  the  same  path  in  opposite  directions  are  weakened 
in  equal  proportion.  The  quantities  of  heat,  which  two 
bodies  mutually  send  to  each  other,  are  therefore  weakened 
by  such  processes  to  the  same  extent ;  so  that,  if  they  would 
be  equal  without  such  weakening,  they  will  also  be  equal 
when  thus  weakened.  Another  circumstance  may  be  con- 
sidered in  connection  with  the  processes  above  mentioned, 
viz.  that  a  body  may  receive  from  the  same  direction  rays 
which  proceed  from  different  bodies.  For  example,  a  body  A 
may  receive  from  a  point,  which  lies  on  the  bounding  surface 
of  two  media,  two  rays  coinciding  in  direction,  but  issuing 
from  two  different  bodies  B  and  0.  One  of  these  may  come 
from  the  bounding  medium  and  be  refracted  at  the  point, 
whilst  the  other  is  already  in  the  bounded  medium,  and  is 
reflected  at  the  point.  In  this  case,  however,  the  two  rays  are 
weakened  by  refraction  and  reflection  in  such  a  way,  that,  if 
both  were  before  of  equal  intensity,  their  sum  afterwards  is 


330      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

of  the  same  intensity  as  either  one  of  them  had  beforehand. 
Now  suppose  a  ray  of  the  same  intensity  to. issue  from  the 
body  A  in  the  opposite  direction,,  this  will  be  divided,  at  the 
same  point,  into  two  parts,  of  which  one  enters  the  bounding 
medium,  and  passes  forward  to  the  body  B,  while  the  other 
is  reflected  and  passes  to  the  body  C.  The  two  parts  which 
thus  reach  B  and  0  from  A  are  exactly  as  great  as  those  which 
A  receives  from  B  and  C.  The  body  A  thus  stands  to  each 
of  the  bodies  B  and  G  in  .such  a  relation,  that,  assuming 
equal  temperatures,  it  exchanges  with  them  equal  quantities 
of  heat.  The  equality  of  the  modifications  which  two  rays 
undergo,  when  passing  in  opposite  directions  in  any  path 
whatever,  must  produce  the  same  result  in  all  other  cases 
however  complicated. 

Again  i^  ipstead  of  perfectly  bla>ek  bodies,  we  consider 
such  as  only  partially  absorb  the  rays  falling  on  them;  or  if 
instead  of  homogeneous  heat  we  consider  heat. which  con- 
tains systems  of  waves  ©f  different  lengths ;  or  lastly,  if 
instead  of  taking  all  the  rays  as  unpolarized  we  include  the 
phenomena  of  polarization;  still  in  all  these  cases  we  have  to 
do  only  with  facts,  which  hold  equally  for  the  heat  sent  out 
by  any  one  body,. and  for  that  which  it  receives  from  other 
bodies.  It  is  not  necessary  to  consider  these  facts  more 
closely,  since  they  also  take  place  with  ordinary  radiation 
without  concentration,  and  the  object  of  the  present  investi- 
gation was  only  to  consider  the  special  actions  which  might 
possibly  be  produced  by  concentration  of  the  rays. 

§  19.    Sumrmiry  of  Restdts, 

The  main  results  of  this  investigation  may  be  briefly 
stated  as  follows : 

(1)  In  order  to  bring  the  action  of  ordinary  radiation, 
without  concentration,  into  accordance  with  the  fundamental 
principle,  that  heat  cannot  of  itself  pass  from  a  colder  to  a 
hotter  body,  it  is  necessary  to  assume  that  the  intensity  of 
emission  from  a  body  depends  not  only  on  its  own  composi- 
tion and  temperature,  but  also  on  the  nature  of  the  sur- 
rounding medium;  the  relation  being  such,  that  the  in- 
tensities of  emission  in  different  media  stand  in  "the  inverse 
ratio  of  the  squares   of  the  velocities   of  radiation  in  the 


CONCENTRATION  OF  RAYS  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT.       331 

media,  or  in  the  direct  ratio  of  the  squares  of  the  coefScients 
of  refraction. 

(2)  IF  this  assumption  as  to  the  influence  of  the  sur- 
rounding media  is  correct,  the  above  fundamental  principle 
is  not  only  fulfilled  in  the  case  of  radiation  without  concen- 
tration, but  must  also  hold  good  when  the  rays  are  concen- 
trated in  any  way  whatever  by  reflections  or  refractions ; 
since  this  concentration  may  indeed  change  the  absolute 
magnitudes  of  the  quantities  of  heat,  which  two  bodies 
radiate  to  each  other,  but  not  the  ratio  between  these 
quantities. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE   MECHANICAL    THEOET  OF   HEAT 
AS  HERE  DEVELOPED,  AND  ON  ITS  FOUNDATIONS. 


§  1.  Different  Views  as  to  the  Relation  between  Heat  and 
Work. 

The  papers  of  the  author  on  the  Mechanical  Theory  of 
Heat,  as  reproduced  in  all  essential  particulars  in  this  volume, 
have  frequently  met  with  opposition;  and  it  may  be  desirahle 
to  give  here  some  of  the  discussions  which  have  taken  place 
on  the  question,  since  many  points  are  raised  in  them,  on 
which  the  reader  may  even  yet  be  in  doubt.  The  removal 
of  these  doubts  may  be  facilitated  by  his  learning  what  has 
been  already  written  upon  these  points. 

As  already  mentioned  in  Chapter  III.,  the  first  important 
attempt  to  reduce  to  general  principles  the  action  of  heat  in 
doing  work  was  made  by  Carnot.  He  started  from  the 
assumption  that  the  total  quantity  of  heat  existing  was  in- 
variable, and  then  supposed  that  the  falling  of  heat  from  a 
higher  to  a  lower  temperature  brought  about  mechanical  work, 
in  the  same  way  as  the  falling  of  water  from  a  higher  to  a 
lower  level.  But  simultaneously  with  this  conception  the 
view  gained  ground  that  heat  is  a  mode  of  motion,  and  that  in 
producing  work  heat  is  expended.  This  view  was  set  forth 
at  intervals  from  the  end  of  the  last  century  by  individual 
writers,  such  as  Rumford,  Davy,  and  Seguin*;  but  it  was  not. 
tin  1840  that  the  law  corresponding  to  this  view,  viz.  that  of 

*  In  a  paper  by  Mohr,  publiBhed  1837,  heat  is  in  some  places  called  a 
molion,  in  otfieis  a  force. 


,  DISCUSSIONS   ON  THE  THEORY,  333 

tVie  equivalence  of  neat  and  work,  was  definitely  laid  down 
by  Mayer  and  Joule,  and  proved  by  the  latter  to  be  correct 
by  means  of  numerous  and  brilliant  experiments.  Soon 
afterwards  the  general  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy 
was  laid  down  by  Mayer*  and  Helmholtzf  (by  the  latter  in  a 
specially  clear  and  convincing  manner),  and  was  applied  to 
various  natural  forces. 

A  fresh  starting  point  was  thus  given  to  researches  on 
the  science  of  heat ;  but  in  carrying  these  out  great  difficul- 
ties presented  themselves,  as  was  natural  with  so  widely 
extended  a  theory,  which  was  intertwined  with  all  branches 
of  natural  science,  and  influenced  the  whole  range  of  physi- 
cal thought.  In  addition,  the  wide  acceptation  which  Car- 
net's  treatment  of  the  mechanical  action  of  heat  had  won  for 
itself,  especially  after  being  brought  by  Clapeyron  into  an 
elegant  analytical  form,  was  unfavourable  for  tlie  reception 
of  the  new  theory.  It  was  believed  that  there  was  no  alter- 
native but  either  to  hold  to  the  theory  of  Carnot,  and  reject 
the  new  view  according  to  which  heat  must  be  expended  to 
produce  work,  or  conversely  to  accept  the  new  view  and 
reject  Carnot's  theory. 

§  2.    Papers  on  the  Subject  hy  Thomson  and  the  Author. 

A  very  definite  utterance  on  the  then  position  of  the 
question  was  given  by  the  celebrated  English  physicist,  now 
Sir  William  Thomson,  in  an  interesting  paper  which  he  pub- 
lished in  1849  (when  most  of  the  above-mentioned  researches 
of  Joule  had  already  appeared  and  were  known  to  him), 
under  the  title,  "An  Account  of  Carnot's  Theory  of  the 
Motive-Power  of  Heat,  with  numerical  results  deduced  from 
Kegnault's  ex;periments  on  steam  J."  He  still  maintains  the 
position  of  Carnot,  that  heat  may  do  work  without  any  change 
in  the  quantity  of  heat  taking  place.  He  however  points 
out  a  difficulty  in  this  view,  and  goes  on  to  say,  p.  545  :  "  It 
might  appear  that  this  difficulty  might  be  wholly  removed,  if 
we  gave  up  Carnot's  fundamental  axiom,  a  view  which  has 
been  strongly  urged  by  Mr  Joule,"    He  adds,,  <'  but  if  we  do 

*  Die  organiscke  Bewegung  in  ihrem  Zusammenhange  mit  dem  Stoff^ 
weeheel.     Heilbronn,  1845. 

+  Ueber  die  Erhaltung  der  Kraft,  1837. 

T  Trans.  Royal  Soc,  of  Edin.,  Vol.  xvi.  p.  541, 


834      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OP  HEAT. 

this  we  stumble  over  innumerable  other  difficulties,  which 
are  insuperable  without  the  aid  of  further  experimental 
researches,  and  without  a  complete  reconstruction  of  the 
Theory  of  Heat.  It  is  in  fact  experiment  to  which  we 
must  look,  eitber  for  a  confirmation  of  Carnot's  axiom,  and  a 
clearing  up  of  the  difiSculty  whicb  we  have  noticed,  or  for  a 
cornpletely  new  foundation  for  the  Theory  of  Heat." 

At  the  time  when  this  paper  appeared  the  author  was 
writing  his  first  paper  "  On  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat," 
which  was  brought  before  the  Berlin  Academy  in  1850,  and 
printed  in  the  March  and  April  numbers  of  Poggendorff's 
Annalen.  In  this  paper  he  attempted  to  begin  the  recon- 
struction of  the  theory,  without  waiting  for  further  experi- 
ments; and  he  succeeded,  he  believes,  in  overcoming  the 
difficulties  mentioned  by  Thomson,  so  far  at  least  as  to  leave 
the  way  plain  for  any  further  researches  of  this  character. 
He  there  pointed  out  the  way  in  which  the  fundamental 
conception,  and  the  whole  mathematical  treatment  of  heat,, 
must  be  altered,  if  We  accepted  the  principle  of  the  equiva^' 
lence  of  heat  and  work ;  and  he  further  shewed  that  it  was 
not  needful  wholly  to  reject  the  theory  of  Carnot,  but  that- 
we  might  adopt  a  principle,  based  on  a  different  foundation 
from  Carnot's,  but  differing  only  slightly  in  form,  which 
might  be  combined  with  the  principle  of  the  equivalence  of 
heat  and  work,  to  form  with  it  the  ground-work  of  the  new 
theory.  This  theory  he  then  developed  for  the  special  cases 
of  perfect  gases  and  saturated  vapour,  and  thereby  obtained; 
a  series  of  equations,  which  have  been  universally  employed 
in  the  form  there  given,  and  which  will  be  found  in  Chap' 
ters  II.  and  VI.  of  this  volume. 

§  3.     On  Rcunhine's  Paper  and  Thomson's  Second  Paper. 

In  the  same  month  (February,  1850)  in  which  the 
author's  papej*  was  read  before  the  Berlin  Academy,  a  valu- 
able paper  by  Eankine  was  read  before  the  Royal  Society  of 
Edinburgh,  and  was  afterwards  published  in  their  Trans- 
actions (;VoL  20,  p.  147)*. 

Rankine  there  proposes  the  hypothesis,  that  heat  consists 
in  a  rotary  motion  of  the  molecules ;  and  thence  deduces  with 

*  In  1854  it  was  reprinted  -with  some  alterations,  in  the  Fhil.  Mag,, 
Series  4,  Yol.  vn.  pp.  1,  HI,  172. 


DISCtrSSIONS  ON  THE  THKORT.  335 

much  skill  a  series  of  principles  on  the  action  of  heat,  which 
agree  with  those  deduced  by  the  author  from  the  first  main 
principle  of  the  mechanical  theory*.  The  second  main  prin- 
ciple was  not  touched  by  Rankine  in  this  paper,  but  was 
treated  in  a  second  paper,  which  was  brought  before  the 
Eoyal  Society  of  Edinburgh  a  year  afterwards  (April,  1851). 
In  this  he  remarka-f-  that  be  had  at  first  felt  doubtful  of  the 
correctness  of  the  mode  erf  reasoning  by  which  the  author 
had  arrived  at  this  second  principle ;  but  that  having  com- 
municated his  doubts  to  Sir  W,  Thomson,  he  was  induced 
by  him  to  investigate  the  subject  more  closely.  Ke  then 
found  that  it  ought  not  to  be  treated  as  an  independent 
principle  in  the  theory  of  heat,  but  might  be  deduced  from 
the  equations,  which  he  had  given  in  the  first  section  of  his 
former  paper.  He  proceeds  to  give  this  new  proof  of  the 
principle,  which  however,  as  will  be  shewn  further  on,  is  in 
opposition, ,  for  certain  very  important,  cases,  with  his  own 
views,  as  elsewhere  expressed. 

This  paper  of  1851  Rankine  added  as  a  fifth  section  to 
his.  former  paper  on  account  of  the  connection  between  them. 
Thence  has  arisen  with  some  authors  the  mistaken  idea  that 
this  new  paper  was  actually  part  of  the  former  one,  and  that 
Rankine  had  therefore  given  a  proof  of  the  second  main 
principle  at  the  same  time  as  the  author.  From  the  fore- 
going it  will  be  seen  that  his  proof  (waiving  the  question 
how  far  it  is  satisfactory)  appeared  a  year  later  than  the 
author's. 

In  March  of  the  same  year,  1851,  a  second  paper  by  Sir 
W.  Thomson  on  the  Theory  of  Heat  was  laid  before  the 
Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh  f.  In  this  paper  he  abandons  his 
former  position  with  regard  to  Carnot's  theory  and  assents  to 
the  author's  exposition  of  the  second  main  principle.  He 
then  extends  the  treatenent  of  the  subject.  For  whilst  the 
author  had  confined  himself  in  the  mathematical  treatment 
of  the  question  to  the  case  of  gases,  of  vapours,  and  of  the 
process  of  evaporation,  and  had  only  added  that  it  was  easy 
to  see  how  to  make  similar  applications  of  the  theory. to  other 

•  Edinb.  Trans.,  Yol.,xx.  p.  205;  Phil.  Mag.,  Series  i,  Vol.  vii.  p.  2i9. 
t  Phil.  Mag.,  Vol.  vii.  p.  250. 

j  Edin.  Trans.,  Vol.  xx.  p.  261 ;  Phil.  Mag.,  Series  4,  Vol.  iv.  pp.  8, 105, 
168. 


330.  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

cdses,  Thomson  developes.a  series  of  general  equations,  whieh 
are  independent  of  the  body's  condition  of  aggregation,  and 
only  then  passes  on  to  more  special  applications. 

On  one  point  this  second  paper  still  falls  short  of  the 
author's.  For  here  also  Thomson  holds  fast  by  the  law  of 
Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac  in  the  case  of  saturated  vapour, 
and  hesitates  to  accept  an  hypothesis  with  respect  to  perma- 
nent gases,  which  the  author  had  made  use  of  in  his  investi- 
gation (see  Chapter  II.,  §  2,  of  this  work).  On  this  he 
remarks* :  "  I  cannot  see  that  any  hypothesis,  such  as  that 
adopted  by  Clausius  fundamentally  in  his  investigations  on , 
this  subject,  and  leading,  as  he  shews,  to  determinations  of 
the  densities  of  saturated  steam  at  different  temperatures, 
which  indicate  enormous  deviations  from  the  gaseous  laws  of 
variation  with  temperature  and  pressure,  is  more  probable, 
or  is  probably  nearer  the  truth,  than  that  the  density  of  sa- 
turated steam  does  follow  these  laws,  as  it  is  usually  assumed 
to  do.  In  the  present  state  of  science  it  would  perhaps  be 
wrong  to  say  that  either  hypothesis  is  more  probable  than 
the  other."  Some  years  later,  after  he  had  proved  by  his 
joint  experiments  with  Joule  that  this  hypothesis  is  correct 
within  the  limits  assigned  by  the  author,  hfe  used  the  same 
method  as  the  author  to  determine  the  density  of  saturated 
vapour  "I". 

Rankine  and  Thomson,  so  far  as  the  author  knows,  have 
always  recognized  most  frankly  the  position  here  assigned  to 
the  first  labours  of  themselves  and  the  author  on  the  me- 
chanical theory  of  heat.  Thomson  remarks  in  his  paper  J: 
"  The  whole  theory  of  the  moving  force  of  heat  rests  on  the 
two  following  principles,  which  are  respectively  due  to  Joule 
and  to  Carnot  and  Clausius."  Similarly  he  introduces  the 
second  main  principle  as  follows:  "Prop,  II.  (Carnot  and 
Clausius)."  He  then  proceeds  to  give  a  proof  discovered  by 
himself,  and  goes  on§:  "It  is  with  no  wish  to  claim  priority 
that  I  make  these  statements,  as  the  merit  of  first  establish- 
ing the  proposition  on  correct  principles  is  entirely  due  to 
Clausius,  who  published  his  demonstration  of  it  in  the  month 

•  Edin.  Trans.,  Vol.  xx.  p.  277;  Phil.  Mag.,  Yol.  iv.  p.  111. 

t  Phil.  Trans.,  1854,  p.  321. 

$  Mdin.  Trans.,  Vol.  xx.  p.  264 ;  Phil.  Mag.,  Vol.  iv;  p.  11; 

§  Edin.  Trans.,  Vol.  xx.  p.  266 ;  Phil,  Mag.,  Vol.  iv.  pp.  14,  242.        '  ' 


DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  THEOET.  337' 

of  May  last  year,  ia  the  second  part  of  his  paper  on  the 
Motive  Power  of  Heat." 

§  4,    Holtzmann's  objecticms. 

From  other  quarters  repeated  and  in  some  cases  violent 
objections  were  raised  to  the  author's  first  paper,  to  which,  in 
the  same  and  following  years,  a  series  of  other  papers,  serving 
to  complete  the  theory,  were  added.     The  earliest  of  these 
objections  came  from  Holtzmann,  who  had  published  in  1845 
a  short  pamphlet*  on  the  subject.     In  this  it  would  at  first 
appear  as  if  he  wished  to  treat  the  question  from  the  point 
of  view,  that  for  the  generation  of  work  there  was  necessaiy 
not  merely  a  change  in  the  distribution  of  heat,  but  also  an 
actual  destruction  of  it,  and  that  conversely  by  destroying 
work  heat  could  be  again  generated.     He  remarks  (p.  7): 
"  The  action  of  the  heat  which  has  passed  to  the  gas  is  thus 
either  a  raising  of  temperature,  combined  with  an  increase  of 
the  elastic  force,  or  a  certain  quantity  of  mechanical  work,  or 
a  mixture  of  the  two ;   and  a  certain  quantity  of  mechanical 
work  is  equivalent  to  the  rise  in  temperature,.    Heat  can  only 
be  measured  by  its  effects;  of  the  two  above-named  effects 
mechanical  work  is  especially  adapted  for  measurement,  and  it 
will  be  chosen  accordingly  for  the  purpose.     I  call  a  unit  of 
heat  that  amount  of  heat,  which  by  its  entrance  into  a  gas 
can  perform  the  mechanical  work  a,  or,  using  definite  mea- 
sures, which  can  raise  a  kilograms  to  a  height  of  1  metre." 
Further  on  (p.  12)  he  determines  the  numerical  value  of  the 
constant  a  by  the  method  previously  used  by  Mayer,  and 
explained  in  Chapter  II.,  §  5;  the  number  thus  obtained  cor- 
responds perfectly  with  the  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat,  as 
determined  by  Joule  by  various  other  methods.     In  extend- 
ing his  theory  however,  i.e.  in  developing  the  equations  by 
which  his  conclusions  are  arrived  at,  he  follows  the  same 
method  as  Clapeyron;  so  that  he  tacitly  retains  the  assump- 
tion that  the  total  quantity  of  heat  which  exists  is  invariable; 
and  therefore  that  the  quantity  of  heat  which  a  body  takes 
in,  while  it  passes  from  a  given   initial  condition   to  its 
present  condition,  must  be  expressible  as  a  function  of  the 
variables,  which  determine  that  condition. 

*  Ueber  die  Warme  und  Etasticitdt  der  Gase  und  Dampfe;    von  C. 
Holtzmann.     Mannheim,  1845 ;  also  Pogg.  Am.,  Vol.  lxxii  a. 

Q.  22 


338      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OF  HEAT. 

In  the  author's  first  paper  the  inconsequence  of  this 
method  was  pointed  out,  and  the  question  treated  in  another 
way.;  on  which  Holtzmann  wrote  an  article*,  in  which  he 
endeavoured  to  shew  that  this  method  of  treatment,  and 
specially  the  assumption  that  heat  was  expended  in  pro- 
ducing work,  was  inadmissible.  The  first  objection  which 
he  raised  was  of  a  mathematical  character.  He  carried  out 
an  investigation  similar  to  that  in  the  author's  paper,  in 
order  first  to  determine  the  excess  of  the  heat  which  a  body 
takes  in  over  that  which  it  gives  out,  during  a  simple  cyclical 
process  consisting  of  indefinitely  small  variations,  and  secondly 
to  compare  this  excess  with  the  work  done.  But  iii  such  a 
process  both  the  work  done  and  the  excess  of  heat  must  be 
indefinitely  small  quantities  of  the  second  order  ;  and  there- 
fore in  the  whole  investigation,  care  must  be  taken  that  all 
quantities  of  the  second  order,  which  do  not  cancel  each 
other,  shall  be  taken  into  account.  This  Holtzmann  neg- 
lected to  do ;  and  he  was  thus  led  to  a  final  equation,  which 
contained  a  self-contradiction,  and  in  which  he  therefore 
imagined  that  he  had  found  a  proof  of  the  inadmissibility  of 
the  whole  method.  This  objection  was  easily  disposed  of 
by  the  author  in  his  reply. 

He  further  brought  forward  as  an  obstacle  to  the  theory, 
that,  according  to  the  formulae  given,  the  specific  heat  of  a 
perfect  gas  must  be  independent  of  its  pressure,  whereas  the 
experiments  of  Suermann,  and  also  those  of  De  la  Roche 
and  B^rard,  shewed  that  the  specific  heat  of  gases  increased 
as  the  pressure  diminished.  On  this  conflict  between  his 
own  theory  and  the  experiments  which  were  then  known 
and  supposed  to  be  correct,  the  author  remarked  in  his  reply 
as  follows  :  "On  this  point  I  must  first  point  out  that,  even 
if  these  observations  are  perfectly  correct,  they  yet  say  nothing 
against  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  equivalence  of  heat 
and  work,  but  only  against  the  approximate  assumption 
which  I  have  made,  viz.  that  a  permanent  gas,  if  it  expand 
at  constant  temperature,  absorbs  only  so  much  heat,  as  is 
required  for  the  external  work  which  it  thus  performs.  But 
besides  it  is  sufficiently  known  how  unreliable  are  in  general 
the  determinations  of  the  specific  heats  of  gases ;  and  all  the 

*  Pogg.  Ann.,  Vol.  lxxxii.  p.  445. 


DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  THEORY.  339 

more  in  those  few  observations  -whicli  have  been  hitherto 
made  at  varying  pressures.  I  did  not  therefore  conceive 
myself  bound  to  abandon  the  above  assumption  on  account 
of  these  observations,  although  they  were  well  known  to  me 
at  the  time  when  I  wrote  my  former  work;  because  the 
other  grounds,  which  may  be  alleged  for  the  correctness  of 
the  assumption  within  the  limits  which  I  had  there  laid 
down,  are  not  wholly  destroyed  by  the  grounds  which  may 
be  alleged  against  it." 

This  remark  found  its  full  confirmation  in  Eegnault's 
Mesearches,  published  some  years  a,ftervvards,  on  the  specific 
heats  of  gases,  which  actually  led  to  the  result  that  these 
earlier,  observations  were  inaccurate,  and  that  the  specific 
heat  of  permanent  gases  is  not  visibly  dependent  on  the 
pressure. 

§  5.    Decker's  Objections. 

Another  most  energetic  attack  on  the  author's  theory 
was  made  in  1858,  by  Professor  G.  Decher,  in  a  paper  "  On 
the  Nature  of  Heat,"  published  in  Dingier 's  Polytechnischer 
Journal,  Vol.  148,  pp.  1,  81,  161,  241.  He  characterizes  the 
author's  mathematics,  in  the  first  half  of  his  paper  of  1850, 
and  in  another  paper  of  1854,  as  an  abuse  of  analysis,  and 
bungling  nonsense ;  he  quotes  the  equations  and  principles 
there  cited  with  single  or  double  notes  of  admiration,  and 
finally,  after  proving  completely  to  his  own  satisfaction  that 
the  results  are  untenable,  concludes  thus:  "These  then  are  the 
data  on  which  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  new  theory 
of  Heat  should  rest,  and  by  which  its  agreement  with  ex- 
perience should  be  proved ;  they  shew  in  the  clearest  light 
that  the  celebrated  work  of  Herr  Clausius,  on  which  he  him- 
self and  other  physicists  have  built  £(,s  on  a  secure  foundation, 
is  nothing  more  than  a  rotten  nut,  which  looks  well  from  the 
outside,  but  in  reality  contains  nothing  whatever." 

Of  the  second  half  of  the  paper  of  1850,  which  relates  to 
the  second  main  principle  of  the  theory,  Herr  Decher  ob- 
serves (p.  163),  that  having  mastered  the  first  half,  he  saw 
no  inducement  to  consider  the  second  any  further. 

On  examining  more  closely  the  objections  raised  by  Herr 
Decher  against  the  author's  mathematical  investigation,  it  is 
seen  that  they  are  due  to  the  fact  that  he  has  not  understood 

22—2 


340  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

the  differential  equations  there  formed,  which,  though  not 
generally  int^grable,  become  so  as  soon  as  one  further  rela- 
tion is  assumed  to  exist  among  the  variables.  In  spite  of  all 
•which  the  author  has  said,  he  has  throughout  treated  the 
quantities  to  which  these  equations  refer,  viz.  the  quantities 
of  heat  taken  in  by  a  body  in  passing  from  a  given  initial 
condition  to  its  present  condition,  as  mere  functions  of  the 
variables  which  determine  the  condition  of  the  body.  After 
quoting  the  author's  equation  for  gases,  viz. 

dt\dv)     dvKdt)         y '^  '' 

•where  A  is  the  heat-equivalent  of  the  unit  of  work,  i.e.  the 
reciprocal   of  E,  he    remarks,   page  243:  "In  equation  (1) 

( -^1  and  (-5^)  are  fully  determined  as  the  differential  co- 
efficients of  a  known  function  of  v  and  t,  viz-  Q,  taken  ac- 
cording to  V  and  t  respectively  as  sole  variables ;  and  in 
whatever  •way  this  function  may  be  formed,  aud  whatever 
relation  may  be  supposed  to  exist  between  v  and  t,  the  right 
side  of  the  equation  must  always  equal  zero." 

This  incorrect  conception,  thus  formed  by  a  professed 
mathematician,  convinced  the  author  that  the  meaning  and 
treatment  of  this  kind  of  differential  equation,  although  long 
before  established  by  Monge,  was  not  so  generally  known  as 
he  had  supposed;  accordingly  in  his  reply*,  after  a  brief 
notice  of  some  other  points  raised  by  Decher,  he  treated  the 
subject  more  fully,  giving  a  mathematical  explanation,  which 
seemed  to  him  sufficient  to  obviate  any  such  misunderstand- 
ings in  future.  This  was  afterwards  prefixed  to  the  collection 
of  the  author's  papers  as  a  mathematical  introduction ;  and 
the  essential  part  of  it  has  been  imported  into  the  mathe- 
matical introduction  to  the  present  work. 

§  6.  Fundamental  Principle  on  which  the  Author^s  Proof 
of  the  Second  Main  Priticiple  rests. 

The  more  recent  objections  to  the  author's  theory,  and 
the  departure  from  his  views  in  more  recent  treatises,  chiefly 

•  Dinglei's  PolyUchnucher  Journal,  Vol.  ci.  p.  29, 


DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  THEOET.  341 

refer  to  "his  method  of  proving  tte  second  main  principle  of 
the  theory.  This  proof  rests,  as  shewn  in  Chapter  III.,  on  the 
following  fundamental  principle: — Heat  cannot  of  itself  (or 
without  compensation)  pass  from  a  colder  to  a  hotter  body. 

This  fundamental  principle  has  been  very  variously  re- 
ceived by  the  scientific  public.  Some  appear  to  consider  it 
so  self-evident  that  it  is  needless  to  state  it  as  a  specific 
principle,  whilst  others  on  the  contrary  doubt  its  correctness. 

§  7.     Zewner's  first  Treatment  of  the  Subject. 

The  first  of  the  two  modes  of  viewing  the  question  men- 
tioned in  the  last  section  appears  in  Zeuner^s  valuable  paper 
of  1860  "  On  the  Foundations  of  the  Mechanical  Theory  of 
Heat."  Here  Zeuner  gives  the  author's  proof  of  the  second 
main  principle  essentially  in  the  same  form  as  it  has  also 
been  given  by  Reech*.  The  two  differ  only  in  one  point. 
Reech  gives  the  principle,  that  heat  cannot  of  itself  pass 
from  a  colder  to  a  hotter  body,  expressly  as  a  fundamental 
principle  laid  down  by  the  author,  and  bases  his  proof 
upon  it.  Zeuner  on  the  contrary  does  not  mention  this 
principle  at  all :  he  shews  that  if  for  any  two  bodies  the 
second  main  principle  of  the  theory  did  not  hold,  then  by 
means  of  two  cychcal  processes  performed  with  these  two 
bodies  in  opposite  directions,  heat  could  be  made  to  pass 
from  a  colder  to  a  hotter  body  without  any  other  special 
change,  and  he  then  goes  on  "  as  we  may  repeat  both  pro- 
cesses as  often  as  we  please,  using  the  two  bodies  alternately 
in  the  way  described,  it  would  follow  that  we  might,  with 
the  aid  of  nothing  and  without  using  either  work  or  heat, 
continually  transfer  heat  from  a  body  of  lower  to  one  of 
higher  temperature,  which  is  an  absurdity." 

Few  readers  would  probably  assent  to  the  opinion  that 
the  impossibility  of  transferring  heat  from  a  colder  to  a 
hotter  body  is  so  self-evident,  as  is  here  indicated  by  the 
short  remark  "which  is  an  absurdity."  Taking  the  facts  of 
conduction,  and  of  radiation  under  ordinary  circumstances, 
we  may  undoubtedly  say  that  this  impossibility  is  established 
by  daily  experience.     But  even  with  radiation  the  question 

*  Secapitulatian  tris-succincte  des  recherches  algebriqties  faites  sur  la 
theorie  des  ejfects  m^caniques  de  la  chaleur  par  diffSrents  auteurs :  Jmirn.  de 
Limville,  Ser.  n.  Vol.  i.  p.  58. 


Sii  ON  THE  MECHAN'ICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

arises,  whether  it  is  not  possible  to  concentrate  the  rays  of 
heat  artificially  by  means  of  mirrors  or  burning-glasses,  so  as 
to  produce  a  higher  temperature  than  that  of  the  radiating 
,  bodies,  and  thus  to  effect  the  passage  of  the  heat  into  a 
hotter  body.  The  author  has,  therefore,  thought  it  necessary 
to  treat  this  question  in  a  special  paper,  the  contents  of 
which  are  given  in  Chapter  XII.  Matters  are  still  more 
complicated  in  cases  when  heat  is  transformed  into  work,  and 
vice  versi,  whether  this  be  by  effects  such  as  .those  of 
friction,  resistance  of  the  air,  and  electrical  resistances,  or 
whether  by  the  fact  that  one  or  more  bodies  suffer  such 
changes  of  condition,  as  are  connected  partly  with  positive 
and  partly  with  negative  work,  both  internal  and  external. 
For  by  such  changes  heat,  to  use  the  common  expression, 
becomes  latent  or  free,  as  the  case  maybe;  and  this  heat  the 
variable  bodies  may  draw  from  or  impart  to  other  bodies  of 
different  temperatures. 

If  for  all  such  cases,  however  complicated  the  processes 
may  be,  it  is  maintained  that  without  some  other  permanent 
change,  which  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  compensation,  heat 
can  never  pass  from  a  colder  to  a  hotter  body,  it  would  seem 
that  this  principle  ought  not  to  be  treated  as  one  altogether 
Self-evident,  but  rather  as  a  newly-propounded  fundamental 
principle,  on  whose  acceptance  or  non-acceptance  the  validity 
of  the  proof  depends. 

§  8.    Zeuner's  later  Treatment  of  the  Subject. 

The  mode  of  expression  employed  by  Zeuner  was  criticized 
by  the  author  on  the  grounds  stated  in  the  last  section,  in  a 
paper  published  in  1863.  In  the  second  edition  of  his 
book,  published  in  1866,  Zeuner  has  therefore  struck  out 
another  way  of  proving  the  second  main  principle.  Assum- 
ing the  condition  of  the  body  to  be  determined  by  the 
pressure  p  and  volume  v,  he  forms,  for  the  quantity  of  heat 
d  Q,  taken  in  by  the  body  during  an  indefinitely  small  varia- 
tion, the  differential  equation 

dQ  =  A{Xdp+7dv).... (2), 

where  X  and  Y  are  functions  of  p  and  v,  and  A  is  the  heat- 
equivalent  of  work.     This  equation,  as  is  well  known,  cannot 


DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  THEOET.  343 

be  integrated  so  long  as  p  and  v  are  independent  variables. 
He  then  proceeds  (p.  41) : 

"But  let  /S  be  a  new  functioti  of  jo  and  v,  the  form  of 
■which  may  be  taken  for  the  present  to  be  known  as  little  as. 
that  of  X  and  3^,  but  to  which  we  will  give  a  signification, 
which  will  appear  immediately  from  what  follows.  Multiply- 
ing and  dividing  the  right-hand  side  of  the  equation  by  B, 
we  have 

dQ  =  ^/S&2> +  1^^1)1 (3). 

We  may  now  choose  S,  so  that  the  expression  in  brackets  is 

a  perfect  differential ;  in  other  words,  so  that  -„  may  be  the 

integrating  factor,  or  B  the  integrating  divisor,  of  the  expres- 
sion within  brackets  of  equation  (2)." 

From  this  it  follows  that  in  the  following  equation  derived 
from  (3), 

the  whole  right-hand  side  is  a  perfect  differential,  and  there- 
fore for  a  cyclical  process  we  must  have 


■(4), 


/ 


f-o (* 


In  this  way  Zeuner  arrives  at  an  equation  similar  to  equation 
(7)  of  Chapter  IV.,  viz. 

{dq_ 


f 


=  0. 

T 


The  resemblance,  however,  is  merely  external.  The  essence 
of  this  latter  equation  consists  in  this,  that  t  is  a  function  of 
temperature  only,  and  further  a  function  which  is  inde- 
pendent of  the  nature  of  the  body,  and  is  therefore  the  same 
for  all  bodies.  Zeuner's  quantity  8,  on  the  contrary,  is  a 
function  of  both  the  variables,  f  and  v,  on  which  the  bodies' 
condition  depends ;  and  further,  since  the  functions  X  and  Y, 
in  equation  (2),  are  different  for  different  bodies,  it  must  be 
true  of  S  also  that  it  may  be  different  for  different  bodies. 
So  long  as  this  holds  with  regard  to  B,  equation  (5)  has 
done  nothing  for  the  proof  of  the  second  main  principle ; 


344  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

since  it  is  self-evident  that  there  must  in  general  be  an 

integrating  factor,  which  may  be  denoted  by  -q,  and  by 

which  the  expression  within  brackets  in  equation  (2)  may 
be  converted  into  a  complete  differential.  Accordingly,  in 
Zeuner's  proof,  as  he  himself  concludes,  everything  depends 
on  the  fact  that  iS*  is  a  function  of  temperature  only,  and  a 
function  which  is  the  same  for  all  bodies,  so  that  it  may  be 
taken  as  the  true  measure  of  the  temperature. 

For  this  purpose  he  supposes  a  body  to  undergo  different 
variations,  which  are  such  that  the  body  takes  in  heat  whilst 
8  has  one  constant  value,  and  gives  out  heat  whilst  8  has 
another  constant  value ;  and  which  together  make  up  a  cycli- 
.  cal  process,  shewing  a  gain  or  loss  of  heat.  This  procedure 
he  compares  with  the  lifting  or  dropping  of  a  weight  from 
one  level  to  another,  and  with  the  corresponding  mechanical 
work ;  and  he  proceeds  (p.  68) :  "A  further  comparison  leads 
to  the  interesting  result  that  we  may  consider  the  function  8 

as  a  length  or  a  height,  and  the  expression  -^  as  a  weight ; 

in  what  follows  therefore  I  shall  call  the  above  value  the 
Weight  of  the  Heat."  Since  a  name  has  here  been  introduced 
for  a  magnitude  containing  8,  in  which  name  there  is  nothing 
which  relates  to  the  body  under  consideration,  it  appears 
that  an  assumption  has  here  been  tacitly  made,  viz.  that  8  is 
independent  of  the  nature  of  the  body,  which  is  by  no  means 
borne  out  by  the  earlier  definition. 

Zeuner  then  carries  still  further  the  comparison  between 
the  processes  relating  to  gravity  and  those  relating  to  heat,  and 
.transfers  to  the  case  of  heat  some  of  the  principles  which  hold 

for  gravity ;  in  so  doing  he  treats  8  as  a,  height,  and  -j^  as  a 

weight,  just  as  before.  Then,  having  finally  observed  that 
the  principles  thus  obtained  are  true  if  we  take  8  to  mean 
the  temperature  itself,  he  proceeds  (p.  74)  :  "  We  are  there- 
fore justified  in  taking  as  the  basis  of  our  further  researches 
the  hypothesis  that  8  is  the  true  measure  of  temperature." 

It  appears  from  this  that  the  only  real  foundation  of  the 
reasonings,  which  in  bis  second  edition  Zeuner  puts  forward 
as  the  basis  of  the  second  main  principle,  is  the  analogy 


DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  THEOBY.  345 

between  the  performance  of  work  by  gravity  and  by  heat ; 
and  moreover  that  the  point  "which  has  to  be  proved  is  in 
part  tacitly  assumed,  in  part  expressly  laid  down  as  a  mere 
hypothesis. 

§  9.    RanMne's  Treatment  of  the  Subject. 

We  may  now  turn  to  those  authors  who  have  considered 
that  the  fundamental  principle  is  not  sufficiently  trustworthy, 
or  even  that  it  is  incorrect. 

Here  we  must  first  examine  somewhat  more  closely  the 
mode  of  treatment  which,  as  already  mentioned,  Bankine 
considered  must  be  substituted  for  that  of  the  author. 

Rankine,  like  the  author,  divides  the  heat  which  must  be 
imparted  to  the  body,  in  order  to  raise  its  temperature,  into 
two  distinct  parts.  One  of  these  serves  to  increase  the  heat 
actually  existing  in  the  body,  and  the  other  is  absorbed  in , 
work.  For  the  latter,  which  comprises  the  heat  absorbed  in 
the  internal  and  in  the  external  work,  Rankine  uses  an 
expression,  which  in  his  first  section  he  derives  from  the 
hypothesis  that  matter  consists  of  vortices.  Into  this  method 
of  reasoning  we  need  not  enter  further,  since  the  circum- 
stance that  it  rests  on  a  particular  hypothesis  as  to  the 
nature  of  molecules  and  their  mode  of  motion,  makes  it 
sufficiently  clear  that  it  must  lead  to  the  consideration  of  com- 
plicated questions,  and  thus  leaves  much  room  for  doubt  as 
to  its  trustworthiness.  In  the  author's  treatises  he  has  based 
the  development  of  his  equations,  not  on  any  special  views 
as  to  the  molecular  constitution  of  bodies,  but  only  on  fixed 
and  universal  principles;  and  thus,  even  if  the  above  fact 
were  the  only  one  which  could  be  alleged  against  Rankine's 
proof,  the  author  would  stiU  expect  his  own  mode  of  treating 
the  subject  to  be  finally  established  as  the  most  correct. 
But  yet  more  uncertain  is  Rankine's  mode  of  determining 
the  second  part  of  the  heat  to  be  imparted,  viz.  that  which 
serves  to  increase  the  heat  actually  existing  in  the  body. 

Rankine  expresses  the  increase  of  the  heat  within  the 
body,  when  its  temperature  t  changes  by  dt,  simply  by  the 
product  Kdt,  whether  the  volume  of  the  body  changes  at  the 
same  time  or  not.  This  quantity  K,  which  he  calls  the  real 
specific  heat,  he  treats  in  his  proof  as  a  quantity  inde- 
pendent of  the  specific  voltime^  Any  sufficient  ground  for  this 


346  ON  THE  MECflANlCAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

procedure  will  be  sought  in  vain  in  his  paper ;  on  the  contrary, 
data  are  found  which  stand  in  direct  opposition  to  it.  In  the 
introduction  to  his  paper  he  gives,  under  equation  (13),  an 
expression  for  the  real  specific  heat  K,  which  contains  a 
factor  k,  and  of  which  he  speaks  as  follows*:  "The  co- 
efficient Ic  (which  enters  into  the  value  of  the  specific  heat) 
being  the  ratio  of  the  vis  viva  of  the  entire  motion  impressed 
on  the  atomic  atmospheres  by  the  action  of  their  nuclei,  to 
the  vis  viva  of  a  peculiar  kind  of  motion,  may  be  conjectured 
to  have  a  specific  value  for  each  kind  of  substance,  depending 
in  a  manner  yet  unknown  on  some  circumstance  in  the  con- 
stitution of  its  atoms.  Although  it  varies  in  some  cases  for 
the  same  substance  in  the  solid,  liquid,  and  gaseous  states, 
there  is  no  experimental  evidence  that  it  varies  for  the  same 
substance  in  the  same  condition."  Hence  it  appears  to  be 
Rankine's  view  that  the  real  specific  heat  of  the  same  sub- 
stance may  be  different  in  difi:erent  states  of  aggregation ; 
and  even  for  the  assumption  that  it  may  be  taken  as  in- 
variable for  the  same  state  of  aggregation  he  produces  no 
other  ground  than  that  there  is  no  experimental  proof  to  the 
contrary. 

In  a  later  work,  A  Manual  of  the  Steam  Engine  and  other 
Prime  Movers,  1859,  Rankine  speaks  yet  more  distinctly  on 
this  point  as  follows  (p.  307):  "A  change  of  real  specific 
heat,  sometinles  considerable,  often  accompanies  the  change 
between  any  two  of  those  conditions"  (i.e.  the  three  con- 
ditions of  aggregation).  How  great  a  difference  Rankine 
conceives  to  be  possible  between  the  real  specific  heats  of  one 
and  the  same  substance  in  different  states  of  aggregation,  is 
shewn  by  his  remark  at  the  same  place,  that  in  the  case  of 
water  the  specific  heat  as  determined  by  observation,  which 
he  calls  the  apparent  specific  heat,  is  nearly,  equal  to  the  real 
specific  heat.  Now  Rankine  well  knew  that  the  observed 
specific  heat  for  water  is  twice  as  great  as  that  for  ice,  and 
more  than  twice  as  great  as  that  for  steam.  Since  then  the 
real  specific  heat  for  ice  and  steam  can  never  be  greater  than 
the  observed,  but  only  smaller,  Rankine  must  assume  that 
the  real  specific  heat  of  water  exceeds  that  of  ice  and  steam 
by  100  per  cent,  or  more. 

If  we  now  ask  the  question  how  on  this  supposition  the 
*  Phil.  Mag.,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  vn.  p.  10.    • 


DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  THEORY.  347 

increase  of  heat  actually  present  in  a  body,  whicli  occurs 
when  its  temperature  t  increases  by  dt,  and  its  volume  v  by 
dv,  is  to  be  expressed,  the  answer  will  be  as  follows :  When 
the  body,  during  its  change  of  volume,  suffers  no  change  in 
its  state  of  aggregation,  we  shall  be  able  to  express  the 
increase  of  heat,  as  Rankine  has  done,  by  a  simple  product 
of  the  form  Kdt ;  but  the  factor  K  must  have  different  values 
for  different  states  of  aggregation.  In  cases,  however,  where 
the  body  during  its  change  of  volume  also  changes  its  state 
of  aggregation  (e.g.  the  case  we  have  treated  so  often,  where 
we  have  a  certain  quantity  of  matter  partly  in  the  liquid  and 
partly  in  the  gaseous  condition,  and  where  the  magnitude  of 
these  two  parts  changes  with  the  change  in  volume,  either  by 
the  evaporation  of  part  of  the  liquid,  or  by  the  condensation 
of  part  of  the  vapour),  we  can  then  no  longer  express  the 
increase  of  heat  connected  with  a  simultaneous  change  in 
temperature  and  volume  by  a  simple  product  Kdt ;  but  must 
use  an  expression  of  the  form 

Kdt  +  K^dv. 

For  if  the  real  specific  heat  of  a  substance  were  different  in 
different  states  of  aggregation,  it  would  be  necessary  to  con- 
clude that  the  quantity  of  heat  existing  in  it  must  also 
depend  on  its  state  of  aggregation ;  so  that  equal  quantities 
of  the  substance  in  the  solid,  liquid,  and  gaseous  condition 
would  contain  different  amounts  of  heat.  Accordingly,  if 
part  of  the  substance  change  its  state  of  aggregation  without 
any  change  of  temperature,  there  must  also  be  a  change  in  the 
quantity  of  heat  contained  in  the  substance  as  a  whole. 

Hence  it  follows  that  Bankine  by  his  own  admission  can 
only  treat  the  mode  in  which  he  expresses  the  increase  of  heat, 
and  the  mode  in  which  he  uses  that  expression  in  his  proof,  aS 
being  allowable  for  the  cases  in  which  there  are  no  changes 
in  the  state  of  aggregation ;  and,  therefore,  his  proof  holds 
for  those  cases  only.  For  all  cases  where  such  changes  occur 
the  principle  remains  unproved ;  and  yet  these  cases  are  of 
special  importance,  inasmuch  as  it  is  chiefly  to  these  that  the 
principle  has  hitherto  been  applied. 

In  fact  we  must  go  further,  and  say  thtii  the  proof  thus 
loses  all  strength  even  for  cases  where  there  is  no  change  in 
!the  state  of  aggregation.     If  Rankine  .assumes  that  the  real 


348      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 

specific  heat  may  be  different  in  different  states  of  aggrega- 
tion, there  seems  no  ground  whatever  left  for  supposing 
that  it  is  invariable  in  the  same  state  of  aggregation.  It  is 
known  that  with  solid  and  liquid  bodies  changes  may  occur 
in  the  conditions  of  cohesion,  apart  from  any  change  in  the 
state  of  aggregation.  With  gaseous  bodies  also,  in  addition 
to  their  great  variations  in  volume,  we  have  the  distinction, 
that  the  more  or  less  widely  they  are  removed  from  their 
condensation-point  the  more  or  less  closely  do  they  follow  the 
law  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac.  How  then,  if  changes  in 
the  state  of  aggregation  may  have  an  influence  on  the  real 
specific  heat,  can  we  refuse  to  ascribe  a  similar,  even  if 
a  smaller,  influence  to  changes  like  the  above?  Thus  the 
proposition,  that  the  real  specific  heat  is  invariable  in  the 
same  state  of  aggregation,  is  not  only  left  unproved  by 
Rankine,  but,  if  we  accept  his  special  assumption,  becomes  in 
a  high  degree  improbable. 

To  this  criticism  on  his  proof,  which  appeared  in  a 
paper  of  the  author's,  published  in  1863*,  Rankine  made  no 
reply;  but  in  a  later  article  on  the  subject-f*  he  expressly 
maintained  the  truth  of  his  view,  firequently  before  stated, 
that  the  real  specific  heat  of  a  body  may  be  different  in 
different  states  of  aggregation;  whereby  the  force  of  his 
proof  is  limited  to  the  cases  in  which  no  change  in  the  state 
of  aggregation  takes  place. 

§  10.     Hvriis  Objection. 

A  yet  more  definite  attack  upon  the  author's  funda- 
mental principle,  that  heat  cannot  of  itself  pass  from  a 
colder  to  a  hotter  body,  was  made  by  Him  in  his  work,  pub- 
lished in  1862,  Exposition  ATudytique  et  Eocperimentale  de  la 
theorie  mecanique  de  la  chaleur,  and  in  two  subsequent  articles 
in  Cosmosl.  He  has  there  described  a  particular  operation 
which  gives  at  first  sight  an  altogether  startling  result.  After 
a  reply  irom  the  author  §,  he  explained  ||  his  attack  as  having 
for  its  object  only  to  mark  an  apparent  objection  to  the 
principle,  whilst  in  reality  he  agreed  with  the  author;  and 
he  has  expressed  himself  to  the  same  effect  in  the  second 
and  third  editions  of  his  valuable  work. 

*  Pogg.  Ann.,  Vol.  cxx.  p.  426. 

+  Phil.  Mag.,  Ser.  4,  Vol.  xxx.  p.  410. 

J  Tol.  XXII.  pp.  283,  413,        §  Vol.  xxii.  p.  560.         ||  VoL  xxii.  p.  734. 


DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  THEORY. 


349 


,  In  spite  of  this  it  seems  worth  while  to  state  here  the 
attack  and  the  reply,  because  the  conception  of  the  subject 
there  expressed  is  one  very  near  the  truth,  and  which  might 
easily  hold  under  other  circiimstances.  An  objection  thus 
raised  has  a  real  scientific  value  of  its  own ;  and  when  it  is 
put  in  so  clear  and  precise  a  light,  as  Hirn  has  done  in  this 
case  by  means  of  his  skilfully-conceived  operation,  it  can 
only  be  advantageous  for  science :  since  the  fact  that  the 
apparent  objection  is  defined  and  placed  clearly  in  view  will 
greatly  facilitate  the  clearing  up  of  the  point.  In  this  way 
we  shall  attain  the  advantage  that  a  difficulty,  which  other- 
wise might  probably  lead  to  many  misunderstandings,  and 
necessitate  repeated  and  long  discussions,  will  be  disposed  of 
once  and  for  ever.  In^  thus  referring  once  more  to  this 
question,  the  author  is  far  from  wishing  to  make  the  objec-. 
tion  a  ground  of  complaint  against  Hirn,  but  rather  believes 
that  this  objection  has  increased  the  debt  which  the  Mechani- 
cal Theory  of  Heat  owes  to  him  on  other  accounts. 

The  operation  alluded  to,  on  which  Hirn  has  based  his 
observations,  is  as  follows :  Let  there  be  two  cylinders  A  and 
B  (Fig.  32)  of  equal  area,  which  are 
connected  at  the  bottom  by  a  compara- 
tively narrow  pipe.  In  each  of  these  let 
there  be  an  air-tight  piston;  and  let 
the  piston-rods  be  fitted  with  teeth 
engaging  on  each  side  with  the  teeth 
of  a  spur  wheel,  so  that  if  one  piston 
descends  the  other  must  rise  through 
the  same  distance.  The  whole  space 
below  the  cylinders,  including  the 
connecting  pipe,  must  thus  remain 
invariable  during  the  motion,  because 
as  the  space  diminishes  in  one  cylinder 
it  increases  in  the  other  by  aa  equal 
amount. 

First,  let  us  suppose  the  piston  in 
£  to  be  at  the  bottom,  and  therefore 
that  in  ^  at  the  top ;  and  let  cylinder 
A  be  filled  with  a  perfect  gas  of  any 
given  density  and  of  temperature  t,. 
Now  let  the  piston  descend  ia  A,  and 


Fig.  32, 


S50     ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

rise  in  B,  so  that  the  gas  is  gradually  driven  out  of  A  into 
B.  The  connecting '  pipe  through  which  it  must  pass  is 
kept  at  a  constant  temperature  t^,  which  is  higher  than  i„,  so 
that  the  gas  in  passing  is  heated  to  temperature  t^,  and  at 
that  -temperature  enters  cylinder  B.  The  walls  of  both 
cylinders,  on  the  other  hand,  are  non-conducting,  so  that 
within  them  the  gas  can  neither  receive  nor  give  off  heat, 
but  can  only  receive  heat  from  without  as  it  passes  through 
the  pipe.  To  fix  our  ideas  let  the  initial  temperature  of  the 
gas  be  that  of  freezing,  or  0°,  and  that  of  the  connecting  pipe 
100°,  the  pipe  being  surrounded  by  the  steam  of  boiling  water. 

It  is  easy  to  see  what  will  be  the  result  of  this  operation. 
The  first  small  quantity  of  gas  which  passes  through  the  pipe 
will  be  heated  from  0°  to  100°,  and  will  expand  by  the  cor^ 
responding  amount,  i.  e.  ^^  of  its  original  volume.  By  this 
means  the  gas  which  remains  in  A  will  be  somewhat  com- 
pressed, and  the  pressure  in  both  the  cylinders  somewhat 
raised.  The  next  small  quantity  of  gas  which  passes  through 
the  pipe  will  expand  in  the  same  way,  and  will  thereby  com^ 
press  the  gas  in  both  cylinders.  Similarly  each  successive 
portion  of  gas  will  act  to  compress  still  further  not  only  the 
gas  left  in  A,  but  also  the  gas  which  has  previously  expanded 
in  B,  so  that  the  latter  will  continually  tend  to  approach  its 
initial  density.  This  compression  causes  a  heating  of  the  gas 
in  both  cylinders ;  and  as  all  the  gas  which  enters  B  enters 
at  a  temperature  of  100°,  the  subsequent  temperature  must 
rise  above  100°,  and  this  rise  must  be  the  greater,  the  more 
the  gas  within  B  is  subsequently  compressed. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  state  of  things  at  the  end  of  the 
(pperation,  when  all  the  gas  has  passed  from  A  into  B.  In 
the  topmost  layer,  just  under  the  piston,  will  be  the  gas 
which  entered  first,  and  which,  as  it  has  suffered  the  greatest 
subsequent  compression,  will  be  the  hottest.  The  layers 
below  will  be  successively  less  hot  down  to  the  lowest,  which 
will  have  the  same  temperature,  100°,  which  it  attained  in 
passing  the  pipe.  For  our  present  purpose  there  is  no  need 
to  know  the  temperature  of  each  separate  layer,  but  only  the 
mean  temperature  of  the  whole,  which  is  equal  to  the  temr 
perature  that  would  exist  if  the  temperatures  in  the  different 
layers  were  equalized  by  a  mixing  up  of  the  gas.  This  mean 
temperjiture  will  be  about  120°. 


DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  THKOEY.  351 

In  a  later  article  published  in  Cosmos,  Him  lias  com- 
pleted this  operation,  by  supposing  that  the  gas  in  B  is  finally 
brought  into  contact  with  mercury  at  0°,  and  thereby  cooled 
back  again  to  0°;  that  it  is  then  driven  back  from  B  to  A 
under  the  same  conditions  as  from  A  to  B,  and  is  therefore 
heated  in  the  same  manner ;  that  it  is  then  again  cooled  by 
mercuTy,  again  driven  from  A  to  B,  and  so  on.  Thus  we  have 
a  periodical  operation,  in  which  the  gas  is  continually  brought 
back  to  its  original  condition,  and  all  the  heat  given  off  by 
the  source  of  heat  passes  over  to  the  mercury  employed  for 
cooling.  Here  we  will  not  enter  into  this  extension  of  the. 
process,  but  confine  ourselves  to  the  first  simple  operation, 
in  which  the  gas  is  heated  from  0"  to  a  mean  temperature  of 
120°;  for  this  operation  comprises  the  essence  of  Hirn's  ob- 
jection. 

In  this  operation  it  is  clear  that  no  heat  is  gained  or  lost ; 
for  the  pressure  in  both  cylinders  is  always  equal,  and  there- 
fore both  pistons  are  always  pressed  upwards  with  equal 
force.  These  forces  are  communicated  to  the  wheel  which 
gears  with  the  piston-rods ;  and  thus,  neglecting  friction,  an 
indefinitely  small  force  will  be  sufficient  to  turn  the  wheel  in 
one  or  the  other  direction,  and  thereby  move  one  piston  up 
and  the  other  down.  The  excess  of  heat  in  the  gas  cannot 
therefore  be  created  by  external  work. 

The  process,  as  is  easily  seen,  is  as  follows.  Whilst  a  quan- 
tity of  gas,  which  is  a  very  small  fraction  of  the  whole,  is  heated 
and  expanded  in  passing  through  the  pipe,  it  must  take  in 
from  the  source  sufficient  heat  to  heat  it  at  constant  pressure. 
Of  this,  one  part  goes  to '  increase  the  heat  actually  existing 
in  the  gas,  and  another  part  to  do  the  work  of  expansion. 
But  since  the  expansion  of  the  gas  within  the  pipe  is  followed 
by  a  compression  of  the  gas  within  the  cylinders,  the  same 
quantity  of  heat  will  be  generated  in  the  one  place  as  is 
absorbed  in  the  other.  Thus  that  part  of  the  heat  derived 
from  the  source,  which  is  turned  into  work  within  the  pipe, 
appears  again  as  heat  within  the  cylinders;  and  serves  to 
heat  the  gas  left  in  A  above  0°,  its  initial  temperature,  and 
the  gas  which  has  passed  into  B  above  100°,  the  temperature 
at  which  it  entered ;  in  other  words  to  produce  the  rise  in 
temperature  already  mentioned.  Accordingly,  without  con- 
sidering the  intermediate  process,  we  may  say  that  all  the 


352  ON  THE  MECHANICAti  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

heat,  which  the  gas  contains  at  the  end  of  the  operation 
more  than  at  the  beginning,  comes  from  the  source  of  heat 
attached  to  the  connecting-pipe.  Hence  we  have  the  sin- 
gular result,  that  by  means  of  a  body  whose  temperature  is 
100°,  i.e.  the  steam  surrounding  the  pipe,  the  gas  within  the 
cylinders  is  heated  above  100°,  or,  looking  only  to  the  mean 
temperature,  to  120°.  Here  then,  is  a  contradiction  of  the 
fundamental  principle  that  heat  cannot  of  itself  pass  from  a 
colder  to  a  hotter  body,  inasmuch  as  the  heat  imparted  by 
the  steam  to  the  gas  has  passed  from  a  body  at  100°  to  a 
body  at  120°. 

One  circumstance  however  has  been  forgotten.  If  the 
gas  had  had  an  initial  temperature  of  100°  or  more,  and 
had  then  been  raised  to  a  still  higher  temperature  by  steam, 
whose  temperature  was  only  100°,  this  would  no  doubt  be  a 
contradiction  of  the  fundamental  principle.  But  this  is  not 
the  real  state  of  things.  In  order  that  the  gas  may  be  above 
100°  at  the  end  of  the  operation,  it  must  necessarily  be  below 
100°  at  the  beginning.  In  our  example,  in  which  the  final 
temperature  is  120°,  the  initial  is  0°,  The  heat,  which  the 
steam  has  imparted  to  the  gas,  has  therefore  served  in  part 
to  heat  it  from  0°  to  100°,  and  in  part  to  raise  it  from  100°  to 
120°.  But  the  fundamental  principle  refers  only  to  the 
temperatures  of  the  bodies  between  which  heat  passes,  as 
they  are  at  the  exact  moment  of  the  passage,  and  not  as  they 
are  at  any  subsequent  time.  Accordingly  we  must  conceive 
the  passage  of  heat  in  this  operation  to  take  place  as  follows. 
The  one  part  of  the  heat  given  off  by  the  steam  has  passed 
into  the  gas,  whilst  its  temperature  was  still  below  100°,  and 
has  therefore  passed  into  a  colder  body ;  and  only  the  other 
part,  which  has  served  to  heat  the  gas  beyond  100°,  has  passed 
into  a  hotter  body.  If  then  we  compare  this  with  the  funda- 
mental principle,  which  says  that,  when  heat  passes  from  a 
colder  to  a  hotter  body,  without  any  transformation  of  work 
into  heat  or  any  change  in  molecular  arrangement,  then  of 
necessity  there  must  be  in  the  same  operation  a  passage  of 
heat  from  a  hotter  to  a  colder  body,  we  easily  see  that 
there  is  complete  agreement  between  them.  The  peculiarity 
in  Him's  operation  is  only  this,  that  there  are  not  two  differ- 
ent bodies  concerned,  of  which  one  is  colder  and  the  other 
hotter  than  the  source  of  heat ;  but  one  and  the  same  body^ 


DISCUSSIOKS  ON  THE  THEORY.  353 

the  gas,  takes  in  one  part  of  the  operation  the  place  of  the 
colder,  and  in  another  part  that  of  the  hotter  body.  This  in- 
volves no  departure  from  the  principle,  but  is  only  one  special 
case  out  of  the  many  which  may  occur.  Dupre  has  raised 
similar  objections  against  the  fundamental  principle  ;  but  as 
there  is  nothing  in  them  essentially  new,  they  will  not  here  be 
entered  upon. 

§  11.     Wands  Objections. 

Some  years  later  Th.  Wand  treated  of  the  same  principle 
in  a  paper  entitled  "Kritische  Darstellung  des  zweiten  Satzes 
der  Mechanische  Warmetheorie*."  He  gives  his  conclusions 
in  the  three  propositions  following:  (1)  "The  second  prin- 
ciple of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat,  i.e.  the  impossibility 
of  a  passage  of  heat  to  a  higher  temperature  without  a  conver- 
sion into  work  or  a  corresponding  passage  of  heat  to  a  lower 
temperature,  is  false."  (2)  "The  deductions  from  this  prin- 
ciple are  only  approximate  empirical  truths,  which  hold  only 
so  far  as  they  are  established  by  experiment."  (3)  "For 
technical  calculations  the  principle  may  be  taken  as  correct, 
since  experiments  on  the  substances  used  for  the  generation 
of  work  and  of  cold  shew  a  very  close  agreement  with  it." 

The  placing  of  such  propositions  side  by  side  seem.i  in 
itself  a  doubtful  measure.  If  a  principle  has  been  found  to 
agree  with  fact  in  so  many  cases,  as  to  compel  us  to  say  that 
for  technical  calculations  it  may  be  taken  as  correct,  it  seems 
dangerous  to  conclude  nevertheless  that  it  is  false,  in  the 
face  of  the  probable  supposition  that  the  apparent  objections 
which  yet  remain  would  be  cleared  up  by  closer  examination. 

The  following  appear  to  be  the  chief  grounds  on  which 
Wand  bases  his  rejection  of  the  principle;  excluding  those 
which  relate  to  internal  work  and  electrical  phenomena,  be- 
cause these  subjects  are  not  here  treated  of. 

"  If  we  suppose,"  he  says  on  p.  314,  "  that  in  the  bring- 
ing of  a  certain  quantity  of  heat  from  a  lower  to  a  higher 
temperature  a  certain  quantity. of  work  must  of  necessity  be 
destroyed,  it  follows  that,  if  the  same  quantity  of  heat  falls 
from  a  higher  to  a  lower  temperature,  the  same  quantity  of 
work  must  re-appear.     Now  suppose  that  this  fall  takes 

•  Karl's  Repertorium  der  Bxjtenmental-Phynk,  Yol.  iv.  pp.  281,  369. 
c.  23 


354      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  EEAT. 

place  by  simple  conduction  or  by  a  non-reversible  cyclical 
process.  Then  the  above  is  not  true,  because  the  falling  of 
heat  by  conduction  goes  on  without  any  other  change  what- 
ever. Therefore  for  equalizations  of  temperature  by  simple 
conduction  there  is  nothing  equivalent  to  the  second  prin- 
ciple ;  and  this  from  the  logical  point  of  view  is  one  of  the 
weakest  points  in  that  principle,  and  leads  to  much  subse- 
quent inconvenience."  The  circumstance  here  mentioned, 
that  compensation  is  required  only  in  the  passage  of  heat  to 
a  higher  temperature,  and  not  to  a  lower,  has  been  frequently 
stated  above ;  and  in  Chapter  X.  is  expressed  in  the  general 
form,  that  negative  transformations  cannot  take  place  with- 
out positive,  but  that  positive  transformations  can  take  place 
without  negative.  From  this  circumstance  the  second  main 
principle  becomes  doubtless  less  simple  in  form  than  the 
first,  but  it  would  be  hard  to  shew  that  it  is  logically  im- 
perfect. 

The  inconveniences  mentioned  by  Wand  iri  the  above 
paragraph  he  arrives  at  by  the  following  considerations.  He 
supposes  a  simple  cyclical  process  to  be  carried  out,  during 
which  the  two  bodies  between  which  the  heat  passes,  and 
which  he  calls  the  heating  and  cooling  body,  have  tempera- 
tures which  are  close  to  0°,  and  difier  from  each  other  by 
an  indefinitely  small  quantity,  which  he  calls  dt.  For  this 
symbol,  which  will  appear  with  another  signification  in  the 
analysis  which  follows,  we  will  substitute  h,  and  will  call  the 
temperatures  of  the  two  bodies,  reckoned  from  freezing-point, 
0  and  S  respectively.  Further,  Wand  supposes  the  cyclical 
process  to  be  so  arranged,  that  one  unit  of  heat  passes  over 
from  the  hotter  to  the  colder  body,  and  therefore  that  the 

quantity  of  heat  ^^  is  transformed  into  work.   He  then  pro- 

ceeds :  "  The  process  being  ended,  I  will  heat  the  whole  ap- 
paratus, comprising  both  the  heating  and  the  cooling  body, 
by  100°.  The  difference  of  temperature  between  the  two 
bodies  will  remain  unaltered.  If  we  now  wish  to  destroy  the 
heat  thus  obtained  by  means  of  the  reverse  cyclical  process, 
we  must  take  from  the  colder  body  the  heat  f^f.  The  colder 
body  thus  loses  the  heat  ^^,  and  giv.es  it  up  to  the  hotter 
body ;  and  if  by  the  reverse  process  all  is  cooled  back  again 
to  the  initial  temperature  0",  the  initial  condition  of  things 


DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  THEOKT.  355 

is  restored.  There  is  no  work  performed  or  consumed,  and 
yet  a  passage  of  heat  has  taken  place  from  the  second  body, 
which  has  remained  the  colder,  to  the  first  which  has  remained 
the  hotter  throughout  the  process.  This  however  is  no  refu- 
tation of  the  second  principle.  For  to  obtain  this  result  there 
must  be  a  continuous  succession  of  alternate  heatings  and 
coolings  of  the  apparatus,  i.e.  heat  must  pass  from  a  hotter 
to  a  colder  body;  but  this  passage  takes  place  by  conduction, 
for  which  there  is  no  equivalent.  Hence  it  follows  from  the 
process  here  described,  that  with  regard  to  the  distribution 
of  the  heat  it  is  by  no  means  the  same  thing,  whether  we 
do  nothing  at  all,  or  carry  out  a  compound  cyclical  process  as 
here  described." 

We  have  here  the  case  of  two  opposite  cyclical  processes 
carried  out  at  different  temperatures,  in  which  the  work 
done  and  the  work  consumed  cancel  each  other,  but  more 
heat  passes  from  the  hotter  to  the  colder  body  than  vice 
vers4 ;  and  "Wand  holds  that  the  passage  of  the  surplus  heat 
from  the  colder  to  the  hotter  body  has  taken  place  without 
compensation.  He  has  however  neglected  certain  differences 
of  temperature,  which  occur  in  this  somewhat  complicated 
operation.  For  after  the  first  process,  in  which  the  hotter 
body  has  given  off  and  the  colder  body  taken  in  heat,  he 
heats  the  whole  apparatus  and  the  two  bodies  by  100°;  and 
he  cools  them  by  100°  after  the  second  process,  in  which 
the  colder  body  has  given  off  heat  and  the  hotter  taken 
it  in.  But  in  giving  off  and  taking  in  heat  the  two  bodies 
alter  their  temperature  somewhat,  and  the  reservoirs  of  heat, 
which  perform  the  heating  and  cooling,  do  not  therefore 
take  back  the  heat  during  the  cooling  at  the  same  tempera- 
ture as  they  gave  it  out  during  the  heating.  Hence  arise 
passages  of  heat  of  which  Wand  has  taken  no  account. 

These  differences  of  temperature  are  of  course  very  small, 
since  the  two  bodies  must  be  assumed  so  large,  that  the  varia- 
tions of  temperature  produced  in  them  by  the  cyclical 
process  may  remain  small  compared  to  the  difference  of 
the  original  temperatures.  But  then  the  quantities  of  heat, 
which  the  bodies  take  from  and  give  back  to  the  reservoirs 
during  their  heating  and  cooling,  are  also  very  large;  and 
since  to  determine  the  heat  which  has  passed  we  must 
multiply   the    differences    of   temperature    by  the    actual 

23—3 


356      OK  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

quantities  of  heat,  we  arrive  at  magnitudes  wliicli  are  quite 
large  enough  to  compensate  for  the  surplus  heat  which  has 
passed  between  the  bodies. 

To  prove  this  point  we  will  make  the  calculation  itself. 
First,  with  regard  to  the  actual  surplus  heat  which  has  passed 
between  the  bodies,  since  the  temperatures  are  0  and  B,  and 

the  quantity  of  heat  equals  -^i^ ,  this  has  the  equivalence 
value  2^g  (273  +  8"  273)  °^'  ^^S^^^^^^S  terms  of  a  higher 
order  than  the  first  with  regard  to  S,  —  ^=^  S.   We  have  now 

to  determine  the  equivalence  value  of  the  passages  of  heat, 
which  take  place  during  the  heating  and  coohng  of  the  body 
by  100°.  By  Chapter  IV.,  §  5,  we  must  divide  the  element 
of  heat  taken  in  by  one  of  the  two  bodies  from  a  reservoir  of 
heat  (reckoning  heat  given  off  as  negative  heat  taken  in) 
by  the  absolute  temperature  which  the  body  has  at  the 
moment,  and  we  must  then  form  the  negative  integral  for 
the  heating  and  cooling. 

Let  M  be  the  mass  of  each  body,  and  C  its  specific  heat, 
which  we  suppose  constant ;  then  the  quantity  of  heat, 
which  it  takes  in  during  a  rise  of  temperature  dt,  equals 
MCdt,  and  this  we  shall  take  as  expressing  the  element  of 
heat.     If  for  convenience  we  put 


^~MG 


■(6). 


the  element  will  be  expressed  by  -  dt.     We  must  consider 


e 


MG  as  very  large,  and  therefore  e  as  very  small,  so  much 
so  as  to  be  small  even  in  comparison  with  the  small  difiference 
of  temperature  h. 

If  we  now  take  the  first  cyclical  process,  the  colder  body 
has,  to  begin  with,  the  temperature  0,  and  the  hotter  the 

temperature  S.     During  the  process  the  former  takes  in  the 

s 
quantity  of  heat  1,  and  the  latter  loses  the  quantity  1  +  ^=^ . 

These  must  be  divided  by  MC,  or  multiplied  by  e,  to  obtain 


DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  THEORY.  357 

the  changes  of  temperature  which  they  produce  in  the 
bodies ;  thus  at  the  end  of  the  process  'wie  colder  body  has 
the  temperature  e,  and  the  hotter  the  temperature 

From  these  temperatures  both  bodies  are  now  to  be  heated 
by  100°. 

The  negative  integral  relating  to  the  heating  of  "the  colder 
body  is 

/■lOO+e    1 

^"~i.       273+T 
If  we  put  T  =  t  —  e,  then 


/■lOO 

A 


.100         1 

h    273  H 


K    273  +  T  +  e* 
Neglecting  higher  terms  in  the  expansion  of  e,  we  have 

11 6 

273  +  T  +  e~273+T      (273+t)'" 

whence  ^  =  --J^    273T-r+Jo    (273T^^ ^'^- 

The  negative   integral   relating  to   the  heating   of  the 
hotter  body  is 

rioo+!-(i+4)'     1 


f" 


dt 
e 


.(,,i-).        273  +  r 
Whence  we  obtain  in  the  same  way  as  before 

„_      1 /•""+»     dr          /          B  Ui°«+°      cZt  . 

^ 7L       273T^'"l^"^273JJs       (273 +  Tf ^''^- 

During  the  second  cyclical  process  the  colder  body  gives 

373 

off  a  quantity  of  heat  =  gs^ ,  and  the  hotTter  body  receives  a 


358  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOBY  OP  HEAT. 

quantity  ^r^^  +  ^f^ .     The  temperatures  of  the  two  bodies, 
after  the  second  cyclical  process,  become  respectively 

100  +  e-||.  =  100-|«-«e, 


100+S-(l+4)e+(g|+4)e  =  100  +  S  + 


100 
273^' 


From  these  temperatures  both  bodies  are  cooled  down  by 
100°.  The  negative  integral  relating  to  this  cooling  is  for 
the  colder  body 


f      1""  1  Ann     lOI  1 

—  ~\  100  ^  =    I    100  ^ 

■'"o-are"  273+^     •'"are'      273+i 


273+ « 
whence  as  before  we  have 

^~eJo    273  +  T  +  273J0    (273  +  t)^ ^''^• 

For  the  cooling  of  the  hotter  body  we  have  similarly 

1  |-ioo+8     dr      _  100  /•"°+»       dr  , 

^~ejs       273 +T     273 is       (273  +  t7  ••••^^"^• 

By  adding  together  A,  B,  G,  D,  we  obtain  the  equivalence 
value  of  all  the  transferences  of  heat  during  the  heating  and 
cooling.     In  this  addition  the  integrals  which  have  the  factor 

-  cancel  each  other,  and  two  of  the  others  may  be  combined 

together.     Whence  we  have 


A+JB  +  G  +  I)-- 


373  /•I""       dr 
''27BJo    (273 +  T)'' 


V273^273/'J8       (273  +  t)' ^^^> 


DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  THEORY.  359 

Performing  the  iategration,  the  right-hand  side  becomes 

1 


373  /_  _1_   1_\  _  /373  _S_\  / 
273  V  373  "*"  27ii)     V273  "^  273/  [ 


373  +  S  "^  273  +  S. 


If  we  expand  the  second  product  in  terms  of  S  to  the 
first  order,  most  of  the  resulting- terms  cancel  each  other,  and 
the  expression  for  the  equivalence  value  of  the  transferences 
of  heat  during  the  heating  and  cooling  becomes  finally 

100    s 
(273)'  *• 

This  expression  fulfils  the  condition  of  being  equal  and 
opposite  to  the  equivalence  value  of  the  surplus  heat 
actually  transferred  between  the  two  bodies.  This  transfer 
therefore  is  not  uncompensated,  but  fully  compensated  as  the 
second  principle-  requires.  We  thus  see  that  the  operation 
suggested  by  Wand  does  not  give  the  smallest,  ground  for 
objecting  to  the  principle. 

Another  objection  is  drawn  by  Wand  from  the  follow- 
ing considerations.  He  proposes  the  question  whether  the 
principle  can  be  derived  by  mechanical  reasoning  from  the 
ideas  which  we  can  form  of  the  nature  and  action  of  heat. 
With  this  object  he  first  applies  the  hypothesis  main- 
tained by  the  author  and  others  as  to  the  molecular  motion 
of  gaseous  bodies,  and  finds  that  this  does  actually  lead 
to  the  principle  in  question.  He  then  says  that  it  ,is 
not  sufficient  to  prove  that  one  particular  hypothesis  leads 
to  the  principle,  bat  that  all  possible  mechanical  hypo- 
theses on  the  nature  of  heat  must  be  shewn  to  lead  to  it. 
Accordingly  as  a  second  example  he  takes  another  hypo- 
thesis, which  he  conceives  specially  adapted  to  represent  the 
phenomena  of  expansion,  and  of  the  increase  of  pressure  by 
heat.  On  this  hypothesis  a  row  of  elastic  balls,  any  two  of 
which  are  connected  by  an  elastic  spring,  vibrate  in  such  a 
way  that  all  of  them  are  in  similar  phases.  From  this 
hypothesis  he  arrives  at  an  equation  different  from  that  which 
he  has  chosen  as  the  criterion  of  the  second  principle,  and 
then  draws  the  conclusion,  "the  second  principle  cannot 
therefore  be  universally  derived  from  the  principles  of 
mechanics."    But  upon  such  a  conclusion  the  question  may 


S60     ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOET  OF  HEAT. 

be  asked,  -whether  in  reality  the  hypothetical  motion,  which 
he  supposes,  agrees  with  the  actual  motion,  which  we  call 
heat,  in  such  a  way  that  the  same  equations  must  hold  for 
both.  So  long  as  this  is  not  proved  the  conclusion  cannot  be 
considered  to  be  made  out. 

Finally,  Wand  considers  the  process  which  Occurs  in 
nature,  when  in  the  growth  of  plants,  under  the  influence  of 
the  sun's  rays  of  light  and  heat,  carbonic  acid  and  water  are 
absorbed,  and  oxygen  liberated ;  whilst  the  organic  substances 
thus  formed,  if  afterwards  burnt  or  serving  as  nourishment 
to  animals,  unite  themselves  again  with  oxygen  to  form  car- 
bonic acid  and  water,  and  thereby  generate  heat.  This 
transformation  of  the  sun's  heat  he  considers  to  be  in  flat 
contradiction  to  the  second  principle.  To  the  analysis  which 
he  gives  many  objections  might  be  taken;  but  the  author 
considers  that  a  process  in  which  so  much  is  still  unknown, 
as  that  of  the  growth  of  plants  under  the  influence  of  the 
sun,  is  altogether  unfit  to  be  used  as  a  proof  either  for  or 
against  the  principle  in  question. 

§  12.     Tait's  Objections. 

Finally  the  author  has  to  mention  certain  objections  re- 
cently raised  against  his  theory  by  Tait ;  objections  which  have 
surprised  him  equally  by  their  substance  and  by  their  form. 
In  an  article  which  appeared  in  1872  on  the  History  of  the 
Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat*,  the  author  had  observed,  that 
Tait's  work,  A  sketch  of  Thermodynamics,  no  doubt  owed  its 
existence  chiefly  to  the  wish  of  claiming  the  Mechanical 
Theory  of  Heat  as  far  as  possible  for  the  English  nation  ;-^a 
supposition  for  which  the  clearest  grounds  can  be  adduced. 
Further  on  in  the  article  he  had  observed  that  Tait  had 
ascribed  to  Sir  William  Thomson  a  formula  due  to  the 
author,  and  had  quoted  it  as  given  by  Thomson  in  & 
paper  which  contained  neither  the  formula  itself  nor  any- 
thing equivalent  to  it.  The  author  expected  that  Mr  Tait, 
in  answering  this  article,  would  specially  address  himself  to 
these  two  points,  of  which  the  latter  particularly  required 
clearing  up.     A  reply  aj)peared  indeed -f,  and  one  written  in 

•  ^ogg.  Ann.,  Vol.  cxlv.  p.  132. 
t  Phil.  Mag. ,  Series  4,  Vol.  xlui. 


DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  THEORY.  361 

p.  very  acrimonious  tone ;  but  to  the  author's  surprise  these 
two  points  were  nowljere  touched  upon,  a  different  turn 
being  given  to  the  whole  matter.  For  whilst  in  the  work 
previously  alluded  to  the,  author's  researches  on  the  Mechani- 
cal Theory  of  Heat,  even  if  in  his  own  view  they  were  not 
put  in  their  right  relation  to  those  of  English  writers,  were, 
yet  described  at  great  length  and  with  a  general  recognition 
of  their  merit,  their  correctness  was  here  at  once  assailed,  by 
the  declaration  that  the  fundamental  principle,  that  heat 
cannot  of  itself  pass  from  a  colder  to  a  hotter  body,  is 
untrue. 

To  prove  this  two  phenomena  relating  to  electric  currents 
are  adduced.  But  in  a  rej  oinder  published  shortly  afterwards  * 
the  author  was  easily  able  to  prove  that  these  phenomena 
in  no  way  contradict  the  principle,  and  that  one  of  them  is 
even  so  evidently  in  accordance  with  it,  that  it  may  serve  as 
an  example  specially  adapted  to  illustrate  and  establish  it. 
As  electrical  phenomena  are  not  here  treated  of,  this  is  not 
the  place  to  enter  further  into  this  subject. 

Tait  further  observed  in  his  reply,  that  by  the  author's 
introduction  of  what  he  namdd  Internal  Work  and  Disgrega- 
tion,  he  had  done  a  serious  injury  to  science,  offering  however 
nothing  to  support  this,  beyond  the  brief  remark :  "  In  our 
present  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  matter  such  ideas  can  do 
only  harm."  What  Tait  has  to  object  to  the  conception  of 
internal  work,  it  is  difficult  to  understand.  In  his  first 
paper  on  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat  the  author  divided 
the  work  during  the  body's  change  of  condition  into  External 
and  Internal  Work,  and  shewed  that  those  two  quantities  of 
work  differed  essentially  in  their  mode  of  action.  Since 
that  time  this  distinction  has  been  similarly  made  by  all 
writers,  so  far  as  he  is  aware,  who  have  treated  of  the  Mecha- 
nical Theory  of  Heat. 

As  regards  the  method  (which  will  be  described  on  a 
future  occasion)  of  calculating  the  combined  internal  and 
external  work,  and  the  conception  of  disgregation  introduced, 
by  the  author  with  this  object,  purely  mechanical  investiga- 
tions have  recently  led  to  an  equation,  exactly  corresponding 
with  that  which  the  author  proposed  in  the  science  of  heat, 
and  in  which  the  disgregation  makes  its  appearance.  If 
*  Phil.  Mag.,  Series  4,  Yol.  xlhi. 


36^      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

these  investigations  cannot  yet  be  considered  as  complete, 
they  nevertheless  shew,  at  least  in  the  author's  opinion,  that 
the  nature  of  things  requires  the  introduction  of  this  con- 
ception. 

He  therefore  leaves  the  objections  of  Tait,  with  as  much 
confidence  as  those  of  Holtzmann,  Decher,  and  others,  to  the 
good  judgment  of  the  reader  *. 

*  For  a  rejoinder  by  Prof.  Tait  to  these  observations,  see  Sketch  of 
Thermodynamics,  2nd  edition,  1877,  p.  xv. 


Finis. 


APPENDIX  I. 

ON  THE  THERMO-ELASTIC  PROPERTIES  OP  SOLIDS. 

Sir  William  Thomson  -was  the  first  who  examined  the  thermo- 
elastic  properties  of  elastic  solids.  Instead  of  abstracting  his 
investigation  {Quarterii/  Mathematical  Jmirnal,  1855)  it  may  be 
well  to  present  the  subject  as  an  illustration  of  the  method  of 
treatment  by  the  Adiabatic  Function. 

Consider  any  homogeneously-strained  elastic  solid.  To  define 
the  state  of  the  body  as  to  strain  six  quantities  must  be  specified, 
say  11,  V,  w,  X,  y,  z:  these  are  generally  the  extensions  along  three 
rectangular  axes,  and  the  shearing  strains  about  them,  each 
relative  to  a  defined  standard  temperature  and  a  state  when  the 
body  is  free  from  stress.  The  work  done  by  external  forces  when 
the  strains  change  by  small  variations  may  always  be  expressed  in 
the  form 

IJJhi+7bv+  ...)x  volume  of  the  solid, 

because  the  conditions  of  strain  are  homogeneous.      U,  V are 

the  stresses  in  the  solid  :  each  is  a  function  oi  uv  and  of  the 

temperature,  and  is  determined  when  these  are  known..  Let  6 
denote  the  temperature  (where  6  is  to  be  regarded  merely  as  the 
name  of  a  temperature,  and  the  question  of  how  temperatures  are 
to  be  measured  is  not  prejudged). 

Amongst  other  conditions  under  which  the  strains  of  the 
body  may  be  varied,  there  are  two  which  we  must  consider. 
First,  suppose  that  the  temperature  is  maintained  constant;  or 
that  the  change  is  efiected  isothermally.  Then  6  is  constant. 
Secondly,  suppose  that' the  variation  is  efiected  under  such  con- 
ditions that  no  heat  is  allowed  to  pass  into  or  to  leave  the 
body  ;  or  that  the  change  is  efiected  adidbatically.  In  the  latter' 
case  6,u,v,  are  connected  by  a  relation  involving  a  para- 
meter which  is  always  constant  when  heat  does  not  pass  into 


364  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

or  out  of  the  solid :  this  parameter  is  called  the  adiabatic  June-, 
iion. 

We  have  now  fourteen  quantities  relating  to  the  body,  viz. 
six  elements  of  strain,  six  of  stress,  the  quantity  6  which  defines 
the  temperature,  and  the  parameter  ^  the  constancy  of  which 
imposes  the  adiabatic  condition.  Any  seven  of  these  may  be 
chosen  as  independent  variables. 

Let  the  body  now  undergo  Carnot's  four  operations  as  fol- 
lows : — 

1°.  Let  the  stresses  and  strains  vary  slightly  under  the  sole 
condition  that  the  temperature  does  not  change.  Let  the  conse- 
quent increase  of  <^  be  8i^.  Heat  will  be  absorbed  or  given  out, 
and,  since  the  variations  are  small,  the  quantity  will  be  propor- 
tional to  8(^,  say 

f{e,u,  v,w,  .'.....)  S<f}. 

'2°.  Let  the  stresses  and  strains  further  vary  adiabatically, 
and  let  S6  be  the  consequent  increase  of  temperature, 

3°.  Let  the  stresses  and  strains  receive  any  isothermal  varia- 
tion, such  that  the  parameter  ^  returns  to  its  first  value.  Heat 
will  be  given  out  or  absorbed,  equal  to 

(/+8/)8<^. 

4°.     Let  the  body  return  to  its  first  state. 

Here  we  have  a  complete  and  reversible  cycle.  The  quantity 
of  heat  given  off  SfxS^  is  equal  to  the  work  done  by  external 
forces.  Now  Carnot's  theorem  (or  the  Second  Principle  of 
Thermodynamics)  asserts  that  the  work  d6ne,  or  Sfx  8^,  divided 
by  the  heat  transferred  from  the  lower  to  the  higher  tempera- 
ture, /  X  8<^,  is  equal  to  a  function  of  6  only  (which  function  is 
the  same  for  all  bodies)  multiplied  by  89.     Thus 

^=-^(5)8(9, 


log  (/)  =  1^0  de  +  a  function  of  <^ ; 


the  function  of  <j>  being  added  because  the  variation  was  per- 
formed under  the  condition  that  ^  was  constant.  By  properly 
choosing  the  parameter  <j)  this  function  may  be  included  in  8^, 
and  we  have,  as  the  quantity  of  heat  absorbed  in  the  first 
operation, 

f  X  bqj. 


THERMO-ELASTIC  PROPEKTIES  OF  SOLIDS.  365 

The  mode  of  measuring  temperature  being  arbitrary,  we  shall 
find  it  convenient  to  define  that  temperature  is  so  measured  that 

F  (0)  =  -^-j  then  we  have  : — 

Heat  absorbed  in  first  operation  =  6S(f> (1); 

"Work  done  by  external  forces  =  86  x  Si^ (2). 

We  must  now  examine  more  particularly  the  variations  in  the 

stresses  and  strains.  Denote  the  values  of  U,  V,  .......  u,v,  by 

different  suffixes  for  the  four  operations. 

The  work  done  by  the  external  forces  in  these  operations  is 
respectively 

and  the  sum  of  these  is  equal  to  S(^Sd. 

Hence  a  variety  of  important  relations  may  be  obtained. 
Let  all  the  strains  but  one  be  constant :  then  we  have 


M,= 

w. 

du   ,, 

«3  = 

-u^ 

du  ,. 

M,= 

=  «a 

du  , 

-d4>'^'^' 

with  similar  equations  for  U,,  &c.     Hence  the  Work  done  in  the 
successive  operations  is,       , 


366  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OF  HEAT, 

__     dll  ,.      „      dU  ,. 

jj^^^de^u,  +  ^d6   ^ 

„     dU  J.     „     dU^, 

vi__ ,_ae. 

Adding  these,  the  total  "Work  done  becomes 
du  dU     du  dU\ 


(    du  du      du  dU\      joji 

\-d^M^re-d^)''^^^^' 


the  differentiations  being  performed  -when  u  and  Zf  are  expressed 
as  functions  of  6,  <j)  and  the  five  other  strains. 

The  same  is  true  if  five  stresses  are  constant,  that  is  if  u  and 
U  are  expressed  as  functions  of  6,  <;!>  and  the  five  other  stresses. 

But  from  (2)  the  "Work  done  =  d6x  d<^.  Hence  it  follows 
generally  (using  the  well-known  theorem  as  to  Jacobians)  that 

dtf)  dO      d<j>  d9  _^  ,„. 

dUd^'d^dU'    ^  '' 

<j)  and  0  being  expressed  as  functions  of  u,  U;  and  either  the  five 
other  stresses  or  the  five  other  strains  being  constant. 

These  equations  are  still  true  if  the  independent  variables  are 
partly  stresses  and  partly  strains,  so  long  as  no  two  are  of  the 
same  name  :  e.g.  if  they  are  vwXYZ. 

From  equation  (3)  all  the  thermo-elastio  properties  of  bodies 
may  be  deduced,     We  have  generally 

^'=fu'^^fu'^ W' 

''^-'P^-fu'^ (^)- 


THERMO-ELASTIC  PEOPEETIES  OF  SOLIDS.  867 

Putting  <Z^  =  0,  we  have 

dU ,  .,  .  J,, 

^  (when  <j,  IS  coDBtant)  =  -  ^  , 

dU 
Putting  de  =  0,  we  have 

-j~  (when  6  is  constant)  ±=  -  ^  . 
OM  'do 

dU_ 
Let  —  denote  —  under  the  condition  that  <^  is  constant, 

that  is,  where  6  is  expressed  as  a  function  of  Au  instead  of  Uu 
Then  by  (4) 

d4 

d^^dO^dU     de^_dO_     ^     d6 

du     dU  du      du       dU     d<^      du 

dlf 

dU 

This  is  the  fourth  thermodynamic  relation  (see  Maxwell  on 
Heat,  1877,  p.  169). 

The  others  are  obtained  in  a  similar  way  thus : — 

d^ 

d^_de__de^  dU 1 djfa 

dU~  dU     du   d<f>        d^~      d4>  ' 

du        du 

de_ 

de4>_d<l>     d^   du         1         duV 
~du^du~dU  dF~~'de^~W 

dU  dU 

d$ 

de<t>  _  d<f»      d<f>  dU  _  1  _    djju 

dU~  dU~  du  dO^  d^"    'df' 

du  du 


368     ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEOEY  OF  HEAT, 

These  relations  are  true  provided  each  of  the  other  strains,  or 
else  its  corresponding  stress,  is  constant. 

Take  the  last  of  these  for  interpretations  When  6  is  con- 
stant we  have  bj  (1), 

Heat  absorbed  in  any  change  (or  dq)  =  6d<j>. 


Hence 

de<t> 
dU 

1   dq  \ 
'  e  dU' 

or,  by  the  fourth'  relation, 

d^ 

dd  ' 

1  dq 

ddU 

Here  -—  is  the  coefficient  of  dilatation.     This,  under  the  condi- 

tions  assumed,  will,  of  course,  be  different  according  as  the 
other  stresses  or  other  strains  are  maintained  constant.  In  the 
case  of  a  bar  of  india-rubber  stretched  by  a  variable  weight, 
all  the  elements  of  stress  but  one  vanish  or  are  constant.     If  the 

stress    be  somewhat  considerable  it   is   found    that  -r^  is  nega- 

da 

tive.     It  follows  that  increase  of  weight  will  liberate  heat  in  ' 

the  indiarrubber.     But  the  same  will  not  be  true  if  the  stretching 

weight  be  nil  or  very  small,  nor  again  if  the  periphery  of  the 

bar  is  held  so  that  it  cannot  contract  transversely  as  the  weight 

extends  it  longitudinally,  unless  (which  is  Improbable)  it  should 

be   found   that  in   these   cases  the   coefficient  of    dilatation    is 

negative. 


APPENDIX  II. 
ON  CAPILLARITY. 


The  equations  obtained  in  Appendix  I.  may  also  be  applied  to 
the  eqailibiium  of  the  surface  film  of  a  liquid  in  contact  with  its 
owu  vapour.  This  subject  is  generally  known  under  the  name  of 
Capillarity,  from  its  having  first  been  studied  in  connection  with 
Capillary  tubes  (Maxwell,  On  Heat,  1871,  p.  263).  Thus  let  the 
body  considered  be  the  film  of  fluid  at  the  surface  of  a  fluid,  and 
let  it  be  so  small  in  volume  that  its  capacity  of  heat  in  virtue  of 
its  volume  may  be  neglected.  Let  T  be  the  surface  tension,  and 
<S^  the  surface.  Then  2*  is  a  function  of  6  only :  hence,  from  an 
equation  analogous  to  Equation  (3),  Appendix  L,  we  obtain 

dT     dS__ 
d6  ""  d^"      ' 

dT d4>__ldg 

*'''  dO"    ^~     edS 

(by  Equatiion  (1*),  Appendix  I.),  where  q  is  heat  absorbed. 

'  dT 
If  then  -j^   is  negative,  as-  is  usually  the  case,  extension  of 
dd 
surface  means  absorption  of  heat. 

The  question  of  the  equilibrium  of  vapour  at  a  curved  sur- 
face  of  liquid   has   been   treated  by  Sir  Wm.   Thomson.     The 
following  is  mainly  taken  from  his  paper  {Froc.  Royal  Society  of 
-Edinburgh,  1870,  Vol.  vii.,  p.  63). 

In  a  closed  vessel  containing  only  liquid  and  its  vapour,  all 
at  one  temperature,  the  liq'iiid'  restsj  with  its  free  surface  raised  or 
depressed  in  capillary  tubes  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  solid 
boundary,  in  permanent  equilibrium  according  to  the  same  law  of 
relation-  between  curvature  and  pressure  as  in  vessels  open  to  the 
air.  The  permanence  of  this  equilibrium  implies  physical  equi- 
librium between'  the  liquid  and  the  vapour  in  contact  with  it  at 
all  parts  of  its  surface.  But  the  pressure  of  the  vapour  at 
difierent  levels  difiers  according  to  hydrostatic  law.  Hence  the 
pressure  of  saturated  vapour  in  contact  with  »■ .  liquid  differs 
c.  24 


370  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

according  to  the  curvature  of  the  bounding  surface,  being  less 
■when  the  liquid  is  concave,  and  greater  when  it  is  convex.  And 
detached  portions  of  the  liquid  iu  separate  vessels,  all  enclosed  in 
one  containing  vessel,  cannot  remain  permanently  with  their 
free  surfaces  in  any  other  relative  positions  than  those  they  would 
occupy  if  there  were  hydrostatic  communication  of  pressure 
between  the  portions  of  liquid  in  the  several  vessels.  There  must 
be  evaporation  from  those  surfaces  which  are  too  high,  and  con- 
densation into  the  liquid  at  those  surfaces  which  are  too  low — a 
process  which  goes  on  until  hydrostratic  equilibrium,  as  if  with 
free  communication  of  pressure  from  vegsel  to  vessel,  is  attained. 
Thus,  for  example,  if  there  are  two  large  open  vessels  of  water, 
one  considerably  abpve  the  other  in  level,  and  if  the  temperature 
of  the  surrounding  matter  is  kept  rigorously  constant,  the  liquid 
in  the  higher  vessel  will  gradually  evaporate  until  it  is  all  gone 
and  condensed  into  the  lower  vessel.  Or  yre  may  suppose  a 
capillary  tube,  with  a  small  quantity  of  liquid  occupying  it  from  its 
bottom  up  to  a  certain  level,  to  be  placed  upright  in  the  middle  of  a 
quantity  of  the  same  liquid  with  a  wide  free  surface,  and  con- 
tained in  a  hermetically  sealed  exhausted  receiver.  The  vapour 
wUl  gradually  become  condensed  into  the  liquid  in  the  capillary  tube, 
until  the  level  of  the  liquid  in  it  is  the  same  as  it  would  be  were  the 
lower  end  of  the  tube  in  hydrostatic  communication  with  the 
large  mass  of  liquid.  The  effect  would  be  that  in  a  very  short 
time  liquid  would  visibly  rise  in  the  capillary  tube,  and  that,  pro- 
vided care  were  taken  to  maintain,  the  equality  of  temperature  all 
over  the  surface  of  the  hermetically  sealed  vessel,  the  liquid  in  the 
capillary  tube  would  soon  take  very  nearly  the  same  level  as  it 
would  have  were  its  lower  end  open ;  sinking  to  this  level  if  the 
capillary  tube  were  in  the  beginning  filled  too  full,  or  rising  to  it 
if  there  is  not  enough  of  the  liquid  in  it  at  first  to  fulfil ''the  con- 
dition of  equilibrium. 

The  following  shews  precisely  the  relations  between  curva- 
tures, differences  of  level,  and  differences  of  pressure  with  which  _ 
we  are  concerned. 

Let  jo  be  the  pressure  of  equilibrium  above  the  curved  surface 
in  the  tube,  rr'  the  principal  radii  of  curvature  of  that  surface, 
and  T  the  surface  tension :  then  by  the  principles  of  Capillarity 


the  upward  drag  on  the  surface,  due  to  the  tension,  is  ^  ( -  +  -, ) . 
ithin  the   liquid 


Hence  the  pressure   within  the   liquid,   immediately  below  the 
surface  is 


ON  CAPILLARITY.  371 

Let  V  be  the  equilibrium  pressure  of  th.e  vapour  at  the  plane  sur- 
face of  the  liquid,  p  the  density  of  the  liquid,  tr  the  density  of  the 
vapour,  h  the  height  at  which  the  liquid  stands  in  the  tube  above 
the  plane  surface :  then  clearly 


-h^^^y 


+h (1). 


But  also 

IT  =p  +  ha- (2). 

Therefore 


TT  (p  -  0-)  =^  (p  -  <r)  +  r  ^- + -,)  0-, 


which  gives  the  relation  between  the  pressure  of  equilibrium'  above 
the  curved  surface  and  that  above  the  plane  surface. 

In  strictness  the  value  of  a-  to  be  uSed'  ought  to  be  the  mean 
density  of  a  vertical  column  of  vapour  extending  through  the 
given  height.  But  in  all  cases  in  which  we  can  practically 
apply  the  formulae,  according  to  our  present  knowledge  of  the  pro- 
perties of  matter,  the.  difference  of  densities  in  this  colunm.  is  very 
smaiU,  and  njiay  be'  neglected.  Hence,  if  .S  denote  the  height 
above  the  plaij.e  surfaee  of  the  liquid  of  an  imaginary  homogeneous 
fluid  whic|i,  if  of  the  same  density  as  the  vapour  at  that  plane, 
would  prgduce  by  its  weight  the  actual  pressure  jr,  we  have 

j^t^t  by  Equations  (1)  and  (2) 

ji^ence  by  Equation  (3) 

/IT  — ah  =  Tr(l  —  -jz.) . 

For  vapour  at  ordinary  atmospheric  temperatures,  H  is  about 
1,300,000  centimetres.  Hence  in  the  capillary  tube  which  would 
keep  water  up  to  a  height  of  J.  3  metres  above  the  plane  level,  the 
curved  surface  of  the  water  is  jn  equilibrium  with  the  vapour  in 
contact  with  it,  when  the  pressure  of  the  vapour  is  less  by  about 
■j^^"'  of  its  own  amount  than  the  pressure  of  vapour  in  equilibrium 
at  a  plane  surfaee  pf  water  ai  the  same  temperature. 

24-2 


APPENDIX  III. 

ON  THE  CONTINUITY   OF  THE  LIQUID  AND 
GASEOUS   STATES   OF  MATTER. 

The  chapters  on  Fusion  and  Vaporization  wDl  be  rendered  more 
complete  by  a  brief  account  of  Dr  Andrews'  important  researches 
on  the  continuity  between  the  liquid  and  gaseous  states, of  matter. 
This  account  is  mainly  taken,  by  permission  of  Messrs  Longmans, 
from  the  late  Prof.  Maxwell's  work  on  The  Theory  of  Heat,  1877, 
Ch.  VI. 

In  Fig.  1  the  full  lines  represent  certain  Isothermal  lines 
for  Carbonic  Acid  Gas  (CO^),  i.  e.  curves  produced  by  making  it 
vary  in  pressure  and  volume,  while  the  temperature  is  kept  con- 
stant at  the  value  written  (in  degrees  Cent.)  along  each  line.  The 
ordinates  represent  pressures  in  atmospheres,  and  the  abscissae 
represent  volumes.  The  variation  is  supposed  to  be  produced  by 
diminishing  the  volume,  e.g.  the  gas  may  be  supposed  to  be 
contained  in  a  cylinder,  the  piston  of  which  is  gradually  lowered. 

Take  one  of  these  isothermals,  e.g.  that  at  21°'5.  Beginning 
from  the  right  hand,  we  have  first  a  curved  line  AB.  During 
this  part  of  the  compression,  the  substance  is  entirely  in  the  state 
of  a  gas.  As  the  volume  diminishes  the  pressure  increases,  and 
the  result  is  a  regular  curve,  which  if  the  gas  were  perfect,  or  pv 
constant,  would  be  an  equilateral  hyperbola.  At  the  point  B, 
corresponding  to  about  60  atm.,  the  gas  commences  to  liquefy. 
From  this  point  the  decrease  of  volume  produces  no  increase  of 
pressure,  but  simply  liquefies  more  and  more  of  the  gas.  The 
curve  becomes  therefore  a  horizontal  straight  line  BC.  At  the 
point  G  the  whole  of  the  gas  is  liquefied.  From  this  point  any 
further  reduction  of  -^lume  is  resisted  by  the  elastic  force  of  the 
liquid,  which  is  very  great;  and  the  isothermal  line  therefore  rises 
in  the  almost  vertical  curve  GD.  i 

Now  the  length  of  the  horizontal  part  BG,  during  which  the 
gas  is  partly  in  the  liquid,  partly  in  the  gaseous  state,  is  not  the 
same  for  different  temperatures.  For  13°'l  its  length  is  seen  to  be 
EF,  which  is  much  greater  than  BG ;  while  for  temperatures  above 


CONTINUITY   OF   THE  LIQUID  AND   GASEOUS   STATES.     373 

21°-5  it  is  found  to  be  shorter  than  BO.    The  dotted  line  DBEGF 
is  the  boundary  of  all  these  horizontal  lines,  up  to  a  certain  point  G^ 


Kg.  1. 

corresponding  to  30'''92,  at  which  their  length  vanishes.    In  other- 
words,  at  temperatures  above  30''"92  the  "  gas  line  "  AB,  and  the 


37^!      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

"liquid  line"   CD  meet   each  other,   without  any  intervening, 
portion. 

In  the  case  of  steam,  for  which  such  isothermal  lines  were  first 
drawn,  similar  phenomena  occur;  and  when  it  was  seen  that  the 
gas  line  and  the  Hquid  Une  thus  continually  approached  each  other 
as  the  temperature  was  raised,  the  question  naturally  arose,  Do 
they  ever  meet?  If  they  do  meet,  then  at  that  temperature  the 
substance  cannot  exist  partly  as  a  liquid  and  partly  as  a  vapour, 
but  must  be  entirely  converted,  at  the  corresponding  pressure, 
from  the  state  of  liquid  to  that  of  vapour  3  or  else,  ?iiice  in  this 
case  the  vapour  and  liquid  have  lihe  same  density,  it  may  be 
suspected  that  the  distinction  between  liquid  and  vapour  has  here 
lost  its  meaning. 

The  answer  to  this  question,  has  l^een  to  a  great  extent  sup- 
plied by  a  series  of  very  interesting  researches. 

In  1822  M.  Cagniard  de  la  Tour '  observed  the  effect  of  a  high 
temperature  upon  liquids  enclosed  in  glass  tubes  of  a  capacity  not 
much  greater  than  that  of  the  liquid  itself.  He  found  that  when 
the  temperature  was  raised  to  a  certain  point,  the.  substance, 
which  till  then  was  partly  Ijquid  and  partly  gaseous,  suddenly 
became  uniform  in  appearance  throughput,  without  any  visible 
surface  of  separation,  or  any  evidence  that  the  substance  in  the 
tube  was  partly  in  one  state  a:^d  partly  ii).  another. 

He  concluded  that  at  this  temperature  the  whole  became 
gaseous.  The  true  conclusion,  as  Dr  Ai?drews  has  shewn,  is, that 
the  properties  of  the  liquid  a^d  those  pf  the  vapour  continually 
approach  to  similarity,  and  thafc  above  *  certain  temperature,  the 
properties  of  the  liquid  are  not  separated  from  those  of  the  vapour 
by  any  apparent  distinction  between^ them. 

In  1823,  the  year  following  the  researches  of  Cagniard  de  la 
Tour,  Faraday  succeeded  in  liquefying  several  bodies  hitherto 
known  only  in  t^e  gaseous  form,  by  p-essure  alog-e,  and  in  1826 
he  ^eatly  extended  our  knowledge  of  the  effects  of  temperature 
tlflid  pressure  on  gases.  He  considers  that  above  a  certain  tempe- 
r^jtsire,  which,  ifl.  the  language  of  Dr  Andrews,  "sre  may  call  the 
(jrijtical  temperature  for  the  substance,  po  amount  of  pressure  will 
ppodiice  the  phenomenon  which  we  p^U  condensation,  and  he 
supposes  that  the  temperature  of  166°  P.  below  zero  is  probably 
above  the  critical  temperature  for  oxygen,  hydrogen,  and  nitrogen. 
Dr  Andrews  has  examined  carbonic  acid  under  varied  con- 
ditions of  temperature  and  pressure,  in  order  to  ascertain  the 
relations  of  the  liquid  and  gaseous  states,  and  has  arrived  at  the 
conclusion  that  the  gaseous  and  liquid  states  are  only  widely- 
'  Annalei  de  Chimie,  2nd  Series,  Vols.  xxi.  and  xxii. 


CONTINUITY  OF  THE  LIQUID  AND  GASEOUS  STATES.     875 

separated  forms  of  the  same  condition  of  matter,  and  may  be 
made  to  pass  one  into  the  other  "without  any  interruption  or 
breach  of  continuity '. 

The  diagram,  Kg.  1,  for  carbonic  acid  is  taken  from  Dr 
Andrews'  paper,  "with  the  exception  of  the  dotted  line  shewing 
the  region  within  which  the  substance  can  exist  as  a  liquid  in 
presence  of  its  vapour.  The  base  line  of  the  diagram  corresponds, 
not  to  zero  pressure,  but  to  a  pressure  of  47  atmospheres. 

The  lowest  of  the  isothermal  lines  is  that  of  13°'l  C.  or 

55°-6  r: 

This  line  shews  that  at  a  pressure  of  about  47  atmospheres 
condensation  occurs.  The  substance  is  seen  to  become  separated 
into  two  distinct  portions,  the  upper  portion  being  in  the  state  of 
vapour  or  gas,  and  the  lower  in  the  state  of  liquid.  The  upper 
surface  of  the  liquid  can  be  distinctly  seen,  and  where  this  surface 
is  close  to  the  sides  of  the  glass  containing  the  substance  it  is  seen 
to  be  curved,  as  the  surface  of  water  is  in  small  tubes. 

As  the  volume  is  diminished,  more  of  the  substance  is  liquefied, 
till  at  last  the  whole  is  compressed  into  the  liquid  form. 

Liquid  carbonic  acid,  as  was  first  observed  by  ThUorier,  dilates 
as  the  temperature  rises  to  a  greater  degree  than  even  a  gas,  and, 
as  Dr  Andrews  has  shewn,  it  yields  to  pressure  much  more  than 
any  ordinary  liquid.  Prom  Dr  Andrews'  experiments  it  also 
appears  that  its  compressibility  diminishes  as  the  pressure  in- 
creases. These  results  are  apparent  even  in  the  diagram.  It  is, 
therefore,  far  more  compressible  than  any  ordinary  liquid,  and  it 
appears  from  the  experiments  of  Andrews  that  its  compressibility 
diminishes  as  the  volume  is  reduced. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  behaviour  of  liquid  carbonic 
acid  under  the  action  of  heat  and  pressure  is  vet-y  different  from 
that  of  ordinary  liquids,  and  ia  some  respects  approaches  to  that 
of  a  gas. 

If  we  examine  the  next  of  the  isothermals  of  the  diagram, 
that  for  21°'5  C.  or  70°*7  F.,  the  approximation  between  the 
liquid  and  the  gaseous  states  is  still  more  apparent.  Here  con- 
densation takes  Talsice  at  about  60  atmospheres  of  pressure,  and 
the  liquid  occupiel  nearly  a  third  of  the  volume  of  the  gas.  The 
exceedingly  dense  gas  is  approaching  in  its  properties  to  the 
exceedingly  light  liquid.  Still  there  is  a  distinct  separation 
between  the  gaseous  and  liquid  states,  though  we  are  approaching 
the  critical  temperature.  This  critical  temperature  has  been 
determined  by  Dr  Andrews  to  be  30»-92  C.  or  87''-7  F.  At  this 
temperature,  and  at  a  pressure  of  from  73  to  75  atmospheres, 
1  Phil.  Trans.  1869,  p.  575. 


376      ON  THE  MECHANICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT. 

carbonic  acid  appears  to  be  in  the  critical  condition.  No  sepa- 
ration into  liquid  and  vapour  can  be  detected,  but  at  tbe.same 
time  very  small  variations  gf  pressure  or  of  temperature  produce 
such  great  variations  of  density  that  flickering  movements  are 
observed  in'  the  tube'  "reseflibling  in  an  exaggerated  form  the 
appearances  exhibited'  during  the"  mixture  of  liquids  of  different 
densities,  or  when  columns  of  heated'  air  ascend  through  colder 
strata." 

Tke  isothermal  line  for'  sr'l  C.  or  88°  F.  passes  above  this 
critical  point.  During  the  whole  compression  the  substance  is 
never  in  two  distinct  conditions  in  diiSerent  parts'  of  the  tube. 
When  the  pressure  is  less  than  73  atmospheres  the  isothermal 
line;-  though  greatly  flatter  than  that  of  a  perfect  gas,  resembles 
it  in-  general  features.  From  73  to  75  atmtisphe^res  the'  vblume 
diminishes  very  rapidly,  but  by  no  means  suddenly,  and  above 
this  pressure  the  volume  diminishes  more  gradually  than  in  the 
case  of  a  perfect  gas,  but  still  more  rapidly  than  in  most  liquids. 

In  the  isothermals  for  32°-5  C.  or  90°-5  F.  and  for  SB'-S  C.  or 
9  5° '9  F.  we  can  still  observe  a  slight  increase  of  compressibility 
liear  the  same  part  of  the  diagram,  but  in  the  isothermal  line  for 
48°"1  C.  or  118°'6  F.  the  curve  is  concave  Upw'ards  throughout  its 
■rt'hole  course,  and  differs  from  the  corresponding  isothermal  line 
for  a  pferfect  gas  only  by  being  somewhat  flatter,  shewing  thalt  for 
all  ordinary'  pressdVes  the-  volilme  is  somewhat  less  than  that 
assigned-  by  Boyle's  law. 

StUlat  the  temperatui'e  of  ri8°'6  F.  carbonic  acid  has  all  the 
firoperties  of  a  gas,  and  the  effects  of  heat  and  pressure  on  it  differ 
from  their  effects  on  a  perfect  gas  oiify  by  quantities  reqiiiring 
careful  experiments  to  detect  them. 

We  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  any^  phenomen'on  similar  to 
condensation  would  occur,  however  great"  a  pressure  were  applied 
to  carbonic  acid  at  this  temperature. 


CAllUllIDGK  :     miKlED    BY   C.    J.    CLAY,    M.A.,    AT   IHE    UNIVEESITY   PKEBS. 


Bedford  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London, 
March  1879. 


Macmillan  ^  Co.'s  Catalogue  of  Works 
in  Mathematics  and  Physical  Science; 
incltiding  Pure  and  Applied  Mathe- 
matics; Physic's,,  Astronomy,  Geqlogt^, 
Chemistry,  Zoology,  Botany;  and  of 
Works  in  Mental  and  Moral  Philosophy 
and  Allied  Subjects. 


MATHEMATICS. 

Airy i— Works  hy  Sir  G.  B.  Airy,  K.C.B.,  Astronomer  Royal  :— 
ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  PARTIAL  DIFFERENTIAL 
EQUATIONS.     Designed  for  the  Use  of  Students  in  the  Univer- 
sities.   With  Diagrams.    New  Edition.    Crown  8vo.     5/,  6d, 
ON  THE  ALGEBRAICAL  AND  NUMERICAL  THEORY  O^ 
ERRORS    OF   OBSERVATIONS   AND   THE   COMBINA- 
TION OF  OBSERVATIONS.     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo. 
6s.  6d. 
■  UNDULATORY  THEORY  OF  OPTICS,    designed  for  the  Use  of 
Students  in  the  University.     New  Edition,     Crown  8vp,.    6s,  6d. 

ON  Sound  and  ^atmospheric  Vibrations.     With 

the  Mathematical  Elements  of  IVtusic.      Designed  for  the  Ijse  of 
Students  'of  the  University.     Second  Edition;  revised  and  enlarged. 
.  Crown  8vo.     gj. 
A  TREATISE  ON  MAGNETISM.     Designed,  for  the!;  Use  of 
Students  in  the  University.     Crown  8vo.     gs.  6d.     '  '       ' 

V^Ball  (R.  S.,  A.M.)— EXPERIMENTAL  MECHANICS.     A 
Course  of  Lectures  delivered  at  the  Royal  College  of  Scie;n,c?,for 
Ireland.    By  Robert  Stawell  Ball,  A.M.,  Professor  of  Applied 
Mathematics  and  Mechanics  in  the.  Royal  College  of  Science  for 
Ireland  (Science  and  Art  Department).     Royal  8vo.  16s. 
"  We  have  not  put  with  any  bi>ok  of  the  sort  in  English.     It  eluci- 
dates instructively  the  methods  of  a  teacher  of  the  very  highest 
rank.  ■  We  most  cordially  tecomviend,  it  to,  (ill  our  readers  J' — 
Mechanics'  Magazine. 
5,000.  3.  79  A 


SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE. 


Bayma.— THE  elements  of  MOLECULAR  MECHA- 
NICS.    By   Joseph    Bayma,    S.J.,    Professor  of   PhUosophy, 

Sto.nyhurst  Cmlege.     Demy  8vo.  cjotiij;     loj.    bd,  \      \\       i'. '.{ 

v'Boole.— Worts    by    G.    BooEe,    D.C.L,    F.R.S.,    Professor   of 

Mathematics  in  the  Queen's  University,  Ireland  !-^  >  •  •-■ 

.    A  TREATISE  ON   DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS.      Third. 
Edition.     Edited  by  I.  Todhuntek.     Crown  8vo.  cloth.  14J. 
"yi  treatise  incomparably  superior  to  anyothef^eletnentArj)  book  on  the 
subject  with  which  we  are  acquainted" — Philosophical  Magazine. 

A  TREATISE  ON  DIFFERJENTIAL  EQtJATldlSfi'  Supple- 
mentary Volume.  Edited  by  I.  TodhunteR.  Crown  8vo.  cloth. 
8j-.  dd. 

THE  CALCULUS  OF  FINITE  DIFFERENCES.  CrOwn  8vo. 
cloth.     \Qs,  6d.     New  Edition  revised. 

■■■,rr  r 

Cheyne.  —  AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  THE 
PLANETARY  THEORY.  With  a  Collection  of  Problems. 
By  C.  H.  H.  Cheyne,  M.A.,  F.R.A.S.  Second.Edition.  Crown 
8vo.  cloth.     6s.  6d.  '  .    :  ; 

"^  Clifford.— THE  ELEMENTS  OF  DYNAMIC.  An  Intrpduction 
to  the  study  of  Motion  and  Rest  in  Solid  and  Fluid  Bodies.  By 
W.  K.  Clifford,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Applied  Mathematics  and 
Mechanics  at  University  College,  London.  Part  I. — Kinematic. 
Crown  8yo.     "Js.  6a.  .    _  ,.      , 

"^Cuxnilling.— AN  INTRODUCTION  TQ  THE  THEORY  QF 
ELEpTRICITY.  With  numerous  Examples.  By  L'inn^us 
CuJiMlNG,  M.A.,  Assistant  Master  at  Rugby  School.  Crown  8vo. 
8j.  6d.  :         ■■ 

Clithbertson.— EUCLIDIAN.  GEOMETRY.  By  F.  Cuth- 
BERTSON,  M.A.,  Head  Mathematical  Master  of  the  City  of  London 
School,     Extra  fcap,  8vo.  ,  4?.  6j/.;  ,    .  ■■  ^ 

'^  Ferrers.— Works  by  the  Rev.  N.M.  Ferrers,  M,  A. ,  F.R.  S.  ,]^ellow 
and  Tutor  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge  ; — 
AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  TRILINEAR  CO-ORDI- 
NATES,   the  Method  of  Reciprocal  Polar^,  aiid  the  Theory  6f 
Projectors.     Third  Edition,  revised.     Crown  8vo.     ^s.  6d. 

SPHERICAL  HARMONICS  AND  SUBJECTS  CONNECTED 
WITH  THEM.     Crown  8vo.     Js.  6d.- 


MATHEMATld^. 


^  Frost. — ^Works  l?y  Percival-  Frost,  M.A.,  late  Fellbw  of  St. 
John's  College,  Mathematical  Lecturer  of  King's  Coll.  eambridge:— 

THE  FIRST  THREE  SECTIONS  OF  NEWTOiS^'S  PRIN- 
ClPIA.  With  Notes  and  Illustrations.  Also  a  Collection  ,of 
Problems,  principally  intended  as  Examples  of  Newton's- Methods. 
Third  Edition.     8vo.  cloth.     I2,s. 

AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  CURVE  TRACING. 
8vo.     12s. 

SOLID  GEOMETRY.  Being  a  New  Editioh,  revised  and  enlarged, 
of  the  Treatise  by  Frost  and  Wolstenholme.  Vol.  I.   8vo.  i6j. 

Godfray. — Works    by.IJUGH    Godfray,    M.A.,    -Mathematical 
Lecturer  at  Pembroke  .College,  Cambridge : — 

A  TREATISE  ON  ASTRONOMY,  for  the  Use  of  CoUegfes  and 
Schools.     8vo.  cloth.     12s.  6cl. 

'^ It  is  a  ■/vorkmg  book,"  says  the  puardian,  ^'taking  Astronomy 
in  its  prober  place  injhe  Mathematical  Sciences.  .  .  .  It  is'a  book 
which  is  not  likely  to  be  got  up  wninielligeutly." 

"  AN     ELEMENTARY      TREATISE     ON     THE     LUNAR 
THEORY,  with  a  Brief  Sketch  of  the  Problem  up  to  the  time.flf 
Newton.     Sepphd  Edition,  revised.     Crovm  8vo.  cloth.    Jj.  D(^. 
"As  an  elementary  treatise  and  introduction  to  the  subject,  we  think 
it  may  justly  claim  to  supersede  all  former  ones." — London,  Edin- 
burgh, and  Dublin  Phil.  Magazine.    ,  , 

v'Green  (George).— mathematica*  papers  of  the 

LATE    GEORGE    GREEN,    Fellow,   of    Gonville   and  Caius 

,    College,  Cambridge.     Edited  by  N.  M".  Ferrers,  M.A.,  Fellow 

q.nd  Tutor  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College.     8vo.     I5r. 

"It  has  been  for  some  time  recognized,  that  Green's  writings  are 

amongst  the  most  valuable ,pfafhematical  productions  we  possess."— 

Athenseum. 

Hemrning.— AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  THE 
DIFFERENTIAL  AND  INTEGRAL  CALCULUS.  For  the 
Use  of  Colleges  and  Schools.  By  G.  W.  Hemming,  M.A,, 
Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.!  Second  Editieny  with 
Corrections  and  Additions.     8vo.  cloth.     9J. 

Jackson.— GEOMETRICAL  CONIC  SECTIONS.  An  Ele- 
mentary Treatise  in  which  the  Cpnic  Sections  are  defjiied  as  the 
Plane  Sections  of  a  Cone,  and  treated  by  the  Method  of  Projections. 
By  J.'  StuarT  Jackson,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Gonville  and  Cams 
College.     Crown  8vo.     \s.  6d. 

A  2 


SCIENTIFIC.  CA  TALQGUE. 


^Kelland  and  Tait. — an  introduction  TQQUATERj 

NipNS.  ,,With  numerous  Examples.  By  p.  Kbslland,  M.A., 
F.ii.S.,  and  P.  G.  Tait,  M.  A.,  Professors  in  the  department  of 
Mathematics  iii  the  University  df  Edinburgh.    Crown'  8vo.    'js.  'dd. 

Kempe.— -HOW  TO  draw  A- STRAIGHT  LINE.,  A  Lecture 
on  Linkages.  By  A.  B.  Kempe,  B.  A.  Illustrated.,  Grpwn  8vo.  ij.e^/. ' 

^  Merriman.— ELEMENTS  OF  THE  METHOD  OF  LEAST 
SQUARES.    By  Mansfield  Merriman,  Professor  of  Civil  and 

Mechanical  Enginpeiiug,  Lehigh  Universityj  Bethleh^nj,  Pqnn., 
U.S.A.  ■  Crown,  8vo.  '  7j.'6ii  ";,,,  '     ,/;'   ,- '   ;      .,-,',,' 

Morgan.— A  COLLECTION  OF  PROBLEMS  AND  EXAM- 
PLES IN  MATHEMATICS.  With  Answers.  By  H:  "a; 
Morgan,  M.A.,  Sadlerian  and  Mathematical  Lecturer  of  Jesus 
College,  Cambridge.     Croym  8vo.  cloth.     6s.  6d. 

v^Newton's  Principia.— 4to.  cVoth.    31s.  6^. 

'  If  is  a  sufficient  guarantee  of  the  reliability  of- this  complete  edition  of 
yyra/iftfw'j  Prilicipia  that  it  has  been  printed  for  wtid  under  the  care 
of  Professor  Sir  William  Thomson  and  Professor  Slackbum,  of 
Glasgoiv  University.        .       ,  '<' 

•^Parkinson. — a  treatise  ON  optics.  By  S.  Parkin- 
son,. D.D.,  F.R.S.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  St.  John's  College, 
Cambridge.  Third  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  Crowii  8vo. 
cloth.     loj.  6d.         ' 

Phear.— ELEMENTARY  HYDROSTATICS.     With  Numerous 

,  I  |Exan?ples.  By  J.  B,jPhear,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  late  Assistant  Tutor 

ofiClare  Coll.  Cambridge.  Fourth  Edition.  Cr.  8vo.  cloth. ,  5^.  to. 

Pirrie.— LESSONS  ON  rigid  dVnAMICS.  By  the  Rev.  G. 
PiRRiE,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Queen's  College,  Cambridge. 
Crown  8vo.    bs. 

Puckle.— AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  CONIC  SEC- 
TIONS AND  ALGEBRAIC  GEOMETRY.  With  numerous 
.Exij.inples  and  Hints  for  their  Solution. .    By  G.  Hale  Puckle, 

M.A.     Fouth  Edition,  enlarged.     Crown  8vo.     "js.  6d. 

V  Rayleigh. — THE  THEORY  OF  SOUND.  By  Lord  Rayljeigh, 
F.R.S.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  8vo. 
Vol.  1.  izs.  dd. ;  Vol.  II.  izs.  6d.  [Vol.  III.  in  preparation. 

Reuleaux.-^THE  KINEMATigS  OF  MACHINERY.  Out- 
lines of  a  Theory  of  Machines,  By  Professor  F.  Reuleaux. 
Translated'  aiid  edited  by  A.  B.  W.  KeNnedy,  C.fi.,  Professor  of 
Civil  and  Mechanical  Engineering,  University  College,  London. 
With  450  Illustrations.     Royal  8yo.-  20J.' 


MA  THEM  A  TICS. 


Routh.; — Works  by  Edward  John  Routh,  M.A.,  F,R.S.,  late 

Fellow  and  Assistant  Tutor  of  St.  Peter's  College,   Cambridge; 

Examiner  in  the  University  of  London  : — 

,  AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  THE  DYNAMICS  OF 

•  THE    SYSTEM    OF    RIGID    BODIES.        With    numerous 

Examples.     Third  Edition,  enlarged.    8vo.     21s. 

Stability  of  a  given  state  of  motion,  parti- 
cularly STEADY  MOTION.  The  Adams'  Prize  Essay  for 
1877.     Svo.     8j:  6d. 

'  Tait  and  Steele — DYNAMICS  OF  A  PAI^TICLE.    With 
•   numerous  Examples.  By  Professor  Tait  and  Mr.  Steele.  Fourth 
Edition,  revised,     Crown  8vo.     lis. 

Thomson. — papers  on  electrostatics  and  mag- 
netism. By  Professor  Sir  William  Thomson,  F.R.S. 
Svo.     i&r. 

Todhunter Works    by    I.   Todhuuter,    M,A.,    F.R.S.,    of 

St.  John's  College,  Cambridge  : — 
,    "Mr.  Todhunter  is  chiefly  known  to  students  of  mathematics  as  the 
author  of  a  series  of  admirable  mathematical  text-books,  which 
possess  the  rare  qualities  of  being  clear  in  style  and  absolutely  free 
\  •  from,  mistakes,  tyfografhical  or  other'}' — S^-today  Review.    nV 

A  TREATISE    ON  SPHERICAL  TRIGONOMETRY.     New 

Editiaji,  enlarged.     Crown  Svo.  cloth,     e^.  6d. 
PLANE  CO-ORDINATE'GEOMETRY,  as  applied  to  the  Straight 

Line  and  the  Conic  Sections/    With  numerous  Examples.     New 

Edition.     Crown  Svo.     ^s.  6d. 
vA.   TREATISE    ON    THE    DIFFERENTIAL    CALCULUS. 

With  numerous  Examples.    New  Edition.  Crown  Svo.  loj.  6d. 
vh  TREATISE  ON  THE  INTEGRAL  CALCULUS  AND  ITS 

APPLICATIONS.     With  numerous  Examples.     New  Edition, 

revbed  and  enlarged.     Crown  Svo.  cloth.     loj.  6d. 
EXAMPLES   OF  ANALYTICAL  GEOMETRY  OF  THREE 

DIMENSIONS.     New  Edition,  revised.     Crown  Svo.  cloth.     4J. 
vA  TREATISE  ON  ANALYTICAL  STATICS.     With  numerous 

Examples.    '  New  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.       Crown  Svo. 

cloth.     lOJ.  6d. 
VA  HISTORY    OF    THE    MATHEMATICAL   THEORY  OF 

PROBABILITY,  from  the  Time  of  Pascal  to  that  of  Laplace. 

Svo.     iSj. 
vliESEARCHES    IN   THE    CALCULUS   OF   VARIATIONS, 

Principally  on  the  Theory  of  Discontinuous  Solutions ;  An  Essay 

to  which  the  Adams'   Prize  was  awarded  in  the  University  of 

Cambridge  in  1871.     Svo.     6s. 


SCIENTIFIC^  CA  TALOGUE. 


Todhunter — cpntmued.  ,.,..r 

>i/AHrSTORY;  OF  THE  MATHEMATICAL  THEORIES'"  OP 
:  '      ATTRACTION,  and  the  Figure  of  the  Earth,  from  the  time  of 
Newton  to  that  of  Laplace.     Two  vols.  8vo.     '24r. 
"  Probably  no  man  in  England  ii  so  qualified  to  do  justice  to  the 
■theme  as  Mr.'  Tblthkliiter. '    '  To  all  mathematicians  these  volumes 
■will  be  deeply  interesting,  and  to  all  succeeding  investigators ^  of  the 
highest  practical  tttUity. "— Athensurii.  '  '  '  ' 

"^AN  ELEMENTARY'TKEATISE  ON  LAPLACE'S,  LAME'S, 
AND  BESSEL'S  FUNCTIONS.     Crown  8vo.     lor. '6^. 

Wilson  (W.  P.)— A  TREATISE  ON  DYNAMICS. '  By 
W.  V.  Wilson,  M.  A.,  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge, 
and  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  Queen's  Collegfe,  Belfast.  8vo. 
gj.  6d.  J';' 

Wolstenhblme. — MATHEMATICAL  PROBLEMS,  oii  Sub- 
jects included  in  the  First  and  Second  Divisions  Of  the  Schedule 
of  Subjects  for  the  Cambridge  Mathematical  Tripos  Examination. 
Devised  and  arranged  by  Joseph  Wolstenholme,  late  Fellow 
of  Christ's  College,  sometime' Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  and 
■  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  the  Royal  Indian  Engineering  College. 
New  Edition,  greatly  enlarged.     Svo.     iSj. 

Young SIMPLE    PRACTICAL    METHODS    OF    CALCU- 

'LATING  STRAINS  ON  GIRDERS,  ARCHES,  AND 
TRUSSES.  With  a  Supplementary  Essay  on  Economy  in  suspen- 
sion jBridges.  By  E.  W.  Young,  Associate  of  King's  College, 
London,  and  Member  pi  the  Institution  of  Civil  Engineers.  Svo. 
7^.  dd. 


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE. 


PHYSICAL    SCIENCE. 

Airy  (G.  B.)— popular  astronomy.  With  illustrations. 
By  Sir  G.  B.  AlRY,  K.C.B.,  Astronomer  Royal.  New  Ifdition. 
iSipo.  cloth.     4P.  6a?.  '  - 

Bastian. — Works,  by  H.   Charlton  Bastian,  M.D.,  F,R.S., 

Professor  of  Pathological  Anatomy  in  University  College,  London, 

&c. : — 

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE :  Being  some  Account  of  the  Nature,. 

Modes  of  Origin,  and  Traiisfornnations  of  Lower  Organisms,     In 

Two  Volufties.  With  upwards  of  lOO  Illustrations.   Crown  8vo.  28.r. 

"/if  is  a  book  that  cannot  be  ignored,  and  must  inevitably  lead  lo 

renewed  discussions  and  repeated  observations,  and  through  these  to 

the  establishment  of  truth." — A.  R.  Wallace  in  Nature, 

EVOLUTION  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  LIFE.     Crown  8vo. 

"Abounds  in  information  oj  interest  to  the  student  of  biological 
science."- -Daily  Nev/s.    .  ,■  '  ■ 

Blake.— ASTRONOMICAL  MYTHS.  Based  on  Flammarion's 
"The  Heavens."  By  John  F.  Blake.  With  numerous  Illustra- 
tions.    Crown  8vo.     ^. 

Blanford  (H.  F.)— RUDIMENTS  OF  PHYSICAL  QEO- 
GRAPHY  FOR  THE  USE  OF  INDIAN  SCHOOLS.  By 
H.  F.  Blanford,  F.G.S.  With  numerous  Illustrations  and 
Glossary  of  Technical  Terms  employed.  New  Edition.  Globe 
8vo.     2s.  6d. 

Blanford  ("W.  T.)— GEOLOGY  and  ZOOLOGY  OF 
ABYSSINIA.     By  W.  T.  Blanford.    8vo.    21s. 

Bosanquet— AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  MUSICAL 
INTERVALS  AND  TEMPERAMENT,     With  an  .Account  of 
an  Enharmonic  Harmonium  exhibited  in  the  Loan  Collection  of 
Scientific  Instruments,  South  Kensington,  1876;  also  of  an  Enhar- 
monic Organ  exhibited  to  the  Musical  Association  of  London, 
May,  1875.     By  R.  H.  Bosanquet,  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College, 
Oxford.     8vo.     6s. 
Codl :  ITS  HISTORY  AND  ITS  USES.    By  Professors  GREfek, 
MiALL, -Thorpe,  Ruckek,  and  Marshall,  of  the   Yorkshire 
College,  Leeds.     With  Illustrations.     8yo.     12s.  6d.       .  , 
' '  It  furnishes  a  very  com^ehMsive  treatise  on  the  whole  subject  of  Coal 
'from  the  gealogicttlpchemical,-  mechanical,  andindMstrig4  points  'of 
viewt  .co^cltiMn-g  it/itfia  chapter  on  the  important  topic  known  as 
the  '  Coal  Question:  "-Daily  News. 


SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE. 


Cooke  (Josiah  P.,  Jun.)— FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF 
CHEMICAL  PHILOSOPPIY.  By  Josiah  P.  Cooke,  Jun., 
Ervine  Professor  of  Chemistry  and  Mineralogy  in  Harvard  College. 
Third  Edition,  revised  and  corrected.     Crown  8vo.     I2J-.      "-'ly 

Cooke     (M.     C.)— HANDBOOK    OF     BRITISH    FUNGI, 
with  full  descriptions  of  all  the  Species,  and  Illustrations  of  the 
Genera.     By  M.  C.  Cooke,  M.A.     Two  vols,  crown  8 vo.    2'+?.' 
"  Will  maintain  its  fldce  as  the  standard  English  hook,   on  the 
. ,  subject  of  which  it  treats,  for  many  years  to  come. " — Stand,ar4.. 

Dawkins,— CAVE-HUNTING  :  Researches  on  the  Evijience  of 
Caves  respecting  the  Early  Inhabitants  of  Europe.  By  W.  Boyd 
Dawkins,  F.R.S.,  &c..  Professor  of  Geology  at  Owens  College, 
Manchester.  With  Coloured  Plate  and  WCodcuts.  8vo.<  zu. 
"  The'mass  of  infdrmatioH  he  has  brought  together,  with  the  judicious 
use  he  has  made  of  his  materials,  •will  be  found  to' invest  his  book 
with  much  of  new  and  singular  value." — Saturday  Review. 

Dawson  (J.   W.)— ACADIAN    GEOLOGY.     The    Geologic 

Structure,    Organic   Remains,  and  Mineral   Resources  of;  Nova 
Scotia,  New  Branswick,  and  Prince  Edward  Island.     By  John 
William  Dawson,  M:A.',  LL^.D.,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.,  Principal  and 
Vice-Chancellor  of  M'Gill  College  and  University,  Montreal,  &c. 
;   ^ith  a  Geological  Map  and  numerous  Illustrations,  Third  Edition, 
with  Supplement.  ;8vo.     2 1 j.  i  Supplement,  separately,- za'.  6i^. 
"  The  book  tuill  doubtless  fnd  a  place,  in.  the  library,   not  'dnly  of 
the  scientific  geologist,  but  fUsp-  of  all  who  are  desirous  of  the  in- 
dustrial progress  and  commercial  prosperity  of  the  Acadian  i>ro- 
vinces." — Mining  Journal.  ,  ,       .,,  ,  .. 

Fleischer.— A  SYSTEM  OF  .VOLUMETRIC  ANALYSIS. 
By  Dr.  E.  Fleischer.  Translated  fro;m  the  Second  German 
Edition  by  M.'  M.  Pattison  Muir,  with;  Notes  and  Additions. 
Illustrated;     Crpwii  8vo.     "js.  6d.  .       ■ 

Forbes.--THE  transit  of  VENUS.  By  George  Forbes, 
B.A,,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the  Andersonian  Univer- 
sity of  Glasgow.  With  numerous  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.  y.  6d. 

Foster  and  Balfour. — elements  of  embryology 
By  Michael  Foster,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  andF.  M,  Balfour,  M.A., 
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  With  numerous  Illustra- 
tions.    Parfl.     Crown  8vo.     Js.  6d. 

Gdlton Works  by  Francis  Galton,  F.R.S.  :— 

METEOROGRAPHICA,  or  Methods  of'  Mapping  the  Weather. 
Illustrated  by  upwards  of  6oo  Printed  Lithbgrapnic  Diagrams.  4to.  gs. 


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE. 


Gallon — continued.  ■      ,  -     »» 

HEREDITARY   (iENTOS ;  Ajx  Inquiry  intq  its  Laws  and  Con- 
sequences.    Demy  8vo.     i2j.  ,    ; 
The  Times  calls  it  "  a  most  able  and  most  interesting  book." 

ENGLISH    MEN   OF   SCIENCE;  THEIR   NATURE   AND 
NURTURE. ,,  8vo.    is.  ed 
"  Tlie  book  iseirtainly  one  of  very  great  interest." — Naturei' 

Geikie. — Works  by  ARCHIBALD  Geikie,  LL.D.,  F.R.S., 
MurcHson  Professor  of  Geplogy  and  Mineralogy  at  Edinburgh  :— 
ELEMENTARY  LESSONS  IN  PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 
With  numerous  lUustrations.  'Fcap.  8vo.  4f.  6d.  Questions,  is.  6d. 
FIELD  GEOLOGY.  ■  With  illlustrations.  Crown  8vo.  [Shortly. 
PRIMER  OF  GEOLOGY.  Illustrated.  1811I0.  is. 
PRIMER  OF  PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY.   Illustrated.  iSmo.  is. 

Gordon. — AN  ELEMENTARY  BOOK  ON  HEAT.  By  J.  E. 
H.  Gordon,  B.A.,  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge. 
Crown  8vo.     zj.'  '  , 

'"Guillemin.— THE  FORCES,  OF  NATURE:  A  Popular  Intro- 

'         duction    to    the   Study  "of   Physical  Phenomena.      By  AM^ofe 

GuiLLEMiN.      Translated  from  the  French  by  Mrs.  Norman 

■  LofeKYfiR  ;  and  Edited,  with  Additions  and  Notes,  by  J.  Norman 
Lockyer,  F.R.S.   Illustrated  by  Coloured'  Plates,  and  455  Wood- 
cuts.   Third  ajid, cheaper  Edition.     Royal  8vo.     2i,s. 
"translator  and  Editor  have  done  justice  .to  their  trust.     The 

text  has  all  iJie  force  and  flow '  of  original  writing,  combining 
faithfulness  to  the  authors  meaning  with  purity  and  independence 
in  regard  to  idiom ;  while  the  historical  precision  and  .accuracy 
pervading  the' work  throughout,  speak  of  the  watchful  editorial 
supervisionwhich  has  been  given  to  every  scientific  ddail,  'N(^Hng 
can  well  exceed  the  cifnrness,'av4  delicacy  of  the  illustrative,  wood- 
cuts. Altogether,  the  work  may  be  said  to'hflvef  no  parallel,  either 
'  in  point  of  fulness  or  attraction,  as, a  popular,  manual  of  physical 
science." — Saturday  Review.  .-,■> 

THE  APPLICATIONS  OF  PHYSICAL  FORCES.  .  By  A. 
Guillemin.  Translated  from  the  French  by  Mrs.  Lockyer,  and 
Edited  with  Notes  and  Additiunsi  by,  Ji  N.  Lockyer,'  F.R.S. 
With    Coloured    Plates    and    numerous    Illustrafions.      Chea,i)pr 

■  ■'    Edition.''  Imperial  8vo.  clotli,  extra  gilt     36^.  ;    '"'  ' 

Alsoin'Eigbte^n  Monthly  Parts,  price  is.  each.  Part  I.  in  Novfember, 
1878.  '        ■'   .  ^    , 

'■'^A  book  ■uihichr  vie  can  heartily  recommend,  both  on  account  of  the 
width  and .  soundness  of  its  contents,  and  also- because  of  the  excel- 
lence of  its.  print.  Us  illustrations,,, amd  external \appecirance." — 
Westminster'.Review.    <   '•  i ' 


SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE. 


Hanbury. — SCIENCE  PAPERS:  chiefly  .Pharmacological  ajid 
Botanical.  .  By  DANIEL  Hanbury,,, F^.R.S.  Edited,  with 
Memoir^  by  J.  Ince,  F.L.S.,  and  Portiait  engraved  by  C.  H. 
Jeens.     8vo.     I4f. 

Henslow.— THE  THEORY  OF  EVOLUTION  OF  LIVltSTG 
THINGS,    and  Application  of.  the- Principles  of  Evolution   to 
Reli^on  considered  as  Illustrative  of  the  Wisdom  and  Benefi- 
cence of  the  Almighty.     By  the    Rev.    George  Henslow, 
M.A,jF.L.S.     CrownSvo,  ,  .6j.  ;  ■ 

Hooker.— Works  by  Sir  J.  D.  HOOKER,  K.C.S.I.,  C.B., 
F.R.S.,  M.D.,    D.C.L. :—  . 

THE   STUDENT'S   FLORA  QF  THE  BRITISH  ISLANDS. 

Second  Edition,  revised  and  improved.     Globe  8vo.     los.  bd. 

The  object  of  this  work  is  to.  supply  students  and  field-botanists  with  a 
fuller  account  of  the  Plants  of  the  British  Islands  than  the  manuals 
hithertq  in.  use  aim  at  giving.  "  Certainly  the  fullest  arid  vipst 
acetfrdte  manual  of  the  kind  that  has  yet  appeared.  Dr.  Hooker 
has  shown  his  characteristic  indiistry  and  ability  in  t/jie  care  and 
skill  which  he  has  thrown  into  the  characters  of  the  ptanis.  ThiSi 
are  top,  great  extent,  origiffal,  and  are  really  admirable ,fhr  their 
(oit^i'ftanah  of  clearness,  brevity,  and  completeness.  "-^Pall  liiall 
Gazette.  'V  ',      . 

PRiMER  (i)F  BOTANY.     With  Illustrations.,    i8mq.     is.    New 
Edition,  revised  and  corrected. 

Hooker  and  Ball.— jpuRNAL  OF  A  TOUR  IN  MARdCCO 
AND  THE  GREAT  ATLAS.  By  Sir  J.  D.  HookER,  K.C.S.L, 
C.B.,  F.RiS.,  &c.,  and  John  Ball,  F.R.S.  With. Appendices, 
including  a  Sketch  of  the  Geology  of  Marocco.  By  G;  MAW, 
F.Li.S.,  F.G.S.     With  Map  and  Illustrations. "  8vo.     2W. 

Huxley  and  Martin.— a  COURSE  OF  PRACTICAL  IN- 
STRUCTION IN  ELEMENTARY  BIDLOGY;  By  T.  H. 
HtrXLEY,  LL.D.,  Sec.  R.S.,  assisted  by  H.  N.  MarTiN,  B.A., 
M.B.,  D.Sc.,  Fellow  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.  Crown  8vo. 
6j. 

"  This  is  the  most  thoroughly  valuable  hook  to  teachers  OMd' students 
of  biology  which  has  ever  appeared  in  the  English  tongue" — 
London  Quarterly. Review.  '  .; 

Huxley  (Professor).— lay  SERMONS,  ADDRESSES, 
AND  REVIEWS,,.  By  T.  H,  Huxley,  LL.D,,  F.R.S.  New 
and  Cheaper  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     Is.  6d. 

FoU7  teen  Discourses  on  the  following  suijeetst^-\  i )  On  the  Advisable- 
ness  of  Improving  Natural  ICmrwledge;: — (2)  EmanHpation — 
Slack  and  White  : — (3)  A  Liberal  Education,  and  where  to  find 
it; — (4)  Scientific  Education: — (5)  On -ithe  Educational'  Value  of 


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE. 


Huxley  (Prp,fessor)-Tr-coi 

the  Natural  History  Sciences: — (6)  On  the  Study  of  Zoology: — 
(7)  On  the  Physical  Basis  of  Li/e:^S)  The  Scientific  Aspects  of 
Positivism: — (9)  On  a  Piece  of  Chalk: — (10)  Geological  Contem- 
poraneity and.  Persistent  Types,  of  Life: — (11)  Geological  ■Reform: — 
(i2)  The  Ori^n  of  Species.: — (13)  Criticisms  on  the  '"  Origin  of 
Species:" — {14)  On  Descartes'  '' Liiscourse  touching  tjie  Method  of 
.  using  Onis  Season  rightly  and i>f  seeking  Scientific  Truth."  '  : 
ESSAYS     SELECTED     FROM      "LAY    SERMONS,    AD- 
DRESSES, AND  REVIEWS."  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  is. 
CRITIQUES  AND  ADDRESSES.     8vo.  '  ios,.6d.  ' 

Contents: — i.  AdmiHisiraiive  Nihilism.  2.  The  School  Boards : 
what  they  can  do,  and  what  they  may  do.  3.  On  Medical  Edu- 
cation. 4.  Yeast.  5.  On- the  Formation  of  Coal.  6.  On  Coral 
and  Coral  Reefs.  7.  On  the  Methods  and  Results  of  Ethnology. 
8.  On  some  Fixed  Points  in  British  Ethnology.  9.  Pala;ontology 
and  the  Doctrine  of  Evolution.  10.  Biogenesis  and  Abiogenesis. 
,  II.  Mr.  Darwin's  Critics.  12.  The  Genealo0t  of  Animals. 
13.  Bishop  Berkeley  on  the  Metaphysics  of  Sensahoti. 
LESSONS  IN  ELEMENTARY  PHYSIOLOGY.  With  numerous 

Illustrations.     New  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     4s.  6d.  ■     ■   ■  , 

"Pure  gold- throughout:"— GmsxAisxi..  "  Unquestionably  the  (ledrest 
and  most  ipmplete  elementary  treatise  on  this  subject  that  we  possess  in 
any  language." — Westminster  Review. 

AMERICAN   ADDRESSES:    with  a  Lecture  on  the  Study  o^ 
.  Biology.     8vo.    6/.  (>d, 

PHYSIOGRAPHY:  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  pf  Nature.  With 
•■     Coloured  Plates  and  numeroils  Woodcuts.     New  Edition.     Crown 
8vo.     7j.  (>d. 

Jellet    (John    H.,     B.D.)  — a    TREATISE     ON    THE 
■    THEORY    OF    FRICTION.     By   John    H.   Jellet,  B.D., 
Senior  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin  ;  President  of  the  Royal 
Irish  Academy.     8vo.  •   8f.  (sd. 

Jones.— THE  OWENS  COLLEGE  JUNIOR  COURSE  OF 
PRACTICAL  CHEMISTRY.  By  Francis  Jones,  Chemical 
Master  in  the  Grammar  School,-  Manchester.  With  Preface  by 
Professor  Roscoe.  New  Edition.  i8ra.o.  with  Illustr^ttipns.;  2s.  dd. 

Kingsley.— GLAUCUS :  OR,  the  wonders  OF  THE 
'.SHORE.  By  Charles  Kingsley,=  Canon '■  o5  "Westminster. 
'   New  Edition,  with  numerous  Colouired  Plates.'.  Crown  Svo*     6s. 

Lahgdon.— THE  APPLiGATiON  of'  eLectrjgity  *ro 

RAILWAY  WORKING,,  '  ByW.  E.  Langdon,  lyiember  of  the 
Society  of  "Telegraph  Engineers.  With  numerous  Ill,us|trations. 
Extira  fcap.  8vo.     4/.  6(/.         '  .    .     , 


.12  .      SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE. 

Lockyer    (J.   N.) — Worksby  J.  Norman  Lockyer,  F.R.S.— 
ELEMENTARY   LESSONS    IN   ASTRONOMY.     With  nu- 
merous Illustrations.     New  Edition.     i8m6;     5j.  6d.  '    , 
''The  book  is  full,  clear,  sound,  and  worthy  of  attention,  not  only  as 
a  popular  exposition,  but  as  a  scientific  'Index.'  " — Athenaeum. 
"  The  most  fascinating  of  elementary  books  on  the  .Sciences." — 
'.  -     Nonconformist.                                          '   ''■ 
•^THE  SPECTROSCOiPE  AND  ITS  APPLICATIONS.    By  J. 
,1  ■  '.  Norman  Lockyer,  F.R.S.    With  Coloured'  'Plate  and  numerous 
,  Illustrations.     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     2^-  ^^• 
■^CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  SOLAR  PHYSICS. .  By  J.   Norman 
Lockyer,  F.  R.  S.    I,  A  Popular  Account  of  Inquiries  into  the 
Physical  Constitutiqn  ,of  the  Sun,  with  especial  reference  to  Recent 
^jSpe.ctroscopic  Researches.      II.    Communicatioiis  to  the  Royal 
Society  of  London  and  the  French  Academy  of  Sciences,  with 
Notes.     Illustrated  by  7  Colc^ur§d  Lithographic  Plates  ^and  1 75 
Woodcuts.     Royal  8yo.  cloth,  extra  gilt,  price  SW.  dd. 
"  The  book  may  be  taken  as  an  authentic  exposition  of  the  present 
state  of  science  in  connection  with  the.  importcmt  subject  of  spectro- 
scope analysis.  ...  Even,  the  unscientific  public  may  derive  much 
information  from  it." — Daily  News. 
PRIMER  OF  ASTRONOMY.     With  Illustrations..    iSmo.  -   u. 

Lockyer  and  Seabroke.^STAR-GAZlNG :  PAST  AND 

PRESENT.     An  Introduction  to  Instrumental  Astronomy.     By 

J.  N-  Lockyer,  F.R.S.     ; Expanded- from  Shorthand' Notes  of  a 

Course  of  Royal  Institution  Lectures  with,  the  assistance  of  iG.  M. 

,  Seabroke,  F.R.A.S.  Withnumerous.IUustiations.  RoyalSyoj  2ij. 

"    '"  A  '  book,  of  great  inieresi  and  utility  to  the  astronomical  student." 

'  '  — Athenssum.       •      ■  '      ■ 

Lubbock.-^Works  by  Sir  John  Lubbock,  M.P.jF.R.is.,D.QX.: 
THE;  ORIGIN    AND    METAMORPHOSES    OiF    INSECTS. 
:With  Numerous  Illustrations.  .  Second  Edition:  Crown  8vo.  3J.  bd. 
"As  a  summary  of  th'e  phenomena  Of  insect  ihetamorphoses  Ms  little 
book  is  of  great  value,  and  will  be  read  with  interest  and  profit 
by  all  students  of  natural  history.    .  The,  i/uhole  chapter  on  the 
'  'origin  of  insects  is  most  interesting  and  Valuable'.     The  ijliisira- 
tions  are  numerous  and  good." — Westminster  Review. 
ON  BRITISH  WILD  FLOWERS  CONSIDERED  IN  RELA- 
TION TO  INSECTS.     With  Numerous  IIlustrati6ns.      Second 
,E^j;ion.    Crown  8yo.     i^.dd.,  i  ... 

Macmillan  (Rev.   Hugh). — For  other  Works  by  the  same 

Author,  see  Theological  Catalogue.  .'  ■      .   .    . 

SOUDAYS  ON  HIGH  LANDS ;  or,  J^amblps.  and^Ineid^ts  in 
"  ;  .  sedrcH 'of  Alpine  Plants.  '  Globe  8vo,  cloth,    (is.  '  7  •:'''  ■-■"■' 
'  '"■One   of  the  most  charmirig'  books  ^  of  its  kind'  ever  written." — 
Litetary  Churchman.       "'Mrl' Maciriiilan's  glo^oing pictures  of. 
Scandinavian  scenery." — Saturday  Review. 


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE.  13 

Macmillan  (Rev.  Hugh)— B(,«;j««^ar,  ;.' 

FIRST  FORMS  ©F  VEGETATION.     Second  Edition,  _  corrected 

and  enlarged,  with  Coloured  Frontispiece  and  numerous  lUiistra- 

tions.     Globe  8v(5.     6j.  .    .  > 

The  first  edition  of  this  book  was  published,  under  the  name  of 

"Footnotes  from  the  Page  of  Nature;  or.  First  Forms  afWegeta- 

tion.     Probably  the  best  popular  guide  to  the  .studyi  of  mosses, 

,    .^jlichetts,  and  fungi  ever  iDritten.     fts  practical  value  as  a  help  to 

ihe  student  and  collector  cannot  be  exaggo-ated." —iHwas^eisXH^ 

Examiner. 

Mansfield  (C.   B.) — Works  by  the  late  C.iB.  Mansfield  :— 

A  THEORY  OF  SALTS.  A  Treatise  on  the  Constitution  of 
Bipolar  (two-membered)  Chemical  Compounds.     Crown  8vo.    14J. 

AERIAL  NAVIGATION.  the  Problem,  with  Hints 'for  its 
Solution.  ,  Edited  by  R.  B,.  Mansfield.  With  a  Preface  by  J. 
M.  Ludlow.     With  Illustrations.    Crown  8vo.     loi.  (id. 

Mayer. — SOUND  ;  a  Series  of  Simple,  Entertaining,  and  In- 
expensive Experiment^  in  the  Phenomena  of  Sound,  for  the  Use  of 
Students  of  every  age.  By  A.  M.  Mayer,  Professor  of  Physics 
in  the  Stevens  Institute  of  Technology,  &c.  With  numerous  Illus- 
trations.    Crown  8vo.     35^.  bd. 

'Mayer  and  Barnard. — light,  a  Series  of  Simple,  Enter- 
taining, and  Useful  Experiments  in  the  phenomena  of  Light,  for 
the  use  of  Students  of  ev.ery  age.  By  A.  M.  Mayer  and  C. 
Barnard.     With  Illustrations.     Crown  8yo.     2J.  (>d. 

Miall.— STUDIES  IN  COMPARATIVE,  AN  ATOMY.  No.  i, 
The  Skull  of  the  Crocodile.  A  M^^Vial  for  Students.  By  L.  C. 
MiALL,  Professor  of  Biology  in  Yorkshiire  College.  8vo.  2J.  M. 
No.  2,  The  Anatomy  of  the  Indian  Elephant.  By  L.  C.  MlALt 
and  F.  Greenwood.     With  Plates.     5^. 

Miller.— THE  romance  of  ASTRONOMY.  By  R.  I^lley 
Miller,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Assistant  Tutor  of  St.  Peters  Col- 
lege,"Cambridge.  Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  Crown 
8vo.     4-r.  6(1?. 

Mivart  ( St.  George).^Works  by  St.  George  Mivart,  F,R.S. 

&c..  Lecturer  in  Comparative  Anatomy  at  St.  Mary's  Hospital:  — 

ON    THE   GENESIS    OF    SPECIES.,     Crown  i8vp^,     Second 

Edition    to  which;  notes  have  been  added  in  reference  and, reply  to 

Darwin's  "Descent  of  Man."     With  numerous  Illustrations,     pp. 

XV'  2Q6        Q-^' 

<•>«««  -work  in  the  English  language  lias  this  great-controversy 

been  treated  at  once  with  the  same  broad  and  vigorous  p-asp  of 

■       facts,  ntid  the  same  liberal  and  candid  ^CTi^<?n"— Saturday  Review. 


1,4  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE. 


Mivart  (St.  Gfiovge.)—cotfimued. 

•  THE  x:OMMON  FROG.     With  Numerous  Illustrations.     Crown 
8vo.  3f.  6(/.     (Nature  Series.)  -  . 

"  It  is  an  able  monogram  of  the  Frog,  and  something  more.  It 
throws  valuable'  crosslights  over  wide  portions  of  anbi^ated  nature. 
Would  that  such  works  were  more  plentiful." — Quarterly  Journal 
of  Sdence. 

Moseley.— NOTES  BY  A  naturalist  ON  THE  '"  Chal- 
lenger," being  an  account  of  various  observations  made  during 
the  voyage  of  H.M.S.  "  Challenger"  round  the  world  in  the  years 
1872—76.  By  H.  N.  Moseley,  M. A..  F.R.S.,  Member  of  fhe 
^cienti^c,  Staff  ,of  the  "Challenger."  ,  With  Map,  Coloi^red 
,  Pjates,  and  Woodcuts.     8vo.   ,  2ij.!-    ,  /,,    ,       .  !        ' 

Mui'r.— PRACTICAL  CHEMISTRY  FOR  MEDICAL  STU- 
DENTS. Specially  arranged  for  the  first  M.  B.  Course,  By 
M.  M.  Pattison  Muir,  F.R.S.E.     Fcap.  '8vo.     \s.  dd.    ' 

Murphy.— HABIT  AND  INTELLIGENCE:  a  Series  of 
Essays  on  the' Laws  of  Life  and  Mind.  By  Joseph  John 
Murphy.  Second  Edition,  thoroughly  revised  and  mostly  re- 
writtfeli.     With  Illustrations.     8vo.   ■  16^. 

Nature.— A  WEEKLY  ILLUSTRATED'  JOURNAL  OF 
SCIENCE.  Pubhshed  every  Thursday.  Price  di.  Monthly 
Parts,  2j.  and  2s.  6d. ;  Half-yearly  Volumes,  i^s.  Cases  for  binding 
Vols.  Is.  6d. 

"  This  able  and  well-edited  Journal,  which- posts  up  the  science  of 
the  day  promptly,  and  prbmises  to  be  of  signal  service  to  students 

and  savants Scarcely  any  expressions  that  we  can  emplj>y 

wo'iild  exaggerate  our  sense  of  the  moral  and  theological  value-  of 
the  work," — British  Quarterly  Rfeview.  '  ' 

"^  Newcomb. — POPULAR  ASTRONOMY.      By  Simon   New- 
comb,  LL.D.,   Professor  U.S.  Naval  Observatory.      With   112 
Engravings  and  Five  Maps  of  the  Stars.     8vo.     iSj. 
"As  affording  a  thoroughly  reliable  foundation  for  more  advanced 
reading.  Professor  Neiucomb's  '  Popular  Astronotiiy  '  is  deserving 
' of  strong  recommendation." — Nature. 

Oliver.— Wprks  by  Daniel  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  F.L.S.,  PrcifeSsor  of 

Botany  in  Uiiiversity  College,  London,  and  Keeper  of  the  HerEa- 

rium  and  Library  of  the  Royal  Gardfens,  Kew  : — 
LESSQNS   IN   ELEMENTARY  BOTANY.    With,  nearly  Two 

Hundred  Illustrations.    New  Edition,     Foap.  8vo.     4^.  6d. 

This  book  is  designed  to  teaci  the.  eleihents  of  Botany  on  Professor 
Henslov^ s  pla,n  of  selected  Types  and  by  the  use  of  Schedules.  The 
earlier  chapters,  embracing  thi elements  of  Structural  and  Physio- 
logical Botany,  introduce  us  to  the  methodical  stiidy  of  the  Ordinal 
Types.       The  mv.clud.ing  chapter ^  g,re  e^f;4kd,    "  Hirw  to  D/y 


PHYSICAL    SCIENCE.  15 


OWVQV— continued. 

Plants  "  and"  How  to  Describe  Plants. "  A  valuable  Qlossary  is 
apjiende^io  the  volume.  In  the  preparation  of  this  work  free  use 
has  been  made,  of  the  n^anuscripi  materials  of  the  late  Professor 
ftenslaw, 

FIRST    BOOK    OF    INDIAN    BOTANY,      With    numerous 
Illustrations.     Extra  fcap.  8yp.    ds.  6d. 

''  It  contains  a  well-digested  sumik&ry  of  all  essential  knowledge 
-.  , ,  P^aining^  to  Indian  Botany,  wrought  out  in  accordance  with  the 
.'   best 'princijiles  of  scientific  arrangement." — Allen's  lildiali  Mail. 

Pennington.— NOTES  ON  THE  BARROWS  AND  BONE 
CAVES  OF  DERBYSHIRE.  With,  an  account  o?  a  Descent 
-into  Elden  Hole.  By  RooKE  Pennington,  B.A.,  LL.B., 
F.G.S.     8V0.     f>s.      ■ 

Penrose  (F,  C.)— on  a  method  of  predicting  by 

GRAPHICAL  CONSTRUCTION,  OCCULTATIONS  OF 
STARS  BY  THE  MO.ON,  AND  SOLAR  ECLIPSES  FDR 
.  ANY  GIVEN  PLACE.  Together  with  more  rigorous  methods 
for  the  Accurate  Calculation  of  Longitude.  By  F.  C.  Penrose, 
F.R.A.S:     With  Charts,  Tables^  &c.     4to.     12s. 

Perry. — AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON   STEAM.     By 
John  Perry,  B.E.,  Professor  of  Engineering,  Imperial  College  of 
Engineering,  Yedo.     With  numerous  Woodcuts,  Numerical  Ex- 
amples, and  Exercises.     i8mo.     4r.  dd.  > 
^'Mr.  Perry  has  ^in  this  compact  little  volume  brougkp  together  an 
immense  amount  of  information,  new  told,  regarding  steam  and 
its  application,  not  the  least  of  its  merits  being  that  it  is  suited  to 
the  capacities  alike  of  the  tyro  in  engineeiing  science  or  the  better 
grade  of  artisan." — Iron. 

^  Pickering.— ELEMENTS  OF  PHYSICAL  MANIPXJLATION. 
By  E.  C.  Pickering,  Thayer  Professor  of  Physics  in  the  Massa- 
■  ichiisetts  Institute  of  Technology,     Part  I.,  medium  8vo.     \Qs.  6d. 
.  Part  II.,,.,  los.  6d. 
"When  finished'  'Physical  Manipulation'  will  no  doubt   be  con- 
sidered the  best  and  most  complete  'text-boo^  en   the  subject  of 

which  it  treats." — Nature. 

.....    ■.;[-■     ■■,  wv  ■  ■    , 

Prestwich THE   PAST  AND   FUTUllE  OF   GEOLOGY. 

An  Inaugural  Lecture,  by  J.  P?iESTWiGH,  M.A.,  F.R.g.,   &c., 
Professor  of  Geology,  Oxford.     8yo.     zs. 

Radcliffe.^PROTEUS  :  OR  UNITY  IN  NATURE.  By.  C. 
B.  RadcLiffe,  M.D.,  Author  of  "Vital  Motion  as  a  mode  of 
Physical  Motion.     Second  Edition.     8vo.     7j,  dd. 


i6  SCIEI^TIFIC  CAT4^0GUE. 

Rendu.— THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GLACIERS  OF  SAVOY. 
By  M.  LE  Chanoine  Rendu.  Translated  by  A.  Weus,  Q.C, 
late  President  of  the  Alpine  Club.  To  which  are  added,  the  Original 
Meniciir  and  Supplementary  Articles  byPrbfessoirs  Tait  and  Rus- 
KiN.  Edited  with  Introductory  remarks  by  George  Forbes,  B.A., 
Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the  Andersonian  Universityj 
Glasgow.   ,'8vo..  "js.Cd.    ■.     ,  i  .'./]      ,'■  ■     '■.■,■.     .        \-\    ' 

Roscpe. — ^yorks  by  Henry  E.'RpscoE,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of 
Chemistry  in  Owens  College,  Manchester  : — 

LESSONS'  IN  ELEMENTARY  CHEMISTRY,  INORGANIC 
AND  ORGANIC.  With  numerous  Illustrations  and  Chromq- 
litho  of  the' Solar- Spectrum,  and  of  the  AlkaMs  and  Alkaline 
Earths.'    New  Edition.     Fcap.'SvOi'   ^s.Sii. 

'  CHEMICAL '^liOBLEMS,' adapted  to  the,  atove  by  Professor 
Thorpe.     Fifth  Edition,  with  Key.     2s. 

"  We  i^ffhesitcfiingly^  pronounce  it , the,,  best  of  all  our  elementary 
treatises  on  Chemistry." — Medical  Times.  \    '   ,  ■ 

PRIMER  OF  CHEMISTRY.    Illustrated.     iSma;    is.. 

Roscoe  and  Schorlemmpr.— A  TREATISE  ON  CHE- 

MISTRY.  .By  PRaFESSQES  RpscoE  and  Schorlemmer'. 
Vol.  I.,  The  Non-metaUic  Elements.    With  numerous  Illustrations 

and  Portrait  of  Dalton.     Medium  8vo.     21s. 
Vol.  II.,  Metals.     Parti.     With  illustrations.     8vo.     t^s. 

"Regarded  as  a  treatise  oh  the  Non-rnetallii  Elements,' there  can  bci 
no  doubt  that  this  volume  is  inc'omparahlv  the  most  satisfactory  one 
of  which  we  are  in  possession'' — Spectator. 

"  It  would  be  difficult  to  praise  the  work  too  highly.  All  the  merits 
wltich  we  noticed  in  the  first  volume  are  conspicuous  in  the  second. 
The  arrangement  is  clear  and  scientific ;  the  facts  gained  by  modern 
research  are  fairly  represented  dhd  judiciously  selected;  and  the 
style  throughout  is  singulgfly  luijid." — Lanceti  ■-.,'. 

[Metals,.  Partll.  in  the  Press. 

^  Rumford  (Count).— THE  LIFE  AND  COMPLETE  WORKS 
OF  BENJAMIN  THOMPSON,  COUNT  RUMFORD.  With 
Notices  of  his  Daughter.  By  George  Ellis.  With  Portrait. 
Five  Vols.  8vo.     4/.  "i+r.  6(f. 

Schorlemmer.— A  MANUAL  OF  THE  CHEMISTRY  OF 

'    THE  CARBON  COMPOUNDS  OR  ORGANIC  CHEMISTRY. 

By  C.  Schorlemmer,  F.R.S.,  Lecturer  in  Organic  Chemistry  iu 

Owens  College,  Manchester.     &vo.     i+r.  ., -. . 

"Zt  appears  Jo  us  to  beas^  complete  ,fl,  manual,  of  the  metamorphoses, of 
.  cfirbon  as  could  be  at /present  produced,  ctiid  it  must  ptoVe  eminently 
useful  to  the  chemical  student.'' — Athenieum. 


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE.  17 

Shann. — AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  HEAT,  IN 
RELATION  TO  STEAM  AND  THE  STEAM  ENGINE. 
By  G..  Shann,  M.A.     With  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo,    4r.  6d. 

Smith.-— HISTORIA  FILICUM  :  An  Exposition  of  the  Nature, 
Number,  and  Organography  of  Ferns,  and  Review  of  the  Prin- 
ciples upon  -which  Genera  are  founded,  and  the  Systeias  of  Classifi- 
cation of  the  principal  Authors,  with  a  new  GeneralArrangement, 
&c.  By  J.  Smith,  A.L.S.,  ex-Curator  of  the  Royal  Botanic 
Garden,  Kew.  With  Thirty  Lithographic  Plates  by  W.  H.  Fitch, 
F.L.S.     Crown  8vo.     12s.  6d. 

"  No  one  anxious  to  work  up  a  thorough  knowledge  of  ferns  can 
afford  to  do  mthout  it." — Gardener's  Chronicle. 

"^  South  Kensington  Science  Lectures.— Vol.  I.— Con- 
taining Lectures  by  Captain  Abney,  F.RS.,  Professor  S.tokes, 
Professor.  Kennedy,  F.  J.  BrAmwell,  F.R.S.,  Professor  G. 
Forbes,  iH.  C.  Sorby,  F.R.S.,  J.  T.  Bottomley,  F.R.S.E., 
,  S.  H.  ViNESj  B.  Sc,  and  Professor  Carey  Foster.  Crown  8vo. 
6s.  [Vol.  II.  nearly  ready. 

SpottiSWOode.— POLARIZATION  OF  LIGHT.  By  W. 
Spottiswoode,  President  of  the  Royal  Society.  With  numerous 
Illustrations.  Second  Edition!  ,Cr.  Svbl.SJ.  id.  (Nature  Series.) 
"  The  illustrations  are  exceedingly  well  adapted  to' assist  in  making 

the  text  comprehensible.'" ^-K^enxura.     "A   clear,   trustworthy 

manual." — Standard. 

Stewart  (B.) — Works  by  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  Professor 
of  Natural  Philosophy  in  Owens  College,  Manchester : — 
LESSONS   IN   ELEMENTARY  PIIYSICS.       With  numerous 
Illnstrations  and  Chromolithos  of  the  Spectra  of  the  Sun,  Stars, 
and  Nebulae.     New  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     4?.  6d. 
The:  Educational  Times  calls  this  the  beaii-idial  of  a  scientific  text- 
book, clear,  accurate,  and  thorough.'^ 
PRIMER  OF  PHYSICS.     With  Illustrations.     New  Edition,  with 
Questions.     iSmo.-    \s. 

Stewart   and  Tait.— the    UNSEEN    UNIVERSE:    or. 

Physical  Speculations  on  a  Future  State,    By  Balfour  Stewart, 

F.R.S.,  and  P.  G.  Tait,  M.A.     Sixth  Edition.     Crown  8vb.     6j-. 

"  The  book  is  one  which  well  deserves  the  attention  of  thoughtful  ana 

religious  readers.  .  .  .  It  is  a  petfectly  sober  inquiry,  on  scientific 

grounds,  into  the posiiUlilies  of  a  fttture  existence." — Guardian. 

-i  Tait.— LECTURES  ON  SOME  RECENT  ADVANCES  IN 
PHYSICAL  SCIENCE.  By  P.  G.  Tait,  M.A.,  Professor  of 
Philosbphy  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  Second  edition, 
revised  and  enlarged,  with  the  Lecture  on  Force  delivered  before 
the  British  Association.     Crown  8vo.     gj. 

B 


SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE. 


Tanner.— FIRST  principles  of  agriculture;.,  By 
Henry  Tanner,  F.C.S.,  Professor  of  Agricultutal  Science, 
University  College,  Aberystwith,  Examiner  in  the  Principles  of 
Agriculture  under  the,  Government  Department  of  Science.     iSmo. 

IS.    '  '   '  '  ' 

Taylor. — sound  and  MUSIC  :  A  Non-Mathematical  Trea 
tise  on  the  Physical  Constitution  of  Musical  Sounds  and  Harniony 
including  the  Chief  Acoustical  Discoveries  of  Pirofessor  Helm 
holtz.  By  Sedley  Taylor,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Trinity  Col 
ledge,  Cambridge.  Large  crovpn  8vo.  %s.  dd. 
"In  no previbus  scientific  treatise  do  we  remember  so  exhaustive  and 
so  richly  illustrated  a  description  of  forms  of  vibration  and  oi 
wave-motion  in  fluids." —  Musical  Standard.  ■  ■    ' '• 

Thomson. — Works  by  Sir  Wyville  Thomson,  K.C.B.,  F.R.S. 
THE  DEPTHS  OF  THE  SEA  :  An  Account  of  the  General 
Results  of  the  Dredging  Cruises  of  H.M.SS.  "Porcupine"  and 
"  Lightning  "  during  the  Summers  of  1868-69  and  70,  under  the 
scientific  direction  of  Dr.  Carpenter,  F.R.S.,  J.  Gwyn  Jeffreys,; 
F.R.S.,  and  Sir  Wyville  Thomson,  F.R.S.  With  nearly  100 
Illustrations  and  8  coloured  Maps  and  Plans.  Second  Edition. 
Royal  8vo.  cloth,  gilt.     '3,u.  6d. 

The  Athenseum  says :  "  The  book  is  full  of  interesting  matter,  and 
is  written  by  a  master  of  the  art  of  popular  exposition.  It  is 
excellently  illustrated,  both  coloured  maps  and  ivoodcuts  possessing 
high  merit..  Those  who  have  already  become  interested  in  dredging 
operations  will  of  course  make  a  point  of  reading  this  work  ;  those 
who  wish  to  be  pleasantly  introduced  to  the  subject,  an<l  rightly 
to  appreciate  the  news  which  artiyes  from  time  to  time  from  the 
'  Challenger,' should  not  fail  to  seek  instruction  from  it." 

THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  "  CHALLENGER."— THE  ATLAN- 
TIC.   A  Preliminary  account  of  the  Exploring  Voyages  of  H.M.S. 
"Challenger,"  during  the  year  1S73  and  the  early  part  of  1876. 
With  numerous  Illustrations,  Coloured  Maps  &  Charts,  &  Portrait 
of  the  Author,  ^ngraved'.byC.  H.  JEENS.  2  Vols.  Medium  8vo.  ,42^. 
.   I%e  Times  says : — "  It  is  right  that  the  public  should  have  some 
authoritative  account  of  the  general  results  of  the  expedition,  and 
that  as  many  of  the  ascertained  data  as  may  be  accepted  with  con- 
fidence should  speedily  find  their  place  in  the  general  body  oj 
scientific  knowledge.    No  one  can  ba  more  competent  than  the 
accomplished  scientific  chief  of  the  expedition  to  satisfy  the  public  in 

this  respect The  paper,  printing,  and  especially  the  numerous 

illustrations,  are  of-  the  highest  quality;  ...  We  have  rarely,  if 
ever,  seen  more  beautiful  specimens  ofiiiood  engraving  than  abound 
in  this  work.  .  .  .  Sir  Wyville  Thomson's  style  is  particularly 
attractive;  he  is  easy  and  graceful,  but  vigorous  and  exceedingly 


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE.  19 

Thomson — continued. 

hapjyin  the  choice  of  language,  andtHraughout  the  work  there%re 
touches  which  show  that  science  has  not  banished  sentiment  .from 
hts  bosom" 

Thudichum    and    Dupre._A   treatise   on   the 

ORIGIN,  NATURE,  AND  VARIETIES  OF  WINE. 
Being  a  Complete  Manual  of  Viticulture  and  CEnology.  By  J.  L. 
W.  Thudichum,  M.D..,  and  August  Dupr£,  Ph.B.,  Lecturer  on 
Chemistry  at  Westminster  Hospital.     Medium  8vo.  cloth  gilt.  25^. 

"A  treatise  almost  unique  for  its  usejiilness  either  to  the  wine-grower , 
the  vendor,  or  the  consumer  of  wine.  The  analyses  of  wine  are 
the  most  complete  we  have  yet  Seen,  exKibiting  at  a  glance  the 
constituent  principles  oj  nearly  all  the  wines  inown  in  this  country. " 
— Wine  Trade  Review. 

W^allace  (A.    R.) — Worksby  Alfred  Russel  Wallace. 
CONTRIBUTIONS    TO    THE  '  THEORY   OF     NATURAL 
SELECTION.        A   Series    of   Essays.       New    Edition,   with 
Corrections  and  Additions.     Crown  8vo.     8s.  6d. 

Dr.  ffooker,  in  his  address  to  the  British  Assofiatian,  spokf  thus 
of  the  author :  "OfMr.  Wallace  and  his  many  contrOtttions 
to  philosophical  biology  it  is  not  easy  to  speak  without  enthu- 
siasm; for,  putting  aside  their  great  merits,  he,  throughout  his 
writings,  with  a  modesty  as  rare  as  I  believe  it  to  be  uncon- 
scious, forgets  his  awn  unquestioned  claim  to  the  honour  oJ 
hoping  originated  independently  of  Mr.  Darwin,  the  theories 
which  he  so  ably  defends."  7%^  Saturday  Review  says:  "He 
has  combined  an  abundarue  of  fresh  and  original  facts  with  a 
,  liveliness  and  sagacity  of  reasoning  which  are  not  often  displayed 
so  effectively  on  so  small  a  'scale."  '     ■ 

THE  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION* OF  ANIMALS, 
with  a  study  of  the  Relations  of  Living  and  Extinct  Faunas  as 
Elucidating  the  Past  Changes  of  the  Earth's  Surface.  2  vols.  8vo. 
with  Maps,  and  numerous  Illustrations  by  Zwecker,  42J.  ■   y 

The  Times  says:  '^  Altogether  it  is  a  wonderful  and  fascinating 
story,  whatever  objections  may  be  taken  to  theories  founded,  upon 
it.  Mr.  IVallace  has  not  attempted  to  add  to  its  interest  by  any 
adornments  of  style  ;  he  has  given  a  simple  and  clear  statepient  of 
intrinsically  interesting  facts,  and.  what  he  considers  to  be  legiti- 
mate inductions  from  them.  Naturalists  ought  to,  be  grateful  to 
him  for  hamng  undertaken  so  toilsome  a  task.  The  work,  indeed, 
is  a  credit  to  all  concerned — the  author,  the  publishers,  the  artist — 
unfortunately  now  no  more — of  the  attractive  illustrations — last 
but  by  no  means  least,  Mr.  Stanford's  map-designer" 


SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE. 


Wallace  (A.  R.)— continued. 
TROPICAL  NATURE:  with  other  Essays^    8vo.    I2s. 

"  Nffwhere  amid  the  niany  descriptions  of  the  irdpUs  that  have  been 
given  is  to  be  found  a  summary  of  the  past  history  and  actual 
phenomena  of  the  tropics  which  gives  thai  which  is  distinctive  of 
!  ;    t^e  .phases  \of  nature  in  them  more  clearly,  shortly,  and  impres- 
sively."— Satui'day  Review. 

Warington,— THE    WEEIC    OF    CREATION;     OR,    THE 

COSMOGONY    OF     GENESIS    CONSIDERED    IN   'ITS 

REL4.TION  TO   MODERN   SCIENCE.    By  Georg:?  Wae- 

INGTON,  Author  of  "  The  Historic  Character  of  the  Pentateuch 

,    Vindicate^."     Crown  8vo.    ,4^.  dd. 

Wilson.— RELIG16  CHEMICI.  By  tiie  late  George  Wilson, 
M.D.,  F.R.S.E.,  Regius  Professor  of  Technology  in  the  University 
of  Edinburgh.  With  a  Vignette  beautifully  engraved  aftei;  a 
design  by  Sir  Noel  fATON.  Crown  8vo.  Zs.dd. 
"A ,  more  fascinating  vpmme,"  the  Spectator  says,  "  has , seldom 
fallen  into  our  hands."        ,      , 

Wilson  (Daniel.)— CALIBAN  :  a  Critique  on  Shakespeare's 
"Tempest"  and  "Midsummer  Night's  Dream."  By  Daniel 
Wilson,, LL.D.,  Professor  of  History  and  English  Literature  in 
University  College,  Toronto.     8vo,     los.  6d. 

''  -The  whole  volutne  is  most  rich  in  the  eloquence  of  thought  and 
imagination  as  well  as  of  words.  It  is  a  choice  contribution  at 
once  to  science,  theology,  religion,  ■  and  literature.'''' — British 
Quarterly  Revifew. 

Wright.— METALS    AND    THEIR    CHIEF    INDUSTRIAL 
APPLICATIONS.     By  C.  Alder  Wright,  D.Sc,  &c.,  Lec- 
'  turei-  on  Chemistry  in  St.  Mary's  Hospital  School,     Extra  fcap. 
8vo.    y.  dd. 

-^  Wuftz.— A  HISTORY  OF   CHEMICAL  THEORY,  from  the 
Age  of  Lavoisier  down  to  the  present  time.     By  Ad.  Wurtz. 
'    Translated  by  Henry  Watts,  F.R.  Si    ■  Crown  8vo.  .  6j.., 

"  The  discourse,  as  a  resume  of  chemical  theory  and  research,  unites 

singular  luminousness  and  grasp.    A  fewjudicious  notes  are  added 

'  by  the  translator." — Pall  Mall  Gazette.     "  The  treatment  of  the 

sttbject  is  admirable,  and  the  translator  has  evidently  done  his  duly 

most  efficiently."— '^estimasiex  Review. 


MENTAL  AND  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.     21 


WORKS  ON  MENTAL  AND  MORAL 
PHILOSOPHY,  AND  ALLIED  SUBJECTS. 

Aristotle. — AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  ARISTOTLE'S 
RHETORIC.  With  Analysis,  Notes,  and  Appendices.  '  By  E. 
M.  Cope,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  Svo.  14J. 
ARISTOTLE  ON  FALLACIES;  OR,  THE  SOPHISTICI 
ELENCHI.  With  a  Translation  and  Notes  by  Edward  Poste, 
M.A.,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford.     8vo.     8j.  6(f. 

Birks.- — Works  by  the  Rev.  T.  R.  BiRKS,  Professor  of  Moral  Philo- 

sophy,  Cambridge  : — 

FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  MORAL  SCIENCE;  or,  a  Firs 
Course  of  Lectures.. delivered  in  the  University  of  Canibpdge. 
Crown  Svo.     Zs.  (yd.  .     ,  1        1 1 '  i 

ITiis  work  treats  of  three  topies  all  preliminary  to  the  direct  exposi- 
,  .  'Hon  of  Moral  Philosophy.  These  are  the  Certainty  amd.  Dignity 
of  Mgrai  Science,  its  Spiritual  Geography,  or  relation  to  vther 
main  subjects  of  human  thought,  and  its  FormaHve  Principles,  or 
some  elementary  truths  on  whuh    its  whole  development  must 


MODERN  UTILITARIANISM;  or,  The  Systems  of  Paley, 
Bentham,  and  Mill,  Examined  and  Compared.  Crown  Svo.  6s.  6d. 

MODERN  PHYSICAL  FATALISM,  AND  THE  DOCTRINE 
OF  EVOLUTION  ;  including  ait  Examination  of  Hfefbel-t  Spen- 
cer's First  Principles.     Crown  Svo,     6s.  ,.,._^ t-J 

Boole.  —  AN    INVESTIGATION     OF     THE     LAWS      OF 

THOUGHT,     OlNf     WHICH     ARE      FOUi^DED    -THE 

MATHEMATICAL  THEORIES    OF    LOGIC   AND  'IPRO- 

B ABILITIES.      By    George    Boole,     LL.D,,    Professor  ,of 

'  Mathematics  in  the  Queen's  University,  Ireland,  &c.     Svo.   ,  I4r.'' 

Butler.— LECTURES  ON  THE  HISTORY  OF  ANCIENT 
PHILOSOPHY.  By  W.  Archer  Butler,  l'at6  Professor  of 
Moral  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Dublin.  Edited  from  the 
Author's  MSS.,  with  Notes/  by  William  Hepworth  ;1Pi^i", 
SON,  M.A.,  Master  of  Trinity  College,  and  Rfigius  PirofeSsbr  of 
Greek  in  the  Unif  ersity  of  Cambridge.  New  and  Cheaper  Edftidn, 
revised  by  the  Editors    Svo.     12s.  ■      i ;.-; 

Caird— A  .critical  account  of  the  ?HiLpsgteY 

.OF  KANT.  With  an.  Historical  Introduction.  By, E.  Caird, 
M.A,,  Professor  Qf  Moral  Philosophy  in  the, University  of. Gjasgow. 
Svo.     iSs.  ,   .,       ,  ,\ 


22  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE. 

Calderwood. — Works  by  the  Rev.  Henry  Calderwood,  M.A., 
LL.D.,  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Edin- 
burgh : —  -,-,-• 
PHILOSOPHY  OF   THE  INFINITE:     A"^ Treatise  on   Man's 
Knowledge  of  the  Infinite  Being,  in  answer  to  Sir  W.  Hamilton 
and  Dr.  Mansel.     Cheaper  Edition.     8vo.     Is.  6d. 
"A  book  of  great  ability  >  ...  written  in  a  clear  style,  and  may 
be  easily  understood  by,,  even  those  who  are  not  versed  in  such 
discussions!' — British  Quarterly  Review- 
A  HANDBOOK  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY.     New,  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.    6^.    .   . '  _  .,  ,.■'•'  ■ 
"It  is,  we/eel  convinced,  the  best  handbook  on  the  subject,  intellectually 
and  morally,  and  does  inHnite  credit  to  its  author. " — Standard, 
"A-  compact  and  useful  work,  going  over  a  great  deal  of  ground 
in  a  manner  adapted  to  suggest  and  facilitate  further  study.  ,  .  . 
His  book  Tjoill  be  an  assistance  to  many  students  outside  his  awn 
University  of  Edinburgh.  — Guardian. 
THE  RELATIONS  OF  MIND  AND  BRAIN.      INearly  ready. 

Fiske.— OUTLINES  OF  COSMIC  PHILOSOPHY,  BASED 
ON  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  EVOLUTION,  WITH  CRITI- 
CISMS  ON  THE  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.  By  John 
FiSKE,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  formerly  Lecturer  on  Philosophy  at 
Harvard  University.     2  vols.  8vo.     ajj. 

"  The  work  constitutes  a  very -ejfecHve  encyclopcedia  of  the  evolution- 
ary philosophyi  and  is  well  worth  the  study  of  all  who  wish  to  see 
at  once  the  entire  scope  and  purport  of  the  scientific  dogmatism  of 
the  day." — Saturday  Review. 

Herbert.— THE  realistic  assumptions  of  modern 

SCIENCE  EXAMINED.  By  T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.,  late 
Professor  of  Philosophy,  &c.,  in  the  Lancashire  Independent 
College,  Msinchester.     8vo.     14J. 

Jardine.— THE  elements  of  THE  psychology  of 
COGNITION.  By  Robert  Jardine,  B.D.,  D'.Sc,  Principal  of 
the  General  Assembly's  College,  Calcutta;  and  Fellow  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Calcutta,     Crown  Svo.     6j.  6<j?.  ; 

Jevons. — Works  by  W.  Stanley  Jevons,  LL.D.,  M.A.,  F.R.S., 
Professor  of  Political  Economy,  University  College,  London. 
THE   PRINCIPLES  OF   SCIENCE.     A  Treatise  on  Logic  and 
Scientific  Method.     New  and  Cheaper  Edition,  ieviseflj     Crown 
Svo.     I2S.  6d. 

"  Ifo  one  in  future  can  be  said  to  have  any  true'' knowledge  of  what 
has  been  done  in  the  way  of  logical  and  scientific  method  in 
England  without  \  having  carefully  studied \I¥ofeisor  yevons' 
book." — Spectator. 


MENTAL  AND  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.       23 

Jevons — continued. 

THE  SUBSTITUTION  OF  SIIiIILARS,  the  true  Principle  of 
Reasoning.      Derived  from  a  Modification  of  Aristotle's  Dictum. 
Fcap.  8vo.     zs.  6d. 
ELEMENTARY  LESSONS  IN  LOGIC,  DEDUCTIVE  AND 
,     jINDUCTIVE.    With  Questions,  Examples,  and  Vocabulary  of 
Logical  Terms.     New  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.   ■  3^.  6d.  ' 

PRIMER  OF  LOGIC.     New  Edition.     l8mo.     is. 

MaCCOll. — THE  GREEK  SCEPTICS,  from  Pyrrho  to  Sextus. 
An  Essay  which  obtained  the  Hare  Prize  in  the  year  1868.  By 
Norman  Maccoll,  B.A.,  Scholar  of  Downing  College,  Cam- 
biidge.     Crown  8vo.     3^.  6d. 

M'Cosh— Works  by  James  M  'Cosh,  LL.D.,  President  of  Princeton 

College,  New  Jersey,  U,S.  . 

^^  He  certainly  shows  himself  skilful  in  that  amplication  of  logic  to 

psychology,  in  that  inductive  science  of  the  human  mind  which  is 

the  fine  side  of  English  philosophy.     His  philosophy  as  a  whole  is 

worthy  of  attention."— '&.&s'^e  de  Deux  Mondes. 

THE  METHOD  OF  THE  DIVINE  GOVERNMENT,  Physical 

and  Mcaral.     Tenth  Edition.     8vo.     los.  6d. 

"This  work  is  distingt^is'hed  from  other  similar  ones  by  its  being 
based  upon  a,  thorough  study  of  physical  sderice,  and  an  accurate 
knowledge  of  its  present  condition,  and  by  its  entering  in  a 
deeperand  moreunfettered  manner  than  its  predecessors  upon  thedis- 
cussion  of  the  appropricUe psychological,  ethical,  and  theological  ques- 
turns.  The  author  keeps  aloof  at  once  from  the  i  priori  idealism  and 
dreaminess  of  German  speculation  since  Schelling,  and  from  the 
onesidedness  and  narrowness  of  the  empiricism  and  positivism 
which  have  so  prevailed  in  England." — Dr.  Ulrici,  in  "Zeitschrift 
fiir  Philosophic." 
THE  INTUITIONS  OF  THE  MIND.     A  New  Edition.     8vo. 

cloth.     10s.  6d.  .  J  ■ 

"  The  undertaking  to  adfust  the  claims  of  the  sensational  and  in- 
tuitional philosophies,  and  of  the  i  posteriori  and  h.  priori  methods, 
is  accontpUshedinthis  work  with  a  great  amount  of  success." — 
,     ;  IBKeSitminster  Review,      f  I  value  it  for  its  large  acquaintance 
'  'with  English  Philosophy,  which  has  not  led  him  to  neglect  the 
sreat  Go-man  works.    I  admire  the  moderation  and  clearness,  as 
well  as.  comprehensiveness,  of  the  author's  views." — Dr.  Dbrner,  of 
Berlin. 
AN  EXAMINATION  OF  MR.  J:  S.  MILL'S  PHILOSOPHY: 

Being  a  Defence  of  Fundamental  Truth.     Second  edition,  with 

additions.     lor.  bd. 

"Such  a  work  greatly  needed  to  be  done,  and  tJuauihor  was  the  man 
to  doit.     This  volume  is  important,  not  merely  in  reference  to  th 


24  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE. 


M' Cosh— condnueJ.  '"'-i'!''"' 

mews  of  Mr.  Mitt,  but  of  the  mhiple.  school  of  ■writers,  ^pmt  and 
pres'eni,  British  and  Continental,  he  so  ably  refiresents."T-:Pxinf;eton 
Review. 

THE  LAWS  OF  DISCURSIVE  THOUGHT :  Being  a  Text- 
book of  Formal  Logic.     Crown  8vo.     ^s, 

' '  The  amount  of  summarized  information  which  it  contains  is  very 
great;  and  it  is  the  only  work  on  the  very  important  subject  with 
which  it  deals.  Never  was  such  a  -work  so  much  needed  as  in 
//«« /ra^Kif  ii?y."— London  Quarterly  Review.  '_ 

CHRISTIANITY 'A]Srb  POSITiyiSM  :  A  Serie?  of  Lectures  to 
tlie  Times  on  Natural  Theology  and  Apologetics.  Crown  8vo. 
']s.  (sd.  ,  ,  ,  ■•       '.  -.,  ..;  ■;,.; 

THE  SCOTTISH  PHILOSOPHY  FROM  HUTCHESON  TO 
HAMILTON,  Biographical,  Critical,  Expository.    Royal  8vo.  i6j. 

Masson.— RECENT   BRITISH    PHILOSOPHY:   A   Review 
with  Criticisms  ;  including  some '  Comments  on  Mr.  Mill's  Answer 
to  Sir  William  Hamilton.     By  Da vii)  Masson,  M.A.,  Professor 
of  Rhetoric  and  EnglishLiterature  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh. 
Third  Edition, ,  with  an  Additional  Chapter.     Crown  8vo.     6'*. 
"  We  can  nowhere  point  to  a  work  which  gives  so  clear  an  exposi- 
tion of  the^  course  of  philosophical  speculation  in  Britain  during 
the  past  century,  or  which  indicates  so  instructively  the  mutual  in- 
fluences  of philosopihic  and  scientific  thought." — Fortnightly  Review. 

Maudsley. — Works  by  H.  Maudsley,  M.D.,  Professdr  of  Medical 
Jurisprudence  in  University  College,  London. 

THE  PHYSIOLOGY  OF  MIND  ;  being  the  First  Part  of  a  Third 
Edition,  Revised,, Enlarged,  and  in  great  part  Rewritten,, of, ,"•  The 
Physiology  and  Pathology  of  Mind; "     Crown  8v6.     \os.()d.' 

THE  PATHOLOGY.  OF  MIND.  llnthe'Press. 

BODY  AND  MIND  :  an  laqtiiry  into  their  Connexion  and  Mutual 
Influence,  specially  with  refeirence  to  Mental  Disorders.  An 
Enlarged  and  Revised  edition.  To  which  are  added,  Psychological 
Essays.     Crown  8 vo.     ds.  dd.  

Maurice. — Works  by  the  Rev.  Frederick  Denison  Maurice, 
M.A.,  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  in  the  University  Of  Cam- 
bridge. ;  (For  other;  'Vyorks  by  the  same  Author,  see  Thsopogigal 
Catalqgue.)  ':'■''         J ,  ,  ,    ' 

SOCIAL  MORALITY.  Twenty-one  LectuVes  deliveired  in  the 
University  of  Cambridge.  New  and  Cheaper  Editiori.  Crowri  8vo. 
los.dd. 


•MENTAL  AND  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.     25 


Maurice — continued. 

"  Whilst  reading  it  we  are  charmed  by  the  freedom  from  exchisiveness 
and  prejudice,  the  large  charity,  the  hrfdness  of  thought,  the  eager- 
ness to  recognize  and  appreciate  whateve)'  there  is  of  real  worth 
extant  in  theiiitirU,  Which  aninifltes  it  /rom  one  end  to  tfie  other.  ■■ 
We  gain  new  thoughts  and  new  ways  of  viewing  things,  even  more, 
ferSaps,  from  being  brought  for  a  time  under  the  influence  of  so 
noble  and  spiritual  a  mind." — Athenseum. 

THE  CONSCIENCE  :  Lectures  on  Casuistry,  delivered  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Cambridge.   New  and  Cheaper  Edition.   Crown  8vo.   5j. 

T'yJ*  Saturday  Review  says:  "We  rise  from  them  with  detestation 
of  all  that  is  selfish  and  mean,  and  with  a  living  impression  that 
there  is  such  a  thing  as  [goodness  after  all. " 

MORAL  AND .  METAPHYSICAL   PHILOSOPHY.      Vol.   L 

,  Ancient  Philosophy  from  the  First  to  the  Thirteenth  Centuries  ; 

Vol.  II.  the' FbiTrteenth  Century  and  the  French  Revolution,  with 

a    glimpse  into    the  Nineteenth     Century.      New  Edition    and 

Preface.     2  Vols.     8vo.    25J. 

Morgan.  ^ANCIENT  SOCIETY  :  or  Researches  in  the  Lines  of 
Human  Progress,  from  Savagery,  through  Barbarism  to  Civilisation. 
By  Lkwis  H.  Morgan,  Member  of  the  National  Academy  of 
Sciences.     8vo.  .  i6s.  - 

Murphy. — THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASES  OF  FAITH,  By 
Joseph  John  Murphy,.  Author  of  "  Habit  and  Intelligence." 
8vo.     14J. 

' '  The  booh  is,  not  without,  substantial  value  ;  the  writer  continues  the 
wofr^  of  the  best  apologists  of  the  last  century,  it  may  be  with  less 

■'..  forfe  and  clearness,  if  tt  still  with  commendable  persuasiveness  and 
tact;  and  with  an  intelligent  feeling  for  the  changed  conditions  oj 
theproktem." — Academy. 

Paradoxical  Philosophy. — a  Sequel  to  "The  Unseen  Uni- 
verse."    Crown  8vo.     "js.  6d. 

Picton. — THE    MYSTERY    OF    MATTER    AND    OTHER 
ESSAYS.    By  J.  Allanson  Picton,  Author  of  "  New  Theories 
;        and  the  Old  Faith."     Cheaper  issue  with  New  Preface.     Crown 
8vo.     6s. 

Contents  :— ra?  Mystery  of  Matter — Tlie  Philosophy  of  Igno- 
rance— The  Antithesis  of  Faith  and  Sight — The  Essential  Nature 
of  Religion — Christian  Pantheism. 


26  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE. 

Sidgwick.— THE  METHODS  OF  ETHICS,  ,  EyjjHENRY 
SiDGWiCK,  M.A.,  Prselector  in  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy  in 
Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  Second 'Editioiiy  revised' 'flii^ughout 
■with  important  additions.     8vD.     14J. 

A  SUPPLEMENT  to  the  First  Edition,  containing  all  the  important 
additions  and  alterations  in  the  Second.     8vo.     2S. 

"  This  excellent  and  very  mekome  volume.  .,.  .  .  J-eaving  to  meta- 
physicians any  further  discussion  thai  may  be  needed  respecting  the 
already  over-discussed  problem  of  the  origin  of  the  moral  faculty,  he 
\  _  tcikes  it.  for  granted'  as  readily  as  the  geometrician  takes  spasce  for 
granted,  or  the  physicist  the  existence  of  matter^  But  htjakes  Utile 
elsefmr  granted,  and  defining  ethics  as  '  th^sciencf  of  conduct,^  be 
carefully  examines,'not  the  various  ethnical,  sysfems  that  have  been 
propounded  by  Aristotle  and  AristotUs  followers  downwards,  but 
the  principles  upon  which,  so  far  as  they  confine  themselves  to  the 
strict  province  of  ethics,  they  are  based." — AthenSeum. 

Thornton. — old-fashioned  ethics,  and  common- 
sense  METAPHYSICS,  with  some  of  their  Applications.,.  By 
William  Thomas  Thornton,  Autjiorof  "  ATreatise  on  Labour." 
8vo.     los.  6d. 

The  present  volume  aeals  with  problems  which  are  agitating  the 
minds  of  all  thoughtjul  men.  The  following  are  the  Contents : — 
/.  Ante-Utilitarianism.  >  //.  ffistory's  Scientific  Tretensioiis.  JII. 
Damd  Hume  as  a  MetaphymeHn.  IV.  HuxkyismU  V.  Recent 
I'hase  of  Scientific  Atheism.    VI.  Limits  of  Demonstrable  Theism. 

Thring  (E.,  M. A.)— THOUGHTS  ON  LIFE-SCIENCE, 
By  :Edward  Thring,  M.  a.  (Benjamin  Place),  Head  Master  of 
Uppingham  School.  „  New  Edition,  enlarged  and  revised.  ■  Crown 
8vo.    "js.  dd. 

Venn.— THE  LOGIC  OF  CHANCE  :  An  Es^ay  on  the  Founda- 
tions and  Province  of  the  Theory  of  Probability,  with  especial 
reterence  to  its  logical  bearings,  and  its  apphcation  to  ^Mdtal  and 
Social  Science.     By  John  Venn,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of 
Gonville  and  Caius    College,   Cambridge.     Second  Edition,  re- 
written and  greatly  enlarged.     Crown  8vo.     lOr.  6d. 
"  One  of  the  most  thoughtful  and  philosophical  treatises  on  any  sub- 
ject connected  with  logic  and  evidence  which  has  been  prudu^d  in 
this  or  any  other  country  for  many  years." — Mill's  Logic,  vol.  ii. 
p.  77.     Seventh  Edition.  ,   .,  ,  ,  ,'  -  -  ,V}:'''.:A 


SCIENCE  PRIMERS.  27 


SCIENCE    PRIMERS    FOR    ELEMENTARY 
SCHOOLS. 

Under  the  joint  Editorship  of    Professors   Huxley,    Roscoe,   and 
Balfour  Stewart.     . 

Chemistry — By  H.  E.  Roscob,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Chemistiy 
in  Owens  College,  Manchester.  With  numerous  Illustrations. 
l8mo.     IJP.     New  Edition.     With  Questiohs. 

Physics.—  By  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of 
Natural  Philosophy  in  Owens  College,  Manchester.  With  numer- 
ous Illustrations.     i8mo.  ^  \s.     NeW  Edition.     With  Questions. 

Physical  Geography.  _By  Archibald  Geikik,  F.R.S., 
Murchison  Professor  of  Geology  and  Mineralogy  at  Edinburgh. 
With  numerous  Illustrations.  New  Edition  with  Questions. 
l8mp.     \s. 

Geology By  Professor  Geikie,  F.R.S.  With  numerous  Illus- 
trations.    New  Edition.     l8mo.  cloth,     is. 

Physiology By    Michael    Foster,    M.D.,    F.R.S.      With 

numerous  Illustrations.     New  Edition.     i8mo.     \s. 

Astronomy — By  J,  Norman  Lockyer,  F.R.S.  With  numerous 
Illustrations.     New  Edition.     i8mo.     \s. 

Botany — ^By  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker;  K.C.S.I.,  C.B.,  F.R.S.  With 
numerous  Illustrations.     New  Edition.     iSmo.     is. 

Logic — By  Professor  Stanley' Jevons,  F.R.S.  New  Edition. 
i8mo.     IS. 

Political  Economy.— By  Professor  Stanley  Jevons,  F.R.S. 
l8mo.     IS. 

In  preparation: — 
INTRODUCTORY.    JBy  Pcofessor  Huxley.    &c.  &c. 

ELEMENTARY  SCIENCE  CLASS-BOOKS. 

Astronomy By  the  Astronomer  Royal.  POPULAR  AS- 
TRONOMY. With  Illustrations.  By  Sir  G.  B.  Airy,,  K.C.B., 
Astronomer  Royal.     New  Edition.     i8mo.     41.  dd. 

Astronomy.— ELEMENTARY  LESSONS  IN  ASTRONOMY. 
With  Coloured.  Diagram  of  the  Spectra  of  the  Sun,  Stars,  and 
Nebulse,  and  numerous  Illustrations.  By  J.  Norman  Logkyer, 
F.R.S.     New  Edition.    Fcap.  8vo.     is.  dd. 


28  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE. 

Elementary  Science  Class-books — continued. 

QUESTIONS  ON  LOGKYER'S  ELEMENTARY  LESSONS 
IN  ASTRONOMY.  For  the  Use  of  Schools.  By  John 
Forbes  Robertson.     i8mo,  cloth  limp.     is.  Bd. 

Physiology.—LESSONS  in  elementary  physiology. 

With  numerous  Hlustrations.     By  T.  H.  Huxley,  F.R.S.,  Pro- 
fessor of  Natural  History  in  the  Rpyal  School  of  Mines.     NeWj 
Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     4s.  6ii.   ' 
QUESTIONS      OIJ       HUXLEY'S       PHYSIOLOGY     FOR 
SCHOOLS.     By  T.  Alcock,  M.D.     iSmo.     is.  (>d. 

Botany — LESSONS  IN  ELEMENTARY  BOTANY.  ByD. 
Oliver,  F.R.S.,  F.L.S.,  Professor  of  Botany  in  University 
College,  London.  With  nearly  Two  flundred  Illustrations.  New, 
Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     d^.  dd.  '  ■ 

Chemistry — LESSONS  IN  ELEMENTARY  CHEMISTRY, 
INORGANIC  AND  ORGANIC.  By  Henry,  E.  Roscoe, 
F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  Owens  College,  Manchester, 
With  numerous  Illustrations  and  Chromo-Litho  ^of  •  the  Solar 
Spectrum,  and  of  the  Alkalies  and  Alkaline  Earths.  New  Edition. 
Fcap.  8vo.     4J-.  6d.  ^    '■ 

A  SERIES  OF  CHEMICAL  ^PROBLEMS,  prepared  with 
Special  Reference  to  the  above,  by  T.  E.  Thorpe,  Ph.D., 
Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  Yorfehire  College  of  Science,  Leeds. 
Adapted  for  the  preparation  of  Students  for  the  Government, 
Science,  and  Society;of:  Arts  Examinations.  With  a  Preface  by 
Professor  RoscoE.     Fifth  Edition,  with  Key.     i8mo.     3J.  , 

Political  Economy — POLITICAL  ECONOMY  FOR  BE- 
GINNERS. By  MiLLicENT  G.  Fawcett.  New.  Edition. 
i8mo.    2s.6d.  . .       •       ■  I    r- 

Logic — ELEMENTARY  LESSONS  IN  LOGIC  ;  Deductive  and 
Inductive,  with  {opious  Questions  and  Examples,  and  a  Vocatulary 
of  Logical  Terms.  By  W.  Stanley  Jevons,  M.A.,  Professor  of 
Political  Economy  in  University  College,  London.  New  Edition. 
Fcap.  8yo.     3^.  6d. 

Physics.-^LESSONS  IN  ELEMENTARY  PHYSICS,,  ;  By 
Balfour  Stevstart,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  NaturaL Philosophy  ih 
Owens  College,  Manchester.  With,  numerous  Illustrations  aji^ 
Chromo-Litho  of  the  Spectra 'of  the  Sun,  Stars,',and  Nebula;.  Ne'w 
■Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     41.  6d. 

Pi-actical  Chemistry.—fHiE  OWEJSfS  cbLLEGEjUNIQR 

COURSE    OF    PRACTICAL    CHEMISTRY.  '  By  Franci? 

,  Jones,   Chemical  Mastfer  in  the  Grammar  School,  Manch^ter. 

With  'Preface  by  Professor    RoscoE,   and,.  Illustrations.    •  New 

Edition.     i8mo.     ds.  6d.  ■  ' 


SCIENCE  CLASS-BOOKS.  29 

Elementary  Science  Cl^ss-books — continued, 

Anattomy.^LESSONS  IN  ELEMENTARY  ANATOMY.  By 
St.  George  Mivart,  F.R.S.,  Lecturer  in  Comparative  Anatomy 
at  St.  Mary's  Hospital.  With  upwards  of  400  Illustrations.  Fcap. 
8y6.    6j.  6(1. 

Mechanics — an  elementary  treatise.  By  A.  B. 
W.  Kennedy,  C.E.,  Professor  of  Applied  Mechanics  in  University 
College,  London.     With  Illustrations.  [In  preparation. 

iSteam an  elementary  treatise.    By  John  Perry, 

1  /Professor- sf  Engineering,  Imperial  College  of  Engineering,  Yedo. 
With  numerous  Woodcuts  and  Numerical  Examples  and  Exercises. 
l8mo.     4T.  6d. 

Physical   Geography.  _  ELEMENTARY    LESSONS    IN 
PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY.     By  A.  Geikie,  F.R.S.,  Murchi- 
son  Professor  of  Geology,    &c.,    Edinburgh.      With    numerous 
.Illustrations.,    Fcap.  8vo.     4^.61^. 
•  QUESTIONS  ON  THE. SAME.     u.  6d. 

Geography.— CLASS-BOOK  OF  'GEOGRAPHY.  By  C.  B. 
ClarkEj  M.A..  F.R.G.S,     Fcap.  8vo.    2s.6d. 

Natural  Philosophy.-NATURAL    PHILOSOPHY    FOR 

BEGINNERS.     By  I.   Todhunter,    M.A.,    F.R.S.      Part  I. 

The  Properties  of  Solid  and  Fluid  Bpdies.     igmo.     y.  6d.     Part 

II.  Sound,  iight,  and  Heat.     iSmo.     3j.  6d. 
Sound AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE.    By  W.  H.  Stone, 

M.D.,  F.R.S.     With  Illustrations.     l8mo.  [In  ihi  Press. 

Others  in  Preparation. 

MANUALS  FOR  STUDENTS. 

Crown  8vo. 

Dyer  and  Vines.— THE  STRUCTURE  OF  PLANTS.  By 
Professor  Thiselton  Dyer,  F.R.S.,  assisted  by  Sydney 
ViNfeSi  B.Sc,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge. 
With  numerous  Illustrations,  ;•  [In  preparation. 

Fawcett.— A  manual  of  political  ECOIJOMY.  By 
Professor  Fawcett,  M.P.  New  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged. 
Crown  Svo.     i2J-.  611?. 

Fleischer.— A  SYSTEM  OF  volumetric  analysis. 

Translated,  with.  Notes  and  Additions,  from,  the  second  German 
Edition,  by  M.  M.  PaTtison  Muik,  F.R.S.E.  .  With  Illustra- 
tions.    Crown  8vo.     7^.  ()d.. 


30  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE. 

Manuals  for  St\xA^n\.s— continued. 

Flower  (W.  H.)_aN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OSTE- 
OLOGY OF  THE  MAMMALIA.  Being  the  Substance  of  the 
Course  of  Lectures  delivered  at  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons  of 
England  in  1870.  By  Professor  W.  H.  Flower,  F.R.S., 
F.R.C.S.  With  numerous  Illustrations.  New  Edition,  enlarged. 
Crown  8vo.     los.  6d.  ■  ' ' 

Foster  and  Balfour._THE  elements  of  ■  EMBRY- 
OLOGY. By  Michael  :Foster,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  and  F.  M. 
Balfour,  M.A.     Part  I.  crown  8vo.     ^s.  6il. 

Foster  and  Langley._A  COURSE  OF  ELEMENTARY 
PRACTICAL  PHYSIOLOGY.  By  Michael  Foster,  M.D., 
F.R.S.,  and  J.  N.  Langley,  B.A.  New  Edition;  Crown  8vo.  6s. 

Hooker  (Dr.)_THE  STUDENT'S  FLORA  OF  THE  BRITISH 
ISLANDS.  By  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker,  K.C.S.I.,  C.B.,  F.R.S., 
M.D.,  D.C.L.  New  Edition,  revised.  Globe  Svo.  los.  6d, 
,  Huxley — PHYSIOGRAPHY.  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of 
Nature.  By  Professor  HuxLEV,  F.R.S.  With  numerous 
Illustrations,  and  Coloured  Plates.  New  Edition.  Crown  Svo. 
7^.  6d.  '       3  ' 

Huxley  and  Martin._A  COURSE  OF  practical  IN- 

■  STRUCTION  IN  ELEMENTARY  BIOLOGY.  By  Professor 
Huxley,  F.R.S.,  assisted  by  H.  N.  Martin,  M.B.,  D.Sc.  New 
Edition,  revised.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

Huxley  and  Parker — ELEMENTARY  BIOLOGY.  PART 
II.  By  Professor  Huxley,  F.R.S. ,  assisted  by  —  Parker. 
With  Illustrations.  ■  ,  \ln> prepdi^atioH. 

Jevons.— THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENCE.  A  Treatise  on 
Logic  and  Scientific  Method.  By  Professor  W.  Stanley  Jevons, 
LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  New  and  Revised  Edition.     Crown  Svo.    X2s.6d. 

Oliver  (Professor)._FlRST  BOOK  OF  INDIAN  BOTANY. 
By  Professor  Daniel  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  F.L.S.,  Keeper  of  the 
Herbarium  and  Library  of  the  Royal  Gardens,  Kew.  With 
numerous  Illustrations.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.     6s.  6d.  ■ 

Parker  and  Bettany._THE  MORPHOLOGY  OF,  THE 
SKULL.  By  Professor  Parker  and  G.  T.  Bettany.  ,  Illus- 
trated.    Crown  Svo.     los.  6d.  • 

Tait— AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ,  ON   HEAT.,    By  Pr«. 

fessor  Tait,  F.R.S.E.     Illustrated.,'.,  ^In  the  Press. 

Thomson.— ZOOLOGY.      By    Sir    C.    Wyville    Thomson, 

F.R.S.     Illustrated.  \In  preparation^ 

Tyler   and   Lankester.— ANTHROPOLOGY.     By  E/B. 

Tylor,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  and  Professor  E.  Ray  Lankester,  M.A., 

F.R.S.     Illustrated.  [In  preparation. 

Other  volumes  of  these  Manuals  will  follow. 


NATURE    SERIES. 


-^THE  SPECTROSCOPE  AND  ITS  APPLICATIONS. 

By  J.  N.  LOCKYER,  F.R>S.    With  Illustrations.    Second  Edition.     Crown 
8vo.  •  3J.  6</. 

THE    ORIGIN    AND    METAMORPHOSES    OF    IN- 

SECTS.      By  Sir  JOHN   LUBBOCK,   M.E.,   F.R.S.      With  Illustrations. 
Crown8vo.l3j.6rf.    Second  EdttioH. 

THE  TR.ANSIT  OF   VENUS.      By   G.   Forbes,  B.A^, 

Frofe^or   of  Natuml  Philosopliy  in   the  Andersonian    Univfersity,    GlasgCrw, 
With  numerous  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.     3^-.  6^/. 

THE    COMMON   FROG.    ,By   St.    Geqrge    Miyart, 

F.R.S.    Illustrated.    Crown  8vo.    a*,  dd. 

'  POLARISATION  OF  LIGHT.      By  W.  Spottiswoode, 

'    LL.I>.^  President  of  the  lloyal  Society.    Illustrated.    Second  Edition.    Crown 

ON   BRITISH  WILD  FLOWERS    CONSIDERED  IN 

relation  to    insects.     By  Sis  JOHN  LUBBOCK,  M.P.,  F.R.S. 
Illustrated.'    Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     j[s.  6d. 

THE  SCIENCE  OF  WEIGHING  AND  MEASURING. 

By  H.  W.  CHISHOLM,  Warden  of  the  Standards.    Illustrated.    Crown  Svo. 
4J.  ^d. 

HOW  TO  i)RAW  A  STRAIGHT  LINE:  A  Lecture  on 

Linkages.    By  A.  B.  KEMPE,  B.A.     Illustrated.    Crown  Svo.    if.  6d. 

•'LIGHT :    A   Series   of  Simple,    Entertaining  and  Useful 

J  Experiments  in  the  Phenomena  of  Light  for  the  Use  of  Students  of  every  Age. 
By  ALFRED  M.  MAYER  and  CHARLES  JBARNARD.  With  Illustrations. 
Crown  Svo.     2J.'  6d. 

""  SOUND  :  A  Series  of  Simple,  Entertaining  and  Inex- 
pensive Experiments  in  the  Phenomena  of  Sound,  for  the  Use  of  Students  of 
every  Age.  By  A.  M.  MAYER,  Professor  of  Physics  in  the  Stevens  Institute 
of  Technology,  &c.    With  numerous  Illustrations.     Crown  Svo^     3f .  6d. 

(Others  to  follow.) 
MACMILLAN   AND   CO.,    LONDON. 


Pttbhshed-  every  Thttrsddy,  frice  fyd.j  Monthly  PaHs  ■is.  and 
2J.    td.,    Half-  Yearly     Volumes,    f^s.' 

nature: 

AJV  ILLUSTRATED   TOliRNAL    OF  SCIENCE. 

Nature  expounds  in  a  popular  and  yet  authentic  manner, 
the  Grand  Results  of  Scientific  Research^  discussing 
the  most  recent  scientific  discoveries,  and  pointing  out 
the  bearing  of  Science  upon  civilisation  and  progress,  and 
its  claims  to  a  more  general  recognition,  as  well  as  to  a 
higher  place  in  the  educational  system  of ,  the  country. 

It  contains  original  articles .  on  all  subjects  within  the 
domain  of  Science ;  Reviews  setting  forth  the  nature  and 
value  of  recent  Scientific  Works ;  Correspondence  Columns,' 
forming  a  medium  of  Scientific  discussion  and  of  intercom- 
munication among  the  most  distmguished  men  of  Science ; 
Serial  Columns,  giving  the  gist  of  the  most  important 
papers  appearing  in  Scientific  Journals,  both  Home  and 
Foreign  ;  Transactions  of  the  principal  Scientific  Societies 
and  Academies  of  the  World,  Notes,  &c. 

In  Schools  where  Science  is  included  in  the  regular 
course  of  studies,  this  paper  will  be  most  acceptable,  as 
it  tells  what  is.  doing  in  Science .  all ,  over  the  world,  is 
popular  without  lowering  the  standard  of  Science,  and  by 
it  a  vast  amount  of  information  is  brought  within  a  small 
compass,  and  students  are.  directei^  to  the  best  sources  for 
what  they  need.  The  various  questions  connected  with 
Science  teaching  in  schools  are  also  fully  discussed,  and  the 
best  methods  of  teaching  are  indicated.,  "  '■'■ 


