BURNDY 
LIBRARY 

Chartered  in  1?41 

1 — — 1 

GIFT   OF 

Bern  Dibner 

The  Dibner  Library 

of  the  History  of 
Science  and  Technology 

SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION  LIBRARIES 


ill  "'^^^^^^sz^yr~^^^^. 

^^^^p 

"3B?r 

<5^^ 

L.   >  • 


A 
NEW  SYSTEM 

OF 

CHEMICAL   PHILOSOPHY. 

'  PART  FIRST.— VOL.  II. 


NEW   SYSTEM 


OF 


CHEMICAL    PHILOSOPHY. 


PART   FIRST 

OF 

VOL.  II. 


BY 

JOHN    DALTON,  F.R.S. 

President  of    the    Literary  and   Philosophical   Society,    Manchester; 

Corresponding  Member  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences,  Paris; 

Member  of  the  Royal  Academy,  Munich,  and  of  the  Caesarean 

Natural  History  Society,   Moscow  ; 

Honorary    Member    of  the  Royal   Medical    Society,    Edinburgh, 

and  of  the  Philosophical  Societies  of  Bristol,  Cambridge, 

Leeds,  Sheffield  and  Yorkshire. 


Printed  by  the  Executors  of  S.  Russell, 

FOR 

GEORGE  WILSON,    ESSEX  STREET,    STRAND, 
LONDON. 

1827. 


TO 

JOHN  SHARPE,  Esa.  F.  R.  S. 

OF  STANMORE,  MIDDLESEX, 

(Late  of  Manchester) 

AS    A    TESTIMONY    OF    HIS    FRIENDLY     REGARD,    AND    OF    HIS 

LIBERAL    ENCOURAGEMENT   GIVEN    TO   THE    PROMOTION 

OF    CHEMICAL   SCIENCE: 

AND    TO 

PETER    EWART,    Esa. 

Vice-President  of  the  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society 
of  Manchester, 

ON    THE    SCORE   OF   FRIENDSHIP, 

BUT     MORE      ESPECIALLY      FOR      THE      ABLE     EXPOSITION     AND 

EXCELLENT    ILLUSTRATIONS    OF    THE    FUNDAMENTAL 

PRINCIPLES    OF    MECHANICS, 

IN     HIS     ESSAY     ON      THE    MEASURE    OF    MOVING    FORCE^f 

THIS   WORK   IS   RESPECTFULLY   INSCRIBED   BY 

THE  AUTHOR. 

+  Manchester  Memoirs,  Vol,  II.  ( second  series. J 


PREFACE. 


J.  HE  work  now  submitted  to  the  public  was  begun  to  be 
printed  in  1817;  and  the  13th  and  14th  sections,  containing 
the  oxicles  and  sulphurets,  were  printed  off  before  the  end  of 
October  of  the  same  year.  The  printing  of  the  rest  of  the 
work  to  the  appendix  was  finished  in  September,  1821.  One 
sheet  of  the  appendix  was  printed  at  the  end  of  1823  ;  but  no 
addition  was  afterwards  made  till  May,  1826 ;  when  the  print- 
ing- was  resumed,  and  has  been  continued  to  the  present  time. 
It  may  be  asked,  what  were  the  motives  for  such  a  plan  of 
procedure.  To  this  it  may  be  replied,  that  soon  after  the 
publication  of  the  first  volume  (in  1810),  I  began  to  prepare 
materials,  and  to  institute  experiments,  relating  to  the  oxides, 
&c,  with  occasional  diversions  into  other  departments  of 
chemistry,  as  circumstances  arose.  As  a  great  portion  of  my 
time  was  always  necessarily  engaged  in  professional  duties, 
and  as  that  part  of  the  work  I  was  about  to  commence  was 
one  running  into  detail,  I  thought  it  would  be  best  to  print  it 
as  I  proceeded,  whilst  the  train  of  thought  and  of  experiments 
was  fresh  in  view.  The  advantage  in  this  case  was  expected 
to  be  partly  at  least  counterbalanced  by  the  loss  of  discoveries 
and  improvements  likely  to  be  made  in  the  interval  between 
the  printing  and  publishing  of  the  several  articles.  This  I 
was  aware  of;  but  as  a  principal  object  I  had  in  view  was  to 


VI.  TREFACE. 

give  the  results  of  my  own  experience,  in  the  various  depart- 
ments of  chemical  science,  rather  than  to  form  the  best  com- 
pilation of  Chemistry  at  the  period,  this  object  was  most 
likely  to  be  obtained  by  the  proposed  plan.  It  is  true  the 
time  the  work  has  been  in  the  press  has  far  exceeded  my  ex- 
pectation; notwithstanding  this  I  am  not  conscious  of  any 
very  material  alterations  or  additions,  which  I  should  wish  to 
make  at  the  present  moment. 

It  affords  me  great  pleasure  to  acknowledge  the  assist- 
ance I  have  had  during  the  progress  of  this  volume,  from  a 
valuable  selection  of  chemical  apparatus,  for  which  I  am 
indebted  to  the  generosity  of  Mr.  Sharpe;  also  the  continued 
and  friendly  intercourse  with  Dr.  Henry,  whose  discussions 
on  scientific  subjects  are  always  instructive,  and  whose  stores 
are  always  open  when  the  promotion  of  science  is  the  object. 

My  present  design  is  to  add  a  second  part  to  this  volume, 
and  with  that  to  finish  the  work.  It  will  eonsist  of  the  more 
complex  compounds.  Acids,  and  other  products  of  the  ve- 
getable kingdom,  Salts,  &c,  will  form  principal  parts. 
Already  I  have  a  stock  of  experiments  on  these  subjects; 
but  I  am  not  satisfied  without  exploring  this  region  afresh, 

August,  1827.  *-*®* 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 

Part  First. 

Page, 

Chap.  v. — compounds  of  two  elements. 

Section  13.  Metallic  Oxides.... 1 

Oxide    of  Gold 5 

•J Platina H 

. : Silver •  •••  17 

Oxides  of  Mercury  1* 

Oxide    of  Palladium 24 

Oxides  of  Rhodium,  Iridium,    and 

Osmium.    ... •  26 

Copper *  26 

Iron 28 

Nickel 34 

Tin 36 

Lead 39 

Oxide    of  Zinc .. «*i 

Oxides  of  Potassium 53 

Sodium , 56 

Oxide    of  Bismuth 57 

Oxides  of  Antimony 58 

Oxide    of  Tellurium     62 

Oxides  of  Arsenic 63 

Cobalt 68 

Manganese *  7i 

. Chromium 80 

— — —   Uranium 86 

—  Molybdenum 87 

Tungsten 90 

. Titanium. 91 

Columbium  92 

Cerium 94 


X.  CONTENTS. 

Pa©? 

Section   14,  Earthy,    Alkaline,    and  Metallic  SuL 

pliurcts 96 

Siifphurets  of  Li?nc 99 

Sulphuret    of  Magnesia  Ill 

Sulphurcts  of  Barytes    112 

Stroniitcs 114 

Alumine,    Si  lex,     Yitria, 

Glucine  etncl  Zireonc    ...   114 

._ —  Potash :..;.; 116 

■  ■-■ —  Sbda..... 119 

Sulphuret    of  Ammonia 120 

Sulphurots  of  Gold...,, ,. 121 

Sulphuret    of  Platina. 123 

Sulphurets  of  Silver    126 

"• — Mercury  127 

Sulphuret    of  Palladium    131 

- —  /       '       Rhodium  132 

'•'"""  '  '"  "        Iridium 132 

-  -  lll ■- —  Osmium 132 

-   Sulphurets  of  Copper ... 133 

* — — - — — —  Iron 134 

'    Nickel 138 

— — —Tin 139 

—  Jbead. 144 

— —  Zinc 146 

► Potassium  and  Sodium    ...   148 

Bismuth 149 

Antimony 151 

Sulphuret    of  Tellurium 153 

Sulphurets  of  Arsenic 153 

Sulphuret    of  Cobalt , 160 

Sulphurcts  of  Manganese  162 

Sulphuret    of  Chromium    163 

Uranium 164 

-r —  Molybdenum    164 

Sulphuret    of  Tungsten 1 64 


CONTENTS  XI. 

Page. 

Sulphur cts  of  Titanium,  Columbium,  and  Cerium  ....   165 

Section   15.  Earthy,  Alkaline,  and  Metallic  Phos- 
phurets    1 66 

PJwsphurct    of  Hydrogen    169 

Phosphurets  of  Carbon  and  Sulphur  184 

Phosphuret  of  Lime.... 184 

.  Barytcs    ._ 188 

Strontites .............   190 

Gold 191 

— —  Platina 194 

_ ,  Silver 195 

1 Mercury 197. 

Palladium 198 

Copper.. 199 

— Iron ...   201 

Nickel , 201 

—  Tin ....s 202 

— -  Lead 203 

Phosphurets  of  Zinc  and  Potassium    ......  204 

Sodium  and  Bismuth  .......  207 

— Antimony  and  Arsenic    ..'.•  208 

Phosphuret    of  Cobalt % 209 

Manganese  * 210 

Section  16.  Carburets.... 211 

._ of  Iron... steel 212—214 

Section  17.  Metallic  Alloys 218 

Alloys   of  Gold,  with  other  metals....  222 

Platina,  with  other  metals  226 

— Silver,  with  other  metals...  228 

Mercury,  and  other  metals  . 

amalgams 230 

Triple,   Quadruple,  fyc.  amalgams  ...  236 

Alloys   of  Copper,  with  other  metals  238 

Iron,  with  other  metals  ...  253 

Alloys   of  Nickel  and  Tin,  with  do..  t,  254 

Lead,  ivith  do.   258 


Xll.  CONTENTS. 

Section  17.   Triple  Alloys,  Solders  ;  fusible  metal,  dfc.  203 

APPENDIX. 

Abstract  of  De  hi   Roche  and  Bcrard's  essay  on   the 

specific  heat  of  gases    268 

Du  yong  and  Pctitfs  essays, 

On  the  expansion  of  air,  mercury,  glass,   iron, 
copper,  and  plettina,  by  heat 272 

On  the  capacities  of  certain  bodies,  for  heat  274 

On  the  laics  of  refrigeration *....,  277 

On  the  specific  heats  of  certain  bodies     280 

Remarks  on  the  above  essays    282 

New  Table  of  the  forces  of  vapours  298 

Table  of  the  expansion  of  air,  and  the  force  of  aqueous 
and  tethcrial  vapour,  adapted  to  atmospheric 
temperatures. 299 

Applications  of  the  eibove  table 300 

Formulae  for  determining  the  proportions  of  combustible 

gases,  in  mixtures 305 

Heat  produced  by  the  combustion  of  gases 309 

Absorption  of  gases  by  water 309 

Fluoric  acid — deutoxide  of  hydrogen 311 

Muriatic  acid — oxy muriatic  acid 313 

Nitric  acid — compounds  of  azote  and  oxygen 315 

On  ammonia., 328 

Decomposition  of  ammonia  by  nitrous  oxide 330 

by  nitrous  gas  and  oxygen     332 

Volume  of  gases  from  the  decomposition  of  ammonia,,,  335 

Decomposition  of  ammonia  by  a  red  heed 335 

Decomposition  of  ammonia  by  oxymuriatic  acid 335 

Sulphuret  of  Carbon 338 

Potassium,  Sodium,  Sfc  ;».. 340 

Alum 311 

New  table  of  the  relative  weigh  ts  of  atoms 352 

Addenda.  Steel ;  mixed  gases ;  expansion  of  liquids 

bu  heat ,, .» 354 


NEW  SYSTEM 


OF 


CHEMICAL  PHILOSOPHY. 


CHAP.   V. 


SECTION   13. 

METALLIC  OXIDES. 

^A-LL  the  metals  are  disposed  to  combine 
with  oxygen,  but  the  combination  is  effected 
more  easily  with  some  than  with  others;  the 
compound  is  usually  called  an  oxide,  but  in 
some  instances  it  is  also  called  an  acid.  The 
same  metal  combines  with  one,  two,  or  per- 
haps more  atoms  of  oxygen,  forming  com- 
pounds which  may  be  distinguished  accord- 
ing to  Dr.  Thomson,  by  the  terms  protoxide, 
deutoxide,  trit oxide, .  &c. 

Such  however  is  the  repulsion  of  oxygen  to 
oxygen  that  we  rarely  find  three  atoms  of  it 
retained  by  a  single  atom  of  any  kind ;  and 
there  are  not  many  instances  of  metals  capa- 

VOL.  II.  A 


2  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

ble  of  holding  two  atoms  of  oxygen.  Vari- 
ous modifications  of  the  proportions  of  metals 
and  oxygen  arise  from  the  combinations  of 
the  oxides  themselves  one  with  another  and 
with  oxygen,  so  as  to  lead  some  to  imagine 
that  an  atom  of  metal  in  some  instances  com- 
bines with  3,  4,  or  more  of  oxygen.  This 
is  altogether  improbable:  It  is  much  more 
simple  to  suppose  that  one  atom  of  oxygen 
connects  two  or  more  atoms  of  protoxide, 
1  of  protoxide  unites  to  1  or  more  of  deut- 
oxide,  &c.  These  intermediate  oxides  are 
in  few  if  any  instances  found  to  combine 
with  acids  like  the  other  two  oxides. 

There  is  no  reason  that  I  am  acquainted 
with  for  disbelieving  that  oxygen  combined 
with  a  metal  is  still  repulsive  df  oxygen, 
and  that  by  the  same  law  as  particles  of  an 
elastic  fluid;  that  is,  the  repulsion  is  inversely 
as  the  distance  of  the  centres  of  the  atoms. 
Hence  it  may  be  demonstrated  that  it  re- 
quires twice  the  strength  of  affinity  to  form 
a  deutoxide  as  a  protoxide*  three  times  the 
strength  to  form  a  tritoxide  as  a  protox- 
ide>  Sec;  On  this  account  it  is,  in  all  proba- 
bility, that  deutoxides  are  not  numerous,  and 
tritoxides  are  rarely  if  ever  found. 

The   quantity  •  of    oxygen  that  combines 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  3 

with  any  metal  to  form  an  oxide  may  be  in- 
vestigated by  several  methods. 

1st.  By  combustion;  a  given  weight  of 
the  metal  may  be  burned  and  the  oxide  pro- 
duced may  be  collected  and  weighed ;  when 
the  increase  by  combustion  will  appear. 

2.  By  solution  in  an  acid  and  precipitation 
by  an  earth  or  alkali;  in  this  case  a  given 
weight  of  the  metal  is  dissolved  and  precipi- 
tated; the  precipitate  collected  and  suffici- 
ently dried  shews  the  increase  by  oxygen. 

3.  By  transferring  the  oxygen  from  an 
oxide  to  another  metal;  in  this  case  the  me- 
tal in  question  is  usually  immersed  in  a  saline 
solution  of  the  other  metal;  this  latter  me^ 
tal  gives  up  its  oxygen  to  the  former  and  is 
itself  reformed  or  revived  as  it  is  termed. 

4.  By  determining  the  proportion  of  hy- 
drogen gas  evolved  during  the  solution  of  a 
given  weight  of  metal;  then  allowing  half  of 
that  volume  for  its  equivalent  of  oxygenous 
gas,  the  weight  of  it  shews  the  oxygen  united 
to  the  metal;  it  being  now  well  understood 
that  water  furnishes  the  two  elements  of  hy- 
drogen and  oxygen  in  such  case. 

5.  The  higher  oxides  are  conveniently  de- 
termined by  the  application  of  the  solution 
of  oxymuriate  of  lime  to  the  lower  oxides  in. 
solution. 


4  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

6.  The  quantity  of  oxygen  in  several  ox- 
ides may  be  found  from  the  quantity  of  ni- 
trous gas  evolved  during  the  solution  of  a 
given  weight  of  metal  in  nitric  acid. 

The  first  four  methods  have  been  used  by 
chemists  for  several  years  past;    the  two  last 

1  have  added  from  my  own  experience,  hav- 
ing found  them  very  useful  assistants  in  vari- 
ous instances.  The  last  method  by  nitrous 
gas,  has  indeed  been  proposed  before,  and  la- 
bour bestowed  on  it  both  by  others  and  my- 
self, but  without  reducing  the  results  to  any 
certainty,  till  lately ;  the  principal  cause  of 
this  want  of  success  has  arisen  from  misunder- 
standing the  nature  and  constitution  of  nitric 
acid.  Most  chemists  seem  with  me  to  have 
mistaken  nitrous  acid  for  nitric ;  the  former 
is  composed  of  1  atom  of  azote  and  2  of 
oxygen  ;  or  perhaps  of  2  azote  and  4  oxygen ; 
the  latter  of  2  azote  and  5  oxygen,  or  2  nitrous 
gas  and  3  oxygen ;  the  weight  of  the  former 
is*  19,  or  its  double  38,  on  my  scale,  and  that  of 
the  latter  45.  [My  reasons  for  adopting  the 
above  conclusion  respecting  nitrous  acid, 
which  is  at  variance  with  that  in  Vol.  1, 
p.  331,  will  be  given  hereafter.]  When  there- 
fore a  metal  is  oxidized  by  nitric  acid,  3 
atoms  of  oxygen  (=  21)  go  to  the  metal,  and 

2  atoms  of  nitrous  gas  (=  24)  are  disengaged. 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  5 

Hence  \  of  the  weight  of  nitrons  gas  evolv- 
ed is  the  weight  of  oxygen  combined.  It 
sometimes  happens  however  that  the  nitrous 
gas  is  partly  or  wholly  retained  by  the  residue 
of  nitric  acid ;  but  in  this  case  the  oxy muriate 
of  lime  can  be  applied  to  convert  the  nitrous 
gas  into  nitric  acid,  and  from  the  oxygen  im- 
bibed the  quantity  of  nitrous  gas  may  be  in- 
ferred. 

1.  Oxide  of  Gold. 

Some  difficulties  have  been  found  in  ascer- 
taining both  the  number  and  proportions  of 
the  oxides  of  gold;  hence  the  differences  in 
the  results  of  authors. 

Gold  does  not  burn  by  exposure  to  heat, 
but  gold  leaf  and  gold  wire  may  be  deflagra- 
ted by  electricity  and  galvanism ;  a  purple 
powder  is  the  product,  which  is  considered 
by  some  as  the  protoxide  of  gold ;  but  others, 
after  Macquer  and  Proust,  conceive  with 
greater  probability  that  this  powder  is  no- 
thing but  gold  reduced  to  its  ultimate  divi- 
sion. Solutions  of  gold  which  are  of  a  fine 
yellow,  give  a  purple  stain  ;  and  gold  deoxi- 
dized by  green  sulphate  of  iron  is  precipita- 
ted blue,  which  precipitate  gradually  as- 
sumes a  yellow  colour  as  the  particles  become 


6  METALLIC   OXIDES. 

united.  The  very  weak  affinity  of  gold  for 
oxygen  is  shewn  by  the  difficulty  with  which 
it  is  oxidized  and  the  ease  with  which  the 
oxygen  is  expelled  again  by  heat;  these 
facts  seem  to  preclude  the  idea  of  gold  com- 
bining with  oxygen  in  high  temperatures. 

Protoxide.  Gold  is  scarcely  affected  by 
pure  sulphuric,  nitric  or  muriatic  acid;  but 
it  is  easily  oxidized  and  dissolved  by  nitro- 
muriatic  acid  (that  is,  a  mixture  of  nitric 
and  muriatic  acids)  when  assisted  by  a  tem- 
perature of  150  or  200°.  Caustic  potash  be- 
ing put  into  the  solution  and  heated,  a  brown- 
ish black  precipitate  is  obtained;  but  a  part 
of  the  oxide  remains  in  solution  combined 
with  the  muriate  of  potash,  according  to 
Vauquelin ;  and  Proust  has  observed  that  the 
oxide  cannot  be  washed  and  dried  in  a  mode- 
rate heat  without  a  portion  of  the  gold  being 
revived;  hence  the  difficulty  of  ascertain- 
ing in  this  way  the  weight  of  oxygen  com- 
bining with  gold. 

I  have  succeeded,  as  I  apprehend,  in  de- 
termining the  relative  weights  of  gold  and 
oxygen,  by  two  methods,  which  mutually 
corroborate  each  other.  The  first  is  by 
means  of  th#  nitrous  gas  generated  by  the 
solution  of  gold  ;  and  the  second  is,*  by  find- 
ing what  quantity  of  green  oxide  of  iron  is 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  7 

converted  into  red  by  precipitating  a  given 
weight  of  gold  in  solution. 

Ten  grains  of  guinea  gold  of  the  sp.  gr. 
17.3,  were  repeatedly  dissolved  in  a  small 
excess  of  nitro-muriatic  acid;  the  quantity 
and  purity  of  the  nitrous  gas  generated  were 
duly  observed  and  allowance  made  for  the  loss 
occasioned  by  a  small  portion  of  common  air 
originally  in  the  gas  bottle.  The  volume  of 
nitrous  gas  corrected  as  above  was  always 
found  between  1100  and  1200  grain  measures, 
the  weight  of  which  may  be  estimated  at  J  .6 
grains,  corresponding  to  1.4  grains  of  oxygen. 
The  small  portion  of  alloy  (XV)  known  to  be 
in  standard  gold  is  chiefly  copper  with  a  small 
part  silver;  now  it  will  be  seen  in  the  sequel 
that  copper  takes  ~  of  its  weight  of  oxygen ; 
hence  if  we  allow  .8  of  a  grain  for  copper 
and  .2  for  the  oxygen  combining  with  it,  we 
shall  have  9.2  gold  united  to  1.2  oxygen,  or 
100  gold  with  13  oxygen,  which  is  nearly  the 
same  as  Berzelius  has  determined  by  precipi- 
tating the  gold  by  mercury.— Again,  10 
grains  of  gold  were  dissolved  as  above  (=  9.2 
pure)  and  precipitated  by  a  solution  of  pure 
green  sulphate  of  iron  of  the  sp.  gr.  1.181 
and  which  I  had  previously  proved  to  contain 
9  grains  of  green  oxide  in  100  measures. 
They  converted  120  measures  of  this  green 


8  METALLIC    OXIDES* 

sulphate  into  yellow,  which  was  carefully 
precipitated  afterwards  by  lime  water,  dried 
and  weighed.  The  gold  precipitated  was 
found  very  nearly  9  grains;  and  the  yellow 
oxide  of  iron  mixed  with  oxide  of  copper 
was  nearly  13  grains.  Now  120  measures 
sulphate  iron  contain  10.8  grains  green  oxide, 
and  these  require  ~  of  their  weight  of  oxy- 
gen (see  the  oxides  of  iron)  to  be  changed 
into  yellow  oxide,  or  1.2  oxygen.  Hence  it 
appears  that  the  oxygen  combined  with  the 
gold  was  transferred  to  the  iron  unchanged  in 
quantity.  It  is  to  be  observed  however  that 
green  oxide  of  iron  not  only  deoxidates  the 
gold  but  it  semideoxidates  the  copper  also ; 
so  that  .1  of  the  transferred  oxygen  above 
might  be  said  to  be  derived  from  the  copper, 
and  the  rest,  or  1.1  from  the  9  grains  of  gold ; 
this  would  give  100  gold  to  12.2  oxygen, 
which  is  still  nearer  to  the  determination  of 
Berzelius.  Upon  the  whole  I  am  inclined  to 
adopt  the  proportion  of  8  to  1  or  100  to  12.5 
as  that  which  appears  the  most  correct  ap- 
proximation and  at  the  same  time  a  ratio 
easily  remembered  and  adapted  to  facilitate 
calculations. 

We  are  now  to  consider  whether  the  above 
is  the  protoxide.  As  no  other  oxide  has  been 
clearly  shewn  to  exist,  and  as  this  combines 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  9 

with  muriatic  acid,  with  ammonia,  with 
the  oxide  of  tin,  &c.  and  is  wholly  deoxi- 
dated by  green  sulphate  of  iron  and  by  a  mo- 
derate heat,  there  seems  every  reason  to  con- 
clude it  is  a  combination  of  the  most  simple 
kind,  or  1  atom  of  metal  to  1  of  oxygen. 
Hence  the  atom  of  oxygen  being  7,  that  of 
gold  must  be  56,  and  not  140  or  200,  as  sta- 
ted Vol.  1,  p.  250. 

Berzelius  seems  to  consider  the  above  as  the 
tritoxide,  or  three  atoms  of  oxygen  to  one  of 
gold;  but  it  is  extremely  improbable  that 
gold,  which  is  allowed  to  have  a  weak  affinity 
for  oxygen,  should  be  able  to  restrain  the 
violent  repulsion  of  three  atoms  of  oxygen, 
and  should  on  every  occasion  lose  them  all  at 
once,  and  not  by  degrees,  as  is  usual  with 
other  high  oxides. 

Subjoined  are  the  results  of  various  au- 
thors in  regard  to  the  oxide  of  gold,  but  ge- 
nerally given  with  diffidence  as  to  their  ac- 
curacy. 


gold 

oxygen 

Bergman         100 

+  10 

Proust 

4-     8.57  to  31. 

Oberkampf   — — 

+  io 

Berzelius       « 

-f  12     (4,  suboxide) 

My  results     — 

+  12.5 

roL.  ii. 

B 

10  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

Since  writing  the  above  I  have  had  an  op- 
portunity of  repeating  the  experiments  on 
the  oxide  of  gold  by  an  improved  nitrous  gas 
apparatus,  calculated  almost  entirely  to  ex- 
clude atmospheric  air;  I  find  less  nitrous  gas 
produced  during  the  solution  than  stated 
above,  sometimes  by  4,  and  that  it  is  variable 
according  to  the  excess  of  nitric  acid ;  also 
that  the  solution  requires  a  portion  of  oxymu- 
riatic  acid  as  an  equivalent  for  the  nitrous  gas 
retained.  I  prefer,  however,  the  method  of 
oxidizing  the  green  sulphate  of  iron;  by 
putting  a  small  excess  of  the  green  sulphate 
and  precipitating,  first  the  red  oxide  and  then 
the  green,  I  obtained  very  distinct  results. 
On  the  whole  I  am  inclined  to  think  my  re- 
sults preceding  these  have  rather  overrated 
the  oxygen,  and  that  it  would  as  nearly  be 
stated  at  11  on  the  hundred.  This  would  be 
nearly  a  mean  of  those  in  the  above  table, 
and  would  require  the  atom  of  gold  to  be  63, 
and  that  of  the  oxide  70.  Between  the  two 
extremes  of  56  and  63  it  is  most  probable  the 
true  weight  of  the  atom  of  gold  will  be 
found. 

It  may  be  proper  to  add  that  I  have  found 
100  grain  measures  of  muriatic  acid  (1.16), 
and  25  of  nitric  (1.35),  are  sufficient  to  dis- 
solve 40  grains  of  standard  gold;  and  I  have 


METALLIC   OXIDES.  11 

reason  to  think  the  acids  are  in  due  proportion 
nearly,  though  different  from  what  is  usually 
recommended  and  employed. 

2.  Oxide  of  Platina. 

Platina  exhibits  greater  difficulties  than 
gold  in  the  investigation  of  its  compounds 
with  oxygen.  It  is  not  oxidized  by  heat; 
but  by  the  explosion  of  an  electric  battery  it 
is  converted  into  a  black  powder,  which  is 
most  probably  the  metal  in  extreme  division, 
though  it  has  been  considered  by  some  as  the 
protoxide.  Platina  is  capable  of  being  oxi- 
dized and  dissolved  by  nitro-muriatic  acid, 
but  less  easily  than  gold;  it  requires  more 
acid,  as  high  or  higher  temperature  and  long 
continued  digestion;  nitrous  gas  is  given  out, 
during  the  solution,  but  sparingly.  When 
lime  or  an  alkali  is  added  to  the  solution 
with  a  view  to  precipitate  the  oxide,  a  tri- 
ple compound  is  usually  formed  of  the  acid, 
the  oxide  and  the  alkali,  which  is  in  most 
instances  precipitated.  This  weighty  com- 
pound renders  the  valuation  of  the  oxygen  in 
it  very  uncertain. 

Chenevix  has  made  some  observations  on 
the  oxides  of  platina,  (see  Nichols.  Journ. 
7.  p.  178.)  He  finds  two  oxides:  the  one  con- 


12  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

sists  of  93  platina  and  7  oxygen;  the  other 
of  87  platina  and  13  oxygen;  but  the  expe- 
riments on  which  these  results  rest  are  not 
quite  satisfactory. 

Mr.  E.  Davy  in  the  40th  vol.  of  the  Philos. 
Magazine,  states  his  having  reduced  the 
oxide  of  platina  in  solution  by  means  of  hy- 
drogen ;  and  that  he  finds  the  oxide  to  consist 
of  84  platina  and  16  oxygen  nearly.  I  could 
not  succeed  at  all  in  effecting  the  reduction  of 
the  metal  in  this  way. 

Berzelius  has  lately  given  us  the  results  of 
his  investigation  on  this  subject.  (An.  de  Chi- 
mie  87-. — 126.)  According  to  this  distinguished 
chemist  there  are  two  oxides  of  platina;  the 
first  consists  of  100  metal  and  8 J  oxygen, 
and  the  second  of  100  metal  and  16|  oxygen* 
nearly.  In  order  to  understand  his  process  it 
may  be  proper  to  premise  that  when  nitro-mu- 
riatic  acid  has  dissolved  as  much  platina  as  it 
can,  there  is  still  a  great  excess  of  one  or 
both  of  the  acids,  which  is  unnecessary  for 
the  existence  of  the  solution,  and  which 
may,  and  in  general  ought  to  be  expelled  by 
evaporation;  by  exposing  the  solution  to  a 
heat  of  100  or  150°  the  excess  of  both  acids 
is  in  great  part  driven  off  and  a  dry  red  mass 
is  obtained,  without  smell,  but  very  deliques- 
cent.    It  is  equal  to  or  rather  more  than  twice 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  13 

the  weight  of  the  platina.  It  consists  of  wa- 
ter, muriatic  and  nitric  acids,  oxygen  and  pla- 
tina; it  is  still  an  acid  salt.  By  exposing  the 
dry  mass  again  to  a  heat  of  400  or  500°,  it 
liquifies,  exhales  acid  fumes  having  the  odour 
of  oxymuriatic  acid,  and  becomes  again  a 
dry  mass  of  an  olive  colour,  exhaling  fumes  as 
the  heat  increases,  and  loses  about  J  of  its 
weight.  It  is  still  soluble  in  water,  except  a 
few  atoms  of  black  powder,  continues  acid 
to  the  tests,  and  may  be  considered  as  a  su- 
permuriate  of  platina.  If  this  olive  powder 
be  again  heated  almost  to  red,  it  exhales  a  vi- 
sible smoke  in  the  open  air,  which  has  the 
smell  of  oxymuriatic  acid,  and  becomes  a 
light  brown  powder,  having  lost  a  little 
weight.  It  is  then  neither  deliquescent  nor 
soluble  in  water  except  in  a  small  degree  so 
as  to  give  the  yellow  colour.  In  this  state  it 
has  been  considered  as  a  neutral  muriate. 
By  a  moderately  bright  red  heat  this  powder 
is  decomposed  and  leaves  a  black  spongy 
mass  which  is  found  to  be  pure  platina. 

The  insoluble  muriate  of  platina  according 
to  Mr.  E.  Davy,  contains  72.5  per  cent,  of 
platina,  and  Berzelius  finds  73. 3j  the  loss  is 
considered  as  oxymuriatic  acid ;  hence  from 
the  known  proportions  of  this  acid  Berzelius 
infers  the  constituents  of  100  muriate=73.3 


14  METALLIC   OXIDES. 

platina,  6.075  oxygen  and  20.625  muriatic 
acid  ;  or  100  platina  take  8.3  oxygen.  The 
near  agreement  of  the  above  authors  is  favour- 
able to  the  accuracy  of  their  results;  but  I 
have  found  some  difficulty  in  obtaining  the 
insoluble  muriate  free  from  the  soluble  one, 
and  at  the  same  time  from  reduced  platina 
because  the  precise  degree  of  heat  requisite 
to  produce  it  is  neither  well  known  nor  easily 
attained;  and  it  is  desirable  that  a  certain 
weight  of  platina  should  be  dissolved  and  the 
same  weight  reproduced  as  a  confirmation 
of  accuracy.  From  a  train  of  experiments 
on  the  soluble  and  insoluble  muriates  of  pla- 
tina, the  salts  being  obtained  from  the  puri- 
fied laminated  metal,  I  am  disposed  to  consi- 
der the  above  results  as  good  approximations 
to  the  truth. 

In  order  to  obtain  the  other  oxide,  Berze- 
lius  digests  mercury  in  a  solution  of  the  super- 
muriate  of  platina;  a  black  powder  is  thrown 
down,  which  is  found  to  be  platina,  and  mer- 
cury is  taken  up,  being  oxidized  at  the  expence 
of  the  platina.  It  was  found  that  16.7  grains 
of  mercury  had  precipitated  8.5  of  platina; 
and  the  mercury  being  calculated  as  in  the 
state  of  deutoxide,  contained,  from  the  known 
proportions  of  this  metal,  1.4  oxygen;  hence 
8.5  platina  must  have  yielded  1.4  oxygen; 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  15 

and  if  8.5:1.4::  100:16.4;  so  that  100  platina 
must  have  had  16.4  oxygen  in  the  supermuri- 
ate,  or  twice  the  quantity  it  had  in  the  inso- 
luble muriate. 

This  conclusion  appears  to  me  premature; 
the  mercurial  oxide  should  at  least  have  been 
precipitated   and    a   corresponding   quantity 
have  been  found  and  proved  to  be  the  red 
oxide.     Even  had  this  been  the  case,  it  is  not 
easy  to  determine  what  quantity  of  it  might 
be  due  to  the  residue  of  nitro-muriatic  acid. 
But  I  have  not  found  that  the  common  yellow 
or   red  oxide  of  mercury  is  precipitated  by 
lime  water  in  such  case;  the   precipitate  is 
brown,  and  evidently  contains  both  mercury 
and  platina.     Proust  had  found  in  his  excel- 
lent essay   on  platina  (Journ.   de  Physique 
52 — 437, 1801)  that  mercury  decomposes  mu- 
riate of  platina,   that  an  amalgam  of  platina 
with  a  little  calomel,  and  much  mercury  in 
powder,  were  precipitated ;  exposed  to  heat, 
a  fine  black  powder  was   left  which  had  the 
characters    of    platina.     Into   a   solution   of 
pure  platina  that  had  been  evaporated  to  dry- 
ness in  150°  and  redissolved,  I  put  9 J  grs.  of 
mercury,  and  boiled  it  for  10  minutes  in  a  glass 
capsule,   till  there  was  apparently  no  further 
change;   the  liquor  filtered  was  as  yellow  as 
at  first;  the  mixture  of  black  powder  and 


16  METALLIC   OXIDES. 

running  mercury  remaining"'  on  the  filter, 
when  dried,  weighed  6|  grains;  this  heated 
to  a  low  red  in  an  iron  spoon,  left  1  grain  of 
fine  black  powder;  the  liquid  saturated  with 
lime  water,  yielded  2|  grains  dry  black  pow- 
der insoluble  in  cold  nitric  acid;  after  this,  pro- 
tomuriate  of  tin  threw  down  5|  grains  of  the 
compound  oxides  of  platina  and  tin.  The  so- 
lution at  first  contained  3.3  grains  of  platina. 
In  another  experiment  2  parts  of  calomel 
were  put  to  1  of  platina  in  solution;  when 
heated  to  boiling,  the  calomel  was  dissolved 
and  a  little  black  powder  was  precipitated, 
which  did  not  amount  to  half  the  weight  of 
the  platina.  Lime  water  threw  down  from 
the  liquid,  a  yellowish  olive  or  brown  pre- 
cipitate, partially  soluble  in  cold  nitro-muri- 
atic  acid;  and  after  this,  muriate  of  tin  yielded 
a  brown  precipitate.  These  experiments 
shew  that  the  action  between  muriate  of  pla- 
tina and  mercury  or  the  mercurial  salts,  is 
of  a  complicated  nature,  and  is  not  limited 
to  the  decomposition  of  the  oxide  of  platina 

and  the  substitution  of  the  deutoxide  of  mer- 
cury in  its  place. 

The  difficulties  abovementioned  have  led 

me  to  investigate  the  oxygen  combining  with 

platina  by  means  of  the  nitrous  gas  yielded 

upon  its  solution  in  nitro-muriatic  acid.     By 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  17 

three  distinct  experiments  I  found  that  30 
grains  of  pure  platina  by  solution  yielded 
nearly  750  grain  measures  of  nitrous  gas, 
which  may  be  considered  as  1  grain  in  weight ; 
|  of  which  =  .875  for  oxygen;  this  would 
give  8.75  oxygen  per  cent.  But  from  a  sub- 
sequent experiment  made  under  circumstan- 
ces calculated  to  preclude  as  much  as  possible 
every  source  of  fallacy,  I  obtained  790  mea- 
sures of  nitrous  gas  from  10  grains  of  pla- 
tina; and  the  solution  afterwards  took  60 
measures  of  oxy muriatic  acid  gas  before  a 
permanent  smell  of  the  gas  was  produced. 
These  790  measures  =  1.05  grain,  \  of  which 
=  .92,  to  which  add  .04  for  the  oxygen  acqui- 
red from  the  oxymuriatic  acid,  and  we  have 
,96  oxygen  for  10  platina ;  or  100  platina  take 
9.6  oxygen.  But  if  9.6 :  100 ::  7  :  73,  for  the 
weight  of  an  atom  of  platina,  and  80  for 
that  of  the  protoxide,  as  I  apprehend  it  to  be, 
and  the  only  oxide  of  platina  we  can  at  pre- 
sent form.  (The  atom  of  platina  in  Vol.  1, 
page  248,  was  estimated  at  100.) 

3.  Oxide  of  Silver, 

When  silver  wire  is  exploded  by  electricity 
in  oxygen  gas,  a  black  powder  is  produced, 
which  is  the  oxide  of  silver.     If  silver  be  dis- 

VOL.  II.  C 


18  METALLIC   OXIDES. 

solved  in  nitric  acid  and  precipitated  by  lime 
water,  an  olive  brown  powder  falls  which  be- 
comes black  when  exposed  to  the  light.  This 
-black  powder  is  the  only  oxide  of  silver  with 
which  we  are  acquainted.  The  proportion  of 
silver  and  oxygen  has  been  investigated  bj 
various  chemists;  the  results  are  as  under. 

silver  oxygeu 

Wenzel 100  4-  s  8.5 

Proust +      9.5 

Bucholz  and  Rose  ...  4-     9.5* 

Gay  Lussac. 4*     7.6  f 

Berzelius , 4-      7.925 

From  the  solution  of  170  grains  of  standard 
silver  T  obtained  nearly  30  oz.  measures  of  ni- 
trous gas  =  18|  grains,  corresponding  to  16 
oxygen.  This  would  give  9.4  oxygen  upon 
1Q0  silver.  But  as  TV  of  the  metal  or  17 
grains  was  copper,  and  this  takes  -J.  of  its 
weight  of  oxygen,  we  shall  have  159  silver 
and  1LJ  oxygen,  or  100  silver  and  7.7  oxygen 
nearly. 

If  we  adopt  7.8  as  the  proper  quantity  of 
oxygen  on  100  silver,  we  shall  have  7.8: 
100  ::  7  :  90  nearly,  which  represents  the 
weight  of  an  atom  of  silver,  and  97  that  of 
the  oxide. 

*  7.9  when  duly  corrected.  Annal.  de  Chimie,  78—114. 
t  Memoirs  d'Arcueil  2—168. 


METALLIC   OXIDES.  19 

4.   Oxides  of  Mercury. 

Two  oxides  of  mercury  have  been  long 
known  and  are  well  distinguished  from  each 
other.  They  may  be  obtained  by  exposing 
mercury  to  a  heat  not  exceeding  600%  in  con- 
tact with  oxygen  gas  or  atmospheric  air,  and 
due  agitation ;  but  this  method  is  rarely  adop- 
ted in  practice.  A  high  degree  of  heat  de- 
composes the  oxides  again. 

Protoxide.  To  obtain  the  protoxide,  mer- 
cury must  be  slowly  dissolved  in  dilute  nitric 
acid  without  heat,  and  an  excess  of  mercury 
must  be  used.  If  to  1000  grain  measures  of 
nitric  acid,  1.2  sp.gr.  be  put  500  grains  of 
mercury,  by  occasional  agitation  the  requi- 
site solution  will  be  obtained  in  24  hours. 
A  portion  of  this  solution  must  be  treated  with 
a  small  excess  of  lime  water  or  caustic  alkali, 
when  a  black  powder  will  be  thrown  down, 
which  is  the  oxide  containing  a  minimum  of 
oxygen,  and  hence  may  be  considered  the 
protoxide. 

Deutoxide.  If  to  1000  measures  of  nitric 
acid,  1.2  sp.  gr.  be  put  350  grains  of  mercury, 
and  the  mixture  be  boiled  till  the  mercury  dis- 
appear, a  solution  will  be  obtained  contain- 
ing the  deutoxide.  A  portion  of  this  being 
treated  as  beforementioned  with  lime  water, 
a  yellowish  red  powder  is  precipitated,  whicn 


20  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

is  the  oxide  of  mercury  containing  a  maxi- 
mum of  oxygen;  all  the  later  authors  agree 
that  it  contains  just  double  the  quantity  of 
oxygen  to  a  given  portion  of  mercury  that 
the  former  does,  and  may  therefore  be  called 
the  deutoxide. 

These  two  oxides  combine  with  most  acids 
and  form  salts,  some  of  which  exhibit  re- 
markable differences  occasioned  by  the  ox- 
ides; thus,  muriatic  acid  with  the  protoxide 
forms  protomuriate  of  mercury,  commonly 
called  calomel,  an  insoluble  salt;  with  the 
deutoxide  it  forms  deutomuriate  of  mercury, 
commonly  called  corrosive  sublimate,  a  solu- 
ble salt. 

The  proportions  of  metal  and  oxygen  in  the 
two  oxides  may  be  found  by  precipitating  a 
known  weight  of  mercury  reduced  by  solu- 
tion to  either  of  the  oxides,  then  drying  and 
weighing  the  oxides,  when  the  increase  of 
weight  by  the  addition  of  oxygen  may  be  ob- 
served. This  method  is  less  accurate  with  re- 
gard to  mercury  than  to  other  metals,  on  ac- 
count of  the  very  great  weight  of  the  atom, 
by  which  a  small  error  in  the  gross  weight  of 
the  oxide  will  be  a  great  one  as  it  respects 
the  oxygen.  This  circumstance  will  partly 
account  for  the  differences  of  authors  on  this 
subject. 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  21 

One  fact  has  been  for  some  time  known 
which  demonstrates  the  oxygen  in  the  red 
oxide  to  be  double  that  in  the  black.  Cor- 
rosive sublimate  may  be  reduced  to  calomel 
by  adding  to  it  as  much  mercury  as  the  sub- 
limate contains,  and  triturating  the  mixture 
well,  the  oxygen  of  the  red  oxide  (as  well 
as  the  acid)  becomes  equally  divided  amongst 
the  mercury  and  forms  the  black  oxide,  which 
is  a  constituent  of  calomel.  Hence  it  fol- 
lows that  if  the  oxygen  in  one  oxide  can  be 
ascertained,  that  of  the  other  becomes  known. 
Or  if  we  can  find  how  much  oxygen  must  be 
added  to  the  black  oxide  to  change  it  to  the 
red,  we  shall  know  the  oxygen  in  both. 
Conformably  with  this  last  idea  I  have  found 
a  very  accurate  and  elegant  method  of  ascer- 
taining the  oxygen  required  to  convert  the 
black  to  the  red  oxide  by  treating  protomu- 
riate  of  mercury,  mixed  with  water  and  a  lit- 
tle muriatic  acid,  with  oxymuriate  of  lime 
in  solution;  this  must  be  gradually  added  till 
the  protomuriate  is  dissolved,-  or  rather  con- 
verted to  the  deutomuriate.  The  quantity  of 
oxygen  in  a  given  solution  of  oxymuriate  of 
lime  is  most  conveniently  found  by  a  solution 
of  green  sulphate  of  iron, :  as  will  be  shewn 
under  the'  oxides  of  that  metal. 

The  oxides  of  mercury  may  be  investigat- 


22  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

ed  by  the  nitrous  gas  produced  during  solution. 
When  mercury  is  dissolved  without  heat,  as 
mentioned  above,  no  nitrous  gas  is  liberated. 
The  solution  has  a  strong  nitrous  smell  and 
requires  a  great  quantity  of  oxy muriate  of 
lime  to  saturate  both  the  oxide  and  the  acid. 
When  heat  is  employed  to  accelerate  the  so- 
lution, nitrous  gas  is  liberated.  I  dissolved 
154  grains  of  mercury,  in  nitric  acid,  1.2 
sp.  gr.,  by  the  application  of  a  gentle  heat 
from  a  lamp.  About  ^  excess  of  acid  re* 
mained  in  the  solution;  the  nitrous  gas  ob- 
tained was  12  oz.  measures  =7.5  grains,  cor- 
responding to  6.5  oxygen,  which  gives  nearly 
4  oxygen  or  100  mercury.  This  would  have 
led  me  to  suppose  I  had  obtained  the  black  ox- 
ide in  solution ;  it  was  however  entirely  the 
red,  as  it  gave  no  precipitate  by  common  salt, 
and  exhibited  the  red  oxide  by  lime  water; 
but  it  required  as  much  oxymuriate  of  lime  as 
contained  6.5  oxygen  to  saturate  the  nitrous 
gas  in  the  solution  before  any  oxymuriatic  acid 
was  liberated.  It  was  clear  therefore  that 
only  |  of  the  nitrous  gas  was  evolved,  and 
the  other  §  was  retained  in  the  solution, 
though  it  had  been  exposed  to  boiling  heat. 

The  following  are  the  proportions  assigned 
by  the  several  authors  for  the  oxides  of 
mercury. 


METALLIC   OXIDES.  23 


Mercury.  Oxygen. 

^ % 

black.  red. 

Bergman*  100  +     4       +  

Lavoisierf H •jr  7.75  to  8 

Chenevixj  — -  +12       +  18.5 

Taboada||                         +     5.2   +  11 

Fourcroy  &  Thenard  (a) +     4.16+  8.21 

Sefstrom  (6)                    +    3.99  +     7.99 

My  results  give               +     4.2   +     8.4 


Though  the  relative  weights  of  oxygen  and 
mercury  may  be  investigated  as  above,  yet  it 
is  from  the  weight  of  mercury  and  the  acids 
in  the  salts  of  mercury,  some  of  which  are  of 
a  very  definite  character,  such  as  the  muri- 
ate and  the  deutomuriate,  that  the  relative 
weight  of  the  atom  of  mercury  is  best  inves- 
tigated. From  these  I  first  deduced  the 
weight  of  an  atom  of  mercury  to  be  167 
about  10  years  ago,  and  subsequent  experi- 
ence has  not  induced  me  to  change  the  num- 
ber, though  it  probably  may  admit  of  some 
correction.  If  the  atom  of  mercury  be  deno- 
ted by  167,  that  of  the  protoxide  will  be  174, 

*  Kirwan's  Mineralogy. 

t  Annals  of  Philosophy,  Vol.  3,  p.  333. 

1  Philos.  Trans.  1802. 

|j  Jour,  de  Physique.  1805. 

(a)  Mem.d'Arcueil,Vol.2.p.l68.  1809. 

(b)  Annals  of  Philosophy,  Vol.2,  p. 48. 


24  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

and  that  of  the  deutoxide  181 ;  which  makes 
100  mercury  take  4.2  and  8.4  oxygen  for  the 
oxides  respectively,  as  in  the  above  table. 

5.  Oxide  of  Palladium. 

The  discoverer  of  this  metal,  Dr.  Wollas- 
ton,  has  given  us  its  distinguishing  chemical 
properties ;  but  we  are  indebted  to  Berzelius 
and  Yauquelin  for  the  proportions  of  oxygen 
and  sulphur  which  combine  with  the  metal 
(Vid.  Annal.  de  Chimie,  77  arid  78.)  Few 
chemists  have  had  an  opportunity  of  making 
experiments  on  this  metal,  owing  to  its  great 
scarcity  and  the  consequent  high  price  of  it 
(1  shilling  per  grain).  It  does  not  seem  de- 
sireable  that  any  but  those  skilled  in  the  more 
delicate  chemical  manipulations  should  ope- 
rate upon  articles  such  as  the  present. 

Berzelius  treated  the  muriate  of  palladium 
with  mercury,  which  abstracted  the  oxygen 
and  left  an  amalgam  of  palladium  and  mer- 
cury ;  from  the  quantity  of  mercury  dissolved 
he  calculates  that  100  palladium  combine 
with  14.2  oxygen.  This  conclusion  was  cor- 
roborated by  the  circumstance  that  100  palla- 
dium were  found  to  take  28  of  sulphur,  or 
double  the  quantity  of  oxygen,  which  fre- 
quently happens  with  the  metals. 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  25 

Vauquelin  precipitates  the  oxide  of  palla- 
dium from  the  muriate  by  potash;  it  appears 
of  a  red  brown  colour,  and  is  probably  a  hy- 
drate ;  when  washed  and  dried  in  a  moderate 
heat,  it  becomes  black,  it  loses  20  per  cent, 
by  a  red  heat  and  becomes  metallic.  This 
would  give  25  oxygen  on  100  metal ;  but  as 
he  finds  the  sulphuret  to  be  100  metal  with  24 
or  30  sulphur,  nearly  agreeing  with  Berze- 
lius,  it  is  very  probable  that  a  moderate  heat 
does  not  free  the  oxide  from  water,  and  that 
consequently  a  part  of  the  20  per  cent,  loss 
is  water. 

I  dissolved  3  grains  of  palladium  in  a  small 
excess  of  nitro-muriatic  acid  and  obtained 
240  grain  measures  of  nitrous  gas ;  the  same 
quantity  was  obtained  a  second  time,  and  to 
the  solution  (slightly  acid)  were  added  by  de- 
grees 200  measures  of  oxymuriatic  acid  gas; 
after  agitation  no  smell  was  perceived,  but 
by  increasing  the  quantity  of  gas  a  perma- 
nent smell  of  oxymuriatic  acid  was  produ- 
ced, and  when  200  more  had  been  added  the 
smell  was  sensible  for  some  days  in  an  open 
jar,  a  presumption  that  no  higher  oxide  is  to 
be  obtained.  Now  240  nitrous  gas  =  .32  of 
a  grain,  corresponding  to  .28  of  oxygen,  and 
200  oxymuriatic  acid  =  .64  of  a  grain,   cor- 

VOL.  II.  D 


26  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

responding1  to  .15  oxygen;  the  sum  of  the 
two  portions  of  oxygen  =  .43,  which  must 
have  combined  with  3  grains  of  palladium ; 
if  .43  : 4 : :  7  :  50  nearly.  Or  100  metal  com- 
bine with  14  oxygen,  as  determined  by  Ber- 
zelius.  I  find  the  sulphuret  to  accord  with 
this  determination;  and  by  carefully  satura- 
ting the  excess  of  acid  in  the  nitro-muriate 
of  palladium  and  then  finding  the  quantity  of 
lime-water  necessary  to  precipitate  a  certain 
weight  of  palladium,  as  well  as  the  quantity 
of  test  muriatic  acid  necessary  to  dissolve  the 
precipitated  oxide,  I  am  confirmed  in  the 
opinion  that  the  atom  of  palladium  must 
weigh  50  nearly,  and  its  oxide  57,  which 
there  is  every  reason  to  believe  is  the  prot- 
oxide. 

6,  7,  and  8.  Oxides  of  Rhodium,  Iridium, 
and  Osmium. 

Nothing  certain  has  yet  been  determined 
respecting  the  oxygenation  of  these  very 
rare  metals. 

9.  Oxides  of  Copper. 

There  are  two  oxides  of  copper  according 
to  the  results  of  Proust,  Chenevix,  Berze- 
lius  and  others,  the  proportions  of  which  are 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  27 

given  nearly  the  same  by  all,  and  so  as  to  leave 
no  reasonable  doubt  concerning  their  accu- 
racy. 

1.  Protoxide.  This  oxide  is  orange,  and 
contains  12|  oxygen  on  100  copper:  it  is  ob- 
tained by  precipitating  a  portion  of  copper 
from  the  solution  of  any  cupreous  salt,  by 
means  of  iron,  then  mixing  this  copper  with 
a  rather  greater  portion  of  the  deutoxide  and 
triturating  them  well.  This  being  done,  the 
mixture  is  to  be  dissolved  in  muriatic  acid, 
and  the  orange  oxide  may  then  be  precipita- 
ted by  an  alkali. 

2.  Deutoxide.  This  oxide  is  black ;  it  con- 
tains 25  oxygen  on  100  copper :  the  black 
oxide  is  obtained  by  dissolving  copper  in  ni- 
tric or  sulphuric  acid,  then  precipitating  by 
lime-water  or  an  alkali,  and  heating  the  dried 
precipitate  red  hot.  It  may  also  be  obtained 
by  exposing  copper  to  a  red  heat  for  some 
time  in  common  air  or  oxygen  gas,  removing 
the  scales  and  exposing  them  in  like  manner, 
till  at  length  the  black  oxide  is  formed. 

By  dissolving  112  grains  of  copper  turn- 
ings in  1000  grain  measures  of  1.16  nitric  acid, 

1  obtained  48  oz.  measures  of  nitrous  gas, 
=  30  grains ;  by  oxy muriate  of  lime  I  found 

2  grains  of  nitrous  gas  in  the  solution,  mak- 
ing in  all  32  grains  =  28  grains  qf  oxygen, 


28  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

Tf  28  :  112  ::  14:56,  for  the  weight  of  an  atom 
of  copper;  hence  the  protoxide  —  63  and  the 
deutoxide  =  70.  These  weights  I  adopted  in 
1806,  and  have  not  seen  any  reason  to  modify 
them  since. 


10.   Oxides  of  Iron, 

Two  well  known  and  well  distinguished 
oxides  of  iron  are  now  universally  admitted ; 
the  one  contains  28  oxygen  on  100  iron,  the 
other  42  on  100. 

1.  Protoxide.  This  is  always  formed  when 
iron  is  dissolved  in  dilute  sulphuric  or  muriatic 
acid  ;  it  may  be  precipitated  from  these  solu- 
tions by  the  pure  alkalies  or  earths  ]  it  appears 
at  first  of  a  dark  green,  being  then  a  hydrate 
or  combined  with  water;  on  a  filtre  it  soon 
becomes  yellow  at  the  surface  by  attracting 
oxygen  ;  when  dried  in  a  heat  of  200°  or  up- 
wards it  becomes  black.  The  quantity  of 
oxygen  in  it  is  best  ascertained  from  the  hy- 
drogen generated  during  the  solution  of  the 
iron.  All  the  authorities  I  have  found  nearly 
concur  in  their  results  as  under. 

100  grains  of  iron  dissolved  in  dilute  sul- 
phuric or  muriatic  acids  yield  hydrogen,  ac- 
cording to 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  29 

Cavendish  (1766)  155  cubic  inches. 

Priestley,  from  147  to  162 

Lavoisier  163 

Vandermonde,  Berthollet,  |  max   176 

and  Monge  y 

Vauquelin  160  to  179 

Dr.Thomson  163 

My  own  Experiments  give  160 

Mean  164=82  oxygen^ 
27.9  grains. 

By  precipitating  the  oxide,  and  drying  it, 
nearly  the  same  result  may  be  obtained,  as 
100  iron  will  yield  128  oxide.  This  oxide  is 
magnetic. 

2.  Intermediate  or  red  oxide.  This  oxide 
may  be  obtained  in  various  ways.  First  by 
calcining  the  sulphate  or  nitrate  of  iron. 
Second  by  precipitation  from  old  solutions 
of  the  salts  of  iron  ;  the  precipitate  is  yellow 
at  first,  being  perhaps  a  hydrate;  but  when 
dried  and  heated  it  becomes  brown-red. 
Third,  by  calcining  iron  or  repeatedly  expos- 
ing iron  filings  to  a  red  heat,  and  tritura- 
tion. Fourth,  by  treating  a  solution  of  the 
sulphate  or  other  salt  of  the  protoxide  with 
oxmuriatic  acid,  or  oxymuriate  of  lime  till 
t^xy muriatic  acid  is  evolved;  then  precipitat- 
ing-the  oxide  which  is  thus  converted  into  the 
red.   Fifth,  by  agitating  water  containing  the 


30  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

green  oxide  recently  precipitated,  with  oxy- 
gen gas.  The  red  oxide  is  not  sensibly  mag- 
netic. 

The  quantity  of  oxygen  in  the  red  oxide 
may  be  investigated  in  various  ways,  and  it 
is  generally  allowed  that  they  all  concur  in 
giving  42  on  100  iron.  The  one  which  I 
have  used  peculiarly,  and  prefer  both  for  ease 
and  accuracy,  is  to  find  the  quantity  of  oxy- 
muriatic  acid  gas  necessary  to  saturate  a  given 
portion  of  the  green  sulphate.  I  take  for  in- 
stance 100  measures  of  1.149  green  sulphate, 
which  I  know  to  contain  8  grains  of  black 
oxide ;  this  I  find  absorbs  nearly  13  hundred 
measures  of  oxymuriatic  acid  gas  before  the 
acid  smell  is  developed ;  the  oxygen  cor- 
responding to  this  quantity  of  acid  is  known 
to  be  near  660  measures,  =  .88  grain.  (See 
Vol.  1,  p.  308.)  Hence,  if  8:  .88::  128  :  14; 
or  128  black  oxide  acquire  14  or  become  142 
when  converted  into  the  red  oxide.  This 
fact  being  established,  I  find  it  very  conve- 
nient to  make  use  of  the  oxymuriate  of  lime 
instead  of  the  acid  gas,  adopting  the  solution 
of  green  sulphate  of  iron  as  a  test  of  the 
quantity  of  oxymuriatic  acid  in  a  given  vo* 
lume  of  any  solution  of  oxymuriate  of  lime. 

The  quantity  of  oxygen  in  the  red  oxide  of 


METALLIC   OXIDES.  31 

iron  may  be  inferred,  but  not  so  satisfacto- 
rily, from  the  nitrous  gas  obtained  during  the 
solution  of  iron  in  nitric  acid.  In  order  to 
obtain  the  most  gas  from  a  given  quantity  of 
the  materials,  they  should  be  so  proportioned 
as  to  produce  saturation  nearly.  If  an  excess 
of  acid  be  used,  it  absorbs  the  nitrous  gas  in 
part;  and  if  an  excess  of  iron,  it  is  not  all 
dissolved.  I  took  50  grains  of  iron  filings 
and  600  measures  of  1.15  nitric  acid;  these 
were  put  together  in  a  gas  bottle  and  by  the 
assistance  of  a  little  heat  a  quantity  of  ni- 
trous gas  was  obtained  equal  to  12  grains  in 
weight,  allowing  the  sp.  gr.  of  the  gas  to  be 
1.04  (air  being  1) ;  all  the  iron  was  dissolved 
except  a  few  atoms,  and  the  solution  was 
slightly  acid ;  the  whole  of  the  oxide  was  red 
when  precipitated  by  lime  water.  Now  50 
grains  of  iron  take  21  of  oxygen  to  form  the 
red  oxide,  and  these  correspond  to  24  of  ni- 
trous gas,  which  is  just  twice  the  quantity 
obtained;  one  half  of  the  gas  generated  then 
remains  in  combination  with  the  iron,  even 
when  the  constituents  of  the  salt  are  pro- 
portioned so  as  to  produce  mutual  saturation. 
I  was  in  expectation  that  the  quantity  of  ni- 
trous gas  retained  might  be  converted  into 
nitric  acid  by  oxymuriate  of  lime,  and  hence 
might  be  determined;   but  in  this  I  was  dis- 


32  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

appointed.  When  oxymuriate  of  lime  is 
added  to  the  liquid,  a  pungent  gas  is  libe- 
rated, the  nature  of  which  I  have  not  de- 
termined. Thinking,  it  might  in  part  be 
owing  to  the  iron,  I  transferred  the  acid 
to  soda,  by  decomposing  the  nitrate  of  iron 
by  the  carbonate  of  soda ;  this  nitrate  of 
soda  however,  when  treated  with  oxymu- 
riate of  lime,  exhibited  the  same  pheno- 
menon as  the  nitrate  of  iron.  When  an 
acid  is  added  the  oxymuriatic  acid  itself  is 
given  out.  These  results  will  require  further 
consideration.  At  present  I  am  inclined  to 
think  the  pungent  gas  is  one  atom  of  nitrous 
and  one  of  oxygen  or  what  I  formerly  con- 
sidered as  nitric  acid.  (See  Vol.  1,  plate  4, 
ng.  27.) 

Some  authors  have  found  as  they  conceive, 
other  oxides  of  iron,  containing  less  or  more 
of  oxygen  than  the  above ;  thus  Darso  finds 
by  calcination  from  15  to  56  oxygen  on  100, 
(Nicholson's  Journ.  Vol.  17);  but  there  is 
great  reason  to  believe  that  uncertainties  must 
exist  in  his  mode  of  experimenting  sufficient 
to  account  for  the  anomalies  observed.  This 
author  has  suggested  some  doubt  whether  the 
oxygenous  gas  naturally  contained  in  water 
has  any  effect  on  the  salts  with  green  oxide  of 
iron.     I   have  ascertained  that  point  by  re- 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  33 

peated  experiments,  and  can  assert  that  the 
oxygen  in  water  immediately  unites  to  the 
green  oxide  of  iron  to  convert  it  into  red,  and 
that  the  green  sulphate  may  be  used  as  an  ac- 
curate test  of  the  quantity  of  oxygen  in  water. 
When  pure  green  sulphate  of  iroh  is  dropped 
into  water  and  then  the  oxide  precipitated  by 
a  gradual  addition  of  lime  water,  it  falls  down 
yellow  in  proportion  to  the  oxygen  in  the  wa- 
ter, which  may  be  increased  3  or  4  times 
by  artificial  impregnation.  If  the  oxygen  of 
the  water  be  previously  saturated  with  nitrous 
gas,  then  the  oxide  is  wholly  precipitated 
green. 

Gay  Lussac,  in  the  80th  Vol.  of  the  AnnaL 
de  Chimie,  asserts  that  an  oxide  of  iron  con- 
taining 37.8  oxygen  upon  100  iron  is  always 
obtained  when  iron  is  burned  in  oxygenous 
gas,  and  still  more  effectually  when  iron  is 
oxydized  by  water  or  steam.  If  this  oxide 
exist  in  the  proportions  stated,  it  must  be  a 
compound  of  1  atom  of  the  protoxide  and  2 
of  the  red  oxide,  which  would  give  37.3 
oxygen  on  100  of  iron. 

From  the  above  facts  and  observations  it  is 
evident  the  atom  of  iron  must  be  considered 
as  weighing  25,  (and  not  50  as  already  given, 
Vol.  1,  page  258) ;   the  protoxide  is  32,  and 

VOL.  II,  E 


34  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

the  intermediate  or  red  oxide  is  2  atoms  prot- 
oxide and  1  of  oxygen  =  71. 


11.  Oxides  of  Nickel. 

1.  Protoxide.     It  appears  to  be  ascertained 
from   the  experiments  of  Proust  (Journ.  de 
Physiq.63— 442),Xtichter  (Nichols  .Jour.12.), 
Tupputi   (An.  de  Chimie  78.),  and   RolhofF 
(An.  of  Philos.  3 — 335.),  that  the  protoxide  of 
nickel  consists  of  100  metal  and  from  25  to  28 
oxygen.     My  experiments  on  the  solution  of 
nickel  in  nitric  acid  give  me  14  grains  ni- 
trous gas,    corresponding  to   12  oxygen,   in 
the   solution  of  44  grains   of  nickel ;     this 
gives  100  nickel  to  27  oxygen,  which  I  adopt 
as  agreeing  with  the  mean  of  the  beforemen- 
tioned  results.     This  oxide  may  be  obtained 
by  precipitation  from  a  solution  of  nitrate  of 
nickel ;   it  is  at  first  white,    being  then  a  hy- 
drate ;  when  dried  in  a  moderate  temperature 
it  becomes  yellowish;  after  this,  being  heated 
to  a  cherry  red,  it  loses  from  20  to  24  per  cent, 
of  water  and  becomes  of  an  ash  grey  colour : 
this   is  the  only  oxide  of  nickel  soluble  in 
acids,  and  must  therefore  be  deemed  the  prot- 
oxide ;  hence  we  have  27 :  100 ::  7 :  26,  nearly, 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  35 

for  the  weight  of  an  atom  of  nickel;  and 
not  25  or  50,  as  estimated  at  page  258.  Vol.  I. 
Intermediate  oxide.  Thenard  discovered  a 
second  oxide  of  nickel  by  passing  oxymuri- 
atic  acid  through  a  solution  of  nickel  and  then 
precipitating;  it  is  a  black  powder;  when 
treated  with  sulphuric  or  nitric  acid  it  gives 
out  gas,  being  the  excess  of  oxygen  above 
the  protoxide ;  but  with  muriatic  acid  it  gives 
oxymuriatic  acid  gas.  RolhofF  was  induced 
to  believe,  but  I  do  not  know  upon  what  evi- 
dence, that  this  oxide  contained  1^-  or  If 
times  the  oxygen  of  the  protoxide.  By 
means  of  oxy muriate  of  lime  I  find  the  prot- 
oxide recently  precipitated,  takes  half  as  much 
oxygen  as  it  had  previously,  to  form  the  black 
oxide;  and  that  it  cannot  be  formed,  like  the 
red  oxide  of  iron,  by  agitation  with  water 
mixed  with  common  air.  The  white  oxide 
treated  with  oxymuriate  of  lime  becomes  al- 
most instantly  blue,  growing  darker  till  it 
gradually  passes  into  brown,  and  finally  black 
in  about  half  an  hour.  It  contains  40  oxygen 
on  100  nickel,  and  is  most  probably  consti- 
tuted of  1  atom  of  oxygen  holding  2  of 
protoxide  together,  more  especially  as  it  is  not 
found  in  combination  with  acids.  The  me- 
thod I  prefer  to  procure  the  black  oxide  is  to 
precipitate  a  known  weight  of  oxide  by  lime 


36  .     METALLIC    OXIDES. 

* 

water ;  then  pouring  off  the  clear  liquid,  I 
put  as  much  liquid  oxymuriate  of  lime  to  the 
moist  hydrate  as  contains  XV  of  the  weight 
of  the  oxide  of  oxygen,  and  stir  frequently 
for  half  an  hour ;  the  point  of  saturation  is 
found  when  more  oxide  put  to  the  clear  liquid 
is  not  discoloured  on  one  hand,  and  when 
more  oxymuriate  of  lime  does  not  affect  the 
colour,  but  remains  in  the  clear  liquid  on  the 
other  hand. 

12.  Oxides  of  Tin. 

There  are  two  .oxides  of  tin,  which  have 
been  carefully  investigated  by  several  che- 
mists, and  appear  to  be  ascertained  with  great 
precision.  The  protoxide  is  grey,  and  con- 
tains 13|  oxygen  on  100  tin;  the  deutoxide 
is  white,  and  contains  27  oxygen  on  100  tin. 

1.  Protoxide.  There  are  t\v.o  methods  of 
obtaining  the  constitution  of  this  oxide.  The 
first  is  by  dissolving  a  certain  weight  of  tin 
filings  in  muriatic  acid,  precipitating  by  lime 
water  or  carbonated  alkalies  and  drying  the 
oxide  in  a  moderate  heat ;  this  is  liable  to 
some  uncertainty ;  the  precipitate  being  a  hy- 
drate, requires  to  be  exposed  to  heat  to  expel 
the  water ;  but  if  the  heat  approaches  to  red, 
the  oxide  takes  fire  and  is  converted  into  the 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  37 

deutoxide.  The  second  method  is  to  dissolve 
tin  in  muriatic  acid  and  carefully  collect  the 
hydrogen  gas  evolved;  this  was  first  done  by 
Mr.  Cavendish,  with  his  usual  accuracy,  and 
published  in  1766;  he  found  1  oz.  of  tin 
yield  202  oz.  measures  of  hydrogen  gas.  I 
have  frequently  tried  this  experiment  and  al- 
ways found  a  proportional  quantity,  or  very 
nearly  200  measures  for  each  grain  of  tin. 
This  mode  of  investigation  appears  to  me 
unexceptionable.  Now  200  hydrogen  unite 
to  100  oxygen,  and  100  grain  measures  of 
oxygen=.134  grain  in  weight;  hence  if  .134 
oxy. :  1  tin ::  7  oxy. :  52  nearly  for  the  weight 
of  an  atom  of  tin,  on  the  presumption  this 
is  the  protoxide. 

2.  Deutoxide.  This  may  be  obtained  by 
heating  tin  till  it  takes  fire,  and  the  produce 
of  the  combustion  is  the  oxide  required;  but 
to  ascertain  the  proportions  of  tin  and  oxygen 
two  other  methods  are  preferable  ;  the  one  is 
to  treat  tin  with  nitric  acid  of  the  sp.  gr. 
1.2  to  1.4;  a  violent  effervescence  and  great 
heat  ensue  and  the  tin  is  converted  into  a 
white  powder.  This  being  dried  in  100*  gives 
about  160  grains  for  100  of  tin.  It  consists 
of  the  deutoxide  united  to  a  little  acid  and 
water;  these  two  may  be  driven  off  by  a  low 
red  heat,   and  127  grains  of  the  deutoxide 


38  METALLIC   OXIDES. 

remain  in  the  state  of  a  white  powder.  The 
other  method  is  to  treat  a  solution  of  the  prot- 
oxide of  tin  with  oxy  muriate  of  lime  till  it 
is  saturated;  this  will  be  found  when  59 
grains  of  the  protoxide  have  acquired  7  grains 
of  oxygen,  or  1 13{  have  acquired  1.3 J  of  oxy- 
gen, which  corroborates  the  result  by  the  1st 
method.  This  oxide  containing  just  twice  as 
much  oxygen  as  the  former,  may  justly  be  con- 
sidered as  the  deutoxide.  No  higher  oxide 
of  tin  has  been  obtained. 

The  two  oxides,  though  both  white  when 
precipitated,  may  be  distinguished  from  their 
different  appearances ;  the  first  is  curdy,  the 
second,  gelatinous. 

It  may  be  proper  to  subjoin  authorities  for 
these  oxides: 

Tin      Protoxide    Deutoxide 
Cavendish,  from  the  hydrogen  100  113.5         

Proust  (Journ.de  Physique  59—341)       100  115  127^.128* 

Gay  Lussac  (Annal.  de  Chimie  80—170)  100  113.5  127.2f 

Berzelius(Annal.deChim.  87— 55)  100  113.6  127.2$ 

My  own,  as  above  100  113.4  127 

*  By  nitric  acid,  the  result  of  3  experiments  all  agreeing 
for  the  deutoxide ;  the  protoxide  is  by  calculation  and  less 
certain.  He  afterwards  adopts  13.6  from  Berzelius.  Journ. 
de  Phys.  Aug.  1814. 

f  The  protoxide  from  hydrogen  by  solution;  the  deut- 
oxide by  transmitting  steam  over  the  metal  at  a  red  heat. 

t  The  2d.  by  oxydizing  the  sulphuret  of  tin  by  nitric 
acid;  the  1st.  by  inference  only,  one  half  of  the  oxygen 
of  the  2d. 


METALLIC   OXIDES.  39 

13.   Oxides  of  Lead. 

There  are  three  oxides  of  lead  now  gene- 
rally recognized,  the  yellow,  the  red,  and 
the  brown,  the  proportion  of  oxygen  in  each 
of  which  has  been  investigated  by  several 
chemists  whose  results  do  not  well  accord 
with  each  other.  I  shall  treat  of  them  under 
the  following  names,  namely  the  protoxide, 
the  intermediate  oxides,  and  the  deutoxide,  for 
reasons  which  will  appear, 

1.  Protoxide.  The  yellow  oxide  of  lead  is 
the  only  one  capable  of  forming  salts  with 
acids.  Lavoisier  found  the  oxygen  of  this 
oxide  combined  with  100  lead  to  be  4.47 j 
Wenzel,  10;  Proust,  9;  Thomson,  10.5; 
Bucholz,  8;  Berzelius,  7.7.  This  last  ac- 
cords best  with  my  own  experience ;  but  it  is 
chiefly  from  the  other  combinations  of  lead, 
that  the  weight  of  its  atom  as  well  as  that  of 
the  protoxide  are  determined  and  confirmed, 
as  lead  forms  several  very  definite  compounds 
with  acids,  &c.  The  quantity  of  oxygen  in 
the  protoxide  may  be  found  by  several  me- 
thods, as  under. 

1st.  By  dissolving  a  given  portion  of  the 
oxide  in  acetic  acid,  and  precipitating  the 
lead  by  another  metal,   as  zinc;   in  this  case 


40  METALLIC   OXIDES. 

the  oxygen  of  the  lead  goes  to  the  zinc  which 
becomes  dissolved,  and  from  the  loss  of 
weight  of  the  zinc  and  the  proportion  of 
oxygen  in  zinc  oxide  being  previously  known, 
and  the  weight  of  the  precipitated  lead  being 
found,  we  have  data  for  determining  the  ox- 
ide of  lead.  I  took  200  measures  of  acetate 
of  lead  solution  (1.142),  which  I  knew  con- 
tained 27  grains  of  oxide  of  lead ;  this  being 
diluted  with  an  equal  volume  of  water,  the 
lead  was  precipitated  by  a  rod  of  zinc ;  in 
6  hours  an  arbor  saturni  was  formed  which 
was  collected  and  well  dried;  it  weighed  21 f 
grains,  and  the  zinc  rod  had  lost  7  grains : 
cafe  must  be  taken  in  performing  this  expe- 
riment that  all  the  lead  be  not  precipitated, 
otherwise  the  oxide  of  zinc  begins  to  fall, 
and  the  result  is  uncertain.  In  the  residuary 
liquid  I  got  4  grains  of  sulphate  of  lead  by 
sulphuric  acid.  Here  then  we  have  the  oxy- 
gen of  21 1  lead  transferred  to  7  zinc;  but 
if  7:21f  ::29:90  nearly.  Now  it  is  known 
that  29  parts  of  zinc  take  7  of  oxygen,  there- 
fore 90  lead  take  7  of  oxygen,  and  the  atom 
of  lead=90,  and  the  protoxide  97. 

I   formerly  stated  the   atom   of  lead  95. 
Vol.  1,  page  260. 

2.  By  dissolving  180  grains  of  lead  in  ni- 
tric acid  in  a  small  thin  capsule,  and  heating 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  41 

it  till  the  salt  was  quite  dry,  I  got  288  grains 
of  salt,  weighed  in  the  capsule;  36  grains 
of  this  salt  yielded  24J  yellow  oxide  by  a  low 
red  heat=22§  lead.  This  gives  90  lead  to 
7  oxygen. 

3d.  Again,  36  grains  of  the  above  salt, 
dissolved  in  water,  precipitated  by  ammonia, 
and  well  washed  on  a  filter,  gave  23  4*  grains 
of  oxide  separated  from  the  filter,  and  this 
had  acquired  1  grain,  making  24  +  grains  of 
oxide  from  the  22 f  lead  as  before ;  the  resi- 
due of  liquid  gave  no  signs  of  lead  by  hydro- 
sulphuret  of  ammonia.  The  same  quantity 
of  salt  precipitated  by  an  excess  of  lime  wa- 
ter gave  only  22  grains  of  oxide ;  but  hydro- 
sulphuret  of  ammonia  precipitated  2  4.  grains 
of  sulphuret  of  lead  from  the  clear  liquid. 

II.  Intermediate  oxide  or  oxides.  Minium 
or  red  lead,  &c.  Minium  is  an  article  of 
commerce  used  as  a  pigment  and  for  various 
other  purposes.  It  is  made  by  exposing  the 
yellow  or  protoxide  of  lead  finely  pulverized 
to  a  low  red  heat  in  a  current  of  air,  and  con- 
stantly stirring  the  oxide  so  as  to  expose  fresh 
particles  to  the  air.  In  two  days  the  yellow 
oxide  is  converted  into  the  red.  Several  au- 
thors observe  that  red  lead  usually  contains 
1,2,  or  more  grains  per  cent,  of  impurities 
insoluble  in  nitric  and  acetic  acids;   the  spe- 

VOL.   II.  F 


42  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

cimen  I  used  however  was  so  pure  as  not  to 
leave  more  than  4-  of  a  grain  per  cent,  of 
insoluble  matter  after  being  heated  red  and 
treated  with  dilute  nitric  acid. 

Some  of  the  most  remarkable  properties 
of  red  lead  are,    1st.  It  is  never  obtained  in 
combination  with   any  acid;    2d.    It  yields 
oxygen  gas  when  exposed  to  a  bright  red  heat 
or  when  treated  with  concentrated  sulphuric 
acid,  and  is  in  both  cases  reduced  to  the  pro- 
toxide; 3d.  When  treated  with  dilute  nitric 
acid  it  is  dissolved   in   part,  but  constantly 
leaves  an  insoluble  brown  residuum,  which  is 
the  deutoxide,  as  will  be  shewn;   the  weight 
of  the  deutoxide  obtained  is  by  my  experi- 
ments 20  per  cent,  and  the  part  in  solution  is 
found  to  be  the  protoxide;  4th.  When  treated 
with  muriatic  acid,  muriate  of  lead  is  formed 
and, oxy muriatic  acid  given  out;  5th.    When 
treated  with  dilute  acetic  acid  or  cold  con- 
centrated acetic  acid,    \  of  the  oxide  is  dis- 
solved  and  the  remainder  is  still  red,  its  co- 
lour being  rather  improved;   if  concentrated 
acid  be  used  and  boiling  heat  applied,  then 
4.  of  the  whole  oxide  ia  dissolved  and  ~  re- 
mains of  brown  oxide,  the  same  as  with  ni- 
tric acid. 

Some   of  the  above   facts   are  new,   and 
may  contribute  to  elucidate  this  most  curious 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  43 

oxide,  which  scarcelyhas  a  parallel.  Proust 
is  the  only  author  I  know  who  has  given  a 
plausible  conjecture  concerning  the  peculiar 
nature  of  this  oxide.  He  supposes  it  a  com- 
pound of  the  yellow  and  brown  oxides. 
This  I  believe  is  the  fact ;  but  it  will  be  found 
I  apprehend  to  be  a  compound  of  1.  atom  of 
oxygen  with  6  of  the  yellow  oxide,  as  will 
appear  from  what  follows. 

Respecting  the  quantity  of  oxygen  in  the 
red  oxide,  Lavoisier  finds  9  oxygen  to  100 
lead,  Thomson  13.6,  and  Berzelius  11.55. 
This  last  is  partly  from  experience  and  partly 
from  a  supposed  analogy,  that  the  successive 
oxides  of  the  same  metal  contain  oxygen  as 
1,  If  and  2  respectively ;  and  having  found 
(I  believe)  correctly,  that  the  brown  oxide 
contains  just  twice  as  much  oxygen  as  the 
yellow,  this  ingenious  and  generally  accurate 
author  adopts  the  theoretic  inference  in  this  in- 
stance at  least  prematurely,  and  concludes 
the  red  oxide  is  the  mean  between  the  yellow 
and  the  brown.  But  we  must  appeal  to  ex- 
perience. 

It  has  already  been  stated  that  when  red 
lead  is  exposed  to  heat,  oxygen  gas  is  given 
out,  and  it  may  be  added,  a  small  trace  of 
water;   and  yellow  oxide  remains. 


44  METALLIC   OXIDES. 

This  experiment  requires  considerable 
skill.  If  too  great  a  heat  is  used,  a  part  of 
the  lead  is  reduced  or  revived  as  it  is  termed; 
if  too  little  heat,  then  a  part  of  the  red  lead 
remains  unaltered.  In  performing  this  expe- 
riment I  use  a  small  clean  iron  spoon  to  hold 
the  red  lead,  and  cover  it  by  another  iron 
spoon ;  the  whole  is  then  held  by  a  pair  of 
tongs  in  a  red  fire  till  the  spoon  exhibits  a 
uniform   moderate  red,  and  some  time  after. 

It  is  then  withdrawn  and  cooled,  and  the 
oxide  weighed.     The  average  loss  of  weight 
is  nearly  2  grains  per  cent.     If  only  1  grain 
or  less,  a  considerable  portion  of  red  oxide 
remains  mixed  with  the  yellow;   if  3  or  more 
grains,   then  the  margin  of  the  oxide  exhi- 
bits particles  of  lead  amounting  to  TV>  less 
or  more,  of  the  original  weight;   this  can  be 
easily   separated  from  the  oxide  if  necessary, 
but  it  is  apt  to  adhere  to  the  iron ;   when  red 
oxide  remains,  it  is  so  mixed  with  the  yellow 
as  not  easily  to  be  separated,  but  its  quantity 
may  be  determined  by  nitric  acid,  which  dis- 
solves the  yellow,  and  £  of  the  red,  leaving 
a  residuum  of  brown  oxide,    from  which  the 
quantity  of  red  is  inferred.     Now  if  the  loss 
of  weight  of  100  red  oxide  be  only  2  grains, 
and  a  part  of  that  be  water,  it  is  impossible 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  45 

that  115.55  should  lose  3.85  grains  of  oxygen, 
according  to  Berzelius.  Another  experiment, 
equally  decisive  of  the  question,  is  to  deter- 
mine the  quantity  of  oxygenous  gas  to  be  ob- 
tained by  heat  or  acids  from  a  given  weight 
of  red  lead.  In  one  experiment  made  with 
great  care,  500  grains  of  red  oxide  gave  6 
grains  of  oxygenous  gas  by  sulphuric  acid; 
in  another,  200  yielded  2 J  grains.  In  order 
to  vary  the  mode  of  determining  the  quantity 
of  oxygen,  into  210  measures  of  test  green 
sulphate  of  iron  solution,  (1 .156)  =  16.8  green 
oxide,  put  160  grains  of  minium;  to  this 
was  added  dilute  muriatic  acid  more  than 
sufficient  for  the  minium :  The  oxymuriatic 
acid  from  the  oxygen  of  the  minium  was  in- 
stantly seized  by  the  oxide  of  the  iron,  the 
whole  of  which  was  found  by  precipitation 
to  be  changed  from  green  to  red  and  an  ex- 
cess of  oxymuriatic  acid  appeared.  Now 
16.8  oxide  would  require  1.86  oxygen  to  be- 
come red,  which  it  must  have  acquired  from 
160 of  red  lead;  or  100  red  lead  yielded  1.2 
oxygen,  the  same  proportion  as  by  sulphuric 
acid.  These  experiments  point  out  1.2  oxy- 
gen in  100  red  lead  as  the  excess  which  con- 
verts the  yellow  to  the  red  oxide.  Were 
any  doubt  to  remain  on  the  subject,  the  ex- 
periment with  nitric  acid  and  red  oxide  will 


46  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

remove  it.  If  the  red  oxide  contained  a  mean 
of  oxygen  between  the  yellow  and  the  brown, 
when  it  is  treated  with  nitric  acid  more  than 
50  per  cent,  of  brown  oxide  would  be  ob- 
tained instead' of  20,  which  is  contrary  to 
all  experience.  It  must  be  observed  that 
Berzelius  informs  us  he  extracted  the  yellow 
oxide,  mechanically  mixed  (as  he  conceives) 
with  the  red  oxide,  by  digestion  with  dilute 
acetic  acid;  but  he  does  not  inform  us  how 
much  per  cent,  his  minium  was  reduced  by 
this  operation.  From  what  is  stated  above, 
it  appears  that  about  J- of  the  whole  is  thus 
dissolved.  The  remaining  half  would  then 
contain  double  the  quantity  of  oxygen  and 
brown  oxide  per  cent,  that  the  original  did. 
Still  these  quantities  are  inadequate  to  explain 
the  phenomena.  Besides  it  cannot  be  admitted 
that  a  red  and  a  yellow  powder  can  be  inti- 
mately mixed  in  equal  quantities  and  the 
mixture  not  be  distinguishable  without  diffi- 
culty from  the  red  one,  and  be  altogether  dif- 
ferent from  the  yellow.  We  must  then  con- 
clude that  the  minium  of  commerce  (such  as 
I  have  used)  is  a  true  chemical  compound. 

Grounding  our  reasonings  upon  the  preced- 
ing facts,  there  are  but  two  suppositions  that 
can  be  considered  as  plausible,  respecting  the 
constitution  of  the  red  oxide.     It  may  be  1 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  47 

atom  of  oxygen  and  5  of  yellow  oxide,  or  I 
atom  of  oxygen  and  6  of  yellow  oxide.     The 
former  would  give  1.4  per  cent,  extra  oxygen 
in  100  red  oxide,  and  21  brown  oxide;  the 
latter  would  give  1.2  per  cent,  extra  oxygen 
and  18  brown  oxide.     I  adopt  the  latter  sup- 
position ;  because  it  agrees  with  experiment 
in  regard  to  oxygen,  and  gives  the  brown  ox- 
ide a  little  lower  than  experiment,  as  may  be 
expected  on  two  accounts;  first,  the  residue 
of  brown  oxide  contains  the  insoluble  dross  of 
the  red  oxide  (which  was  very  small  however, 
as  stated  above) ;  and,  second,  unless  a  con- 
siderable excess  of  nitric  acid  be  used,  or  long 
digestion,  a  small  portion  of  the  red  oxide  es- 
capes decomposition.     Another  and  still  more 
important  consideration,  as  to  the  question 
whether  5  or  6  atoms,  is  the  equal  division  of 
the  red  oxide  by  the  operation  of  cold  acetic 
acid;   it  reduces  the  1  oxygen  and  6  yellow 
oxide  to  1  and  3  atoms;  whereas  if  we  adopt 
the  other,  we  must  conclude  it  reduces  the  1 
and  5  to  1  and  2|,  a  position  that  cannot  well 
be  reconciled  to  the  atomic  theory. 

According  to  this  conclusion  then  the  red 
oxide  of  lead  or  minium  of  commerce  is  con- 
stituted of  1  atom  of  oxygen  holding  6  atoms 
of  yellow  oxide  together;  or  it  is  composed 
of  100  lead  and  9.07  oxygen.     When  it  is 


48  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

digested  in  cold  acetic  acid  the  residuum  con- 
stitutes another  oxide  consisting  of  1  atom  of 
oxygen  and  3  of  yellow  oxide,  or  100  lead 
and  10.4  oxygen,  possessing  the  same  colour 
as  the  former,  but  distinguishable  by  its  not 
being  acted  on  by  cold  acetic  acid,  and  by  its 
containing  twice  as  much  brown  oxide  and 
extra  oxygen  as  minium.  No  doubt  the  other 
intermediate  oxides  of  1  to  4  and  1  to  5  exist, 
and  are  all  alike  red;  but  have  not  perhaps 
any  remarkable  distinctions  besides  their 
containing  different  proportions  of  oxygen 
and  brown  oxide.  Whether  an  oxide  consist- 
ing of  1  oxygen  and  2  yellow  oxide  exists,  I 
have  not  discovered;  but  that  1  oxygen  and 
1  yellow  oxide  are  found  united,  appears 
below. 

III.  Deutoxide.  This  is  the  flea-brown  ox- 
ide mentioned  above.  It  may  also  be  obtained 
by  treating  solutions  of  salts  containing  the 
yellow  oxide  by  oxymuriate  of  lime,  in 
which  case  the  oxide  is  precipitated,  leaving 
the  acid  in  the  liquor,  a  proof  that  it  is  inso- 
luble in  acids.  Its  more  remarkable  proper- 
ties are :  1st.  like  the  red  oxide,  when  heated 
to  a  low  red,  or  treated  with  sulphuric  acid, 
it  yields  oxygenous  gas,  and  more  copiously; 
it  is  thus  reduced  to  the  yellow  oxide:  2d. 
with  muriatic  acid  it  yields  oxymuriatic  acid 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  49 

in  great  plenty  and  muriate  of  lead :  3d.  it 
detonates  when  rubbed  with  sulphur  in  a 
mortar. 

The  quantity  of  oxygen  in  the  brown  ox- 
ide is  stated  by  Thomson  at  25  oxygen  to  100 
lead,  by  Berzelius  at  15.6  to  100.  This  last 
is  very  nearly  right  by  my  experience,  and 
being  just  double  of  the  oxygen  in  the  prot- 
oxide, it  warrants  us  in  denominating  it  the 
deutoxide.  Berzelius  finds  100  of  the  brown 
oxide  lose  6.5  by  a  red  heat  so  as  to  reduce  it 
to  the  yellow;  Dr.  Thomson  finds  the  loss  9 
grains.  This  difference  is  easily  accounted 
for;  it  loses,  I  find,  from  7  to  10  grains  per 
cent,  according  to  the  previous  degree  of 
dryness ;  when  exposed  to  a  moist  atmosphere 
it  attracts  humidity;  when  dried  in  a  tempe- 
rature of  200°  and  exposed  to  red  heat  imme- 
diately after,  it  does  not  lose  more  than  6.5  or 
7  per  cent.  This  is  corroborated  too  by  the 
oxygen  expelled  by  sulphuric  acid.  From 
100  grains  of  brown  oxide  and  sulphuric  acid 
in  a  gas  bottle,  I  obtained  by  the  heat  of  a 
lamp  8.3  oz.  of  oxygenous  gas  =  5.3  grains; 
about  120  grains  of  grey  sulphate  of  lead 
were  left  in  the  bottle.  The  oxygen  is  rather 
less  than  was  expected;  but  it  must  be  re- 
membered that  100  grains  of  brown  oxide, 
obtained  in  the  ordinary  Way,  have  the  inso- 

YOL.  II.  O 


50  METALLIC   OXIDES. 

luble  dross  of  500  red  oxide  in  them,  which 
must  have  some  influence  in  diminishing  the 
production  of  oxygen. 

Though  the  above  might  be  deemed  suffici- 
ent to  demonstrate  the  proportion  of  oxygen 
in  the  brown  oxide,  I  was  desirous  to  corro- 
borate the  results  by  oxy muriate  of  lime. 
I  found  repeatedly  that  100  grain  measures  of 
acetate  of  lead  (1.142)  =  13.8  yellow  oxide, 
required  400  measures  of  oxy  muriate  of 
lime=l  oxygen,  to  precipitate  the  whole  of 
the  oxide  in  a  brown  state.  Now  if  13.8 : 1 :: 
97:7.  Again,  into  240  measures  of  test 
green  sulphate  of  iron  (1.156)  =  19  oxide, 
were  put  40  grains  of  brown  oxide  of  lead, 
together  with  a  sufficient  quantity  of  muria- 
tic acid  to  saturate  the  lead,  and  discharge 
the  oxygen;  after  due  agitation  sulphate  of 
lead  was  precipitated,  and  the  whole  of  the 
oxide  of  iron  was  found,  when  precipitated,  to 
be  yellow.  But  19  grains  oxide  of  iron  re- 
quired +  of  oxygen  to  become  yellow;  hence 
the  40  grains  brown  oxide  of  lead  must  have 
furnished  2  +  grains  of  oxygen  to  form  oxy- 
muriatic  acid,  which  transferred  it  to  the  oxide 
of  iron.  If  40:2+  ::  100  i5+  oxygen,  for  the 
excess  or  secoridtioseof  oxygen  in  100  brown 
oxide,  such  as  is  obtained/by  nitric  acid  along 

"  tlniii  '■  ;   ]r 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  5} 

with  its  impurities;   which  agrees  with  the 
results  obtained  by  the  other  methods. 

14.  Oxide  of  zinc. 

When  zinc  is  exposed  to  a  strong  heat  it 
burns  with  a  brilliant  white  flame,  and 
a  white  powder  sublimes,  which  is  the  oxide 
of  the  metal.  When  dilute  sulphuric  acid  is 
poured  on  granulated  zinc,  hydrogen  gas  is 
produced  in  great  abundance  and  purity;  the 
metal  is  oxidized  at  the  expence  of  the  water 
and  dissolved  in  the  acid,  the  oxide  may  be 
precipitated  by  an  alkali;  it  is  white  both 
when  precipitated  and  dried,  and  when  heated 
does  not  differ  from  that  obtained  by  combus- 
tion.    By  a  violent  heat  it  runs  into  glass. 

The  quantity  of  oxygen  in  zinc  oxide  is,  I 
think,  best  estimated  by  the  hydrogen  gas 
produced  during  the  solution ;  it  may  also  be 
obtained  by  direct  combustion,  or  by  solution 
in  nitric  acid  and  calcination.  Dr.  Thomson 
determines  the  oxygen  by  comparison  of  the 
weights  of  real  sulphuric  acid  and  metallic 
zinc  in  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  zinc,  along 
with  the  consideration  that  the  proportion  of 
sulphuric  acid  and  oxygen  in  the  metallic 
sulphates  is  known ;  Mr.  Cavendish  obtained 
356  oz.  measures  of  hydrogen  from  1  oz.  of 


52  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

zinc  by  solution.  I  dissolved  49  grains  of 
zinc  in  dilute  sulphuric  acid  and  obtained  hy- 
drogen, after  the  rate  of  363  grain  measures 
for  1  grain  of  zinc  =  182  measures  of  oxygen 
=  .24  grain  of  oxygen. 

The  following  are  the  principal  authorities 
for  the  quantity  of  oxygen  in  zinc  oxide,  in 
the  order  of  lime. 

Zinc.         Oxygen. 

1766.     .  Cavendish 100   +  23.3 

1785.  Lavoisier -J-  19.6 

1790—1800.     Wenzel  and  Proust ... f-  25 

1801.  Desorme  and  Clement 1-  21.7 

Davy  .„. J-  21.95 

Berzelius -f-  24.4 

Gay  Lnssac — —  -j-  24.4 

Thomson \-  24.42 

My  own — —  -|-  24 

Now  if  24oxy.  :100  zinc::7  oxy.:29zinc, 
nearly,  which  is  therefore  the  weight  of  an 
atom  of  this  metal,  on  the  supposition  that 
the  oxide  is  1  oxygen  and  1  metal;  and  the 
atom  of  oxide  =  36. 

I  formerly  estimated  the  atom  of  zinc  at 
56  (Vol.  1,  page  260).  This  was  occasioned 
by  taking  the  above  as  the  deutoxide  instead 
of  the  protoxide.  By  violently  heating  the 
oxide  of  zinc  in  a  close  vessel,  Desorme  and 
Clement  reduced  the  oxygen  nearly  one  half, 
so  as  to  afford  a  presumption  that  an  oxide 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  53 

with  half  the  oxygen  of  the  common  one  sub- 
sisted. Since  that  time  some  observations  of 
Berzelius  seem  to  shew  that  a  sub-oxide  of 
zinc  exists.  It  does  not  appear  however,  that 
such  oxide  is  ever  found  in  combination  with 
acids;  and,  granting  the  accuracy  of  the  ob- 
servations, it  is  rather  to  be  presumed  to  be 
the  semi-oxide,  or  1  atom  of  oxygen  and  2  of 
metal,  than  the  protoxide.  No  higher  oxi- 
dation of  zinc  than  the  above  has  yet  been 
obtained,   and  probably  does  not  exist. 

15.  Oxides  of  potassium. 

Since  writing'  the  articles  "potassium  and 
Sodium/'  in  the  former  volume,  a  very  impor- 
tant essay  relating  chiefly  to  these  subjects  has 
been  written  by  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard  (a 
copy  of  which  they  were  so  good  as  to  send 
me),  entitled  "  Recherches  Physico-chimi- 
ques,  &c."  in  2  Vol. — Many  of  the  most  in- 
teresting experiments  of  Davy  have  been  re- 
peated on  a  larger  scale,  and  a  great  number 
of  original  ones  added;  these  ingenious  au- 
thors endeavour  to  sum  up  the  evidences  for 
and  against  the  two  hypotheses  concerning 
potassium  and  sodium,  namely,  as  to  their  be- 
ing metals  or  hydrurets,  and  upon  the  whole 
incline  to  the  former,  allowing  however,  that 


54  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

the  facts  afford  great  plausibility  to  both. 
One  thing  they  seem  to  have  discovered  and 
established,  that  the  new  bodies  or  metals  ad- 
mit of  various  degrees  of  oxidation,  and  of 
course  these  products  have  a  claim  to  be  classed 
amongst  oxides  in  general  though  the  nature 
of  their  bases  may  still  be  an  object  of 
dispute. 

They  find  three  oxides  of  potassium ;  the 
lowest  degree  is  obtained  by  exposing  potas- 
sium to  atmospheric  air  in  a  small  bottle,  with 
a  common  cork;  a  gradual  oxidation  takes 
place;  a  blueish  grey  brittle  product  is  ob- 
tained; there  does  not  appear  however,  to  be 
any  proper  limit  to  this  oxidation  besides  that 
which  they  admit  as  characterizing  the  second 
degree  or  potash,  which  degree  of  oxidation 
may  always  be  immediately  obtained  by  plac- 
ing potassium  in  contact  with  water.  This  I 
think  should  be  called  the  protoxide  and  con- 
sidered as  1  atom  of  potassium,  and  1  of 
oxygen ;  before  this  point  it  is  potassium  and 
pot-ash  mixed  or  perhaps  combined. 

Besides  these  there  is  another  obtained  by 
burning  potassium  in  oxygen  gas  at  an  eleva- 
ted temperature;  this  oxide  is  yellow*  fusible 
byjheat,  and  crystallizes  in  lamina  on  coolings 
it  contains  three  times  as  much  oxygen  as  pot- 
ash ;  put  into  water  it  is  suddenly  decomposed* 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  55 

giving  out  4.  of  the  oxygen  in  gas  and  becom- 
ing potash.  Very  probably  an  oxide  contain- 
ing twice  as  much  oxygen  as  potash  might  be 
formed  with  some  mark  of  discrimination, 
by  uniting  18  parts  potassium  with  56  of  yel- 
low oxide,    but  this  has  not  vet  been  done. 

According  to  these  conclusions  the  weights 
of  the  oxides  of  potassium  may  be  stated  as 
under.-— Potassium  35,  protoxide  or  potash 
42,  deutoxide  (supposed  to  exist)  49,  and 
the  yellow  or  tritoxide  56.     Hence  we  have 

Potassium.    Oxygen. 

Protoxide  (potash)  100  -f-  20  7  Gay  Lussac  &  Thenard 

19  j  Davy 

Deutoxide  100  +  40     (unknown) 

Tritoxide  100  +  60     Gay  Lussac  &  Thenard 

One  feels  unwilling  to  admit  of  a  tritoxide, 
(and  that  perhaps  the  only  one  existing,) 
when  the  deutoxide  is  unknown,  were  it  not 
upon  good  authority.  The  obscurity  on  this 
subject  may  be  removed  by  future  expe- 
riments. 

It  may  be  proper  to  add  that  Gay  Lussac 
and  Thenard  concur  with  Davy  in  assigning 
a  much  greater  saturating  power  to  potassium 
and  sodium  than  to  the  fused  hydrates  of  pot- 
ash and  soda  of  equal  weights.  From  the  ta- 
ble, Recherches,  Tom.  2,  p.  214,  it  may  be 
deduced  that  35  potassium  require  as  much 


56  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

sulphuric  acid  to  saturate  them  as  50  or  more 
of  the  hydrate  of  potash;  and  that  21  sodium 
are  equivalent  to  36  or  37  hydrate  of  sodium. 
If  these  results  are  accurate,  the  weights  of 
potassium  and  sodium,  considered  as  hydru- 
rets,  cannot  be  as  we  have  deduced  them  at 
pages  486  and  503,  Vol.  1,  namely,  43 
and  29  respectively,  but  35  and  21,  as  at 
page  262. 

16.  Oxides  of  sodium. 

Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard  find  a  suboxide 
of  sodium  in  the  same  way  as  that  of  potas- 
sium, and  it  is  probably  a  compound  of  soda 
and  sodium  :  the  remarkable  oxidation  which 
produces  soda  is,  I  should  imagine,  the  prot- 
oxide or  one  atom  to  one,  as  obtained  by 
placing  sodium  in  contact  with  water.  A 
higher  oxide  is  obtained  as  with  potassium, 
by  burning  sodium  in  oxygen  gas  with  a  vi- 
vid heat.  It  resembles  the  yellow  oxide  of 
potassium  in  its  appearance  and  properties. 
The  degree  of  oxidation  varies  in  the  differ- 
ent experiments  from  1^  to  l.-|-  times  the 
oxygen  of  soda.  It  is  probably  a  combina- 
tion of  the  protoxide  and  deutoxide.  Hence 
the  oxides  of  sodium  may  be  as  under;  reck- 
oning the  atom  of  sodium  21,  and  soda  28. 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  57 

Sodium.         Oxygea. 
Protoxide  (Soda)  100     +     33* 

Intermediate  oxide  100     -j-     ^0 

17.   Oxide  of  bismuth. 

Only  one  oxide  of  bismuth  is  known,  and 
the  proportion  of  its  parts  has  been  gradu- 
ally approximated  by  Bergman,  Lavoisier, 
Klaproth,  Proust,  and  others.  Berzelius 
mentions  a  purple  oxide  obtained  by  exposing 
bismuth  to  the  action  of  the  atmosphere; 
but  as  no  experiments  have  been  made  upon 
it,  we  cannot  adopt  it  at  present.  According 
to  Klaproth  and  Proust,  100  bismuth  unite 
with  12  oxygen;  but  by  the  more  recent  ex- 
periments of  Mr.  J.  Davy  and  Lagerhjelm 
100  bismuth  take  11.1  or  11.3  oxygen.  If 
we  adopt  this  last,  which  is  doubtless  near 
the  truth;  we  shall  have  11.3: 100::  7:62  for 
the  weight  of  the  atom  of  bismuth,  on  the 
supposition  that  the  compound  is  the  protox- 
ide or  1  atom  of  metal  to  1  of  oxygen.  My 
former  weight  of  bismuth  was  68  (page  263), 
which  is  clearly  too  high. 

Bismuth  is  best  oxidized  by  nitric  acid. 
Part  of  the  oxide  combines  with  the  acid  and 
part  precipitates  in  the  state  of  a  white  pow- 
der;  if  the  whole  be  gradually  heated,  the  acid 

VOL.  n.  H 


58  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

is  driven  off,  and  at  a  low  red  the  oxide  re- 
mains pure;  it  is  fused  into  glass  and  of  a  red 
or  yellow  colour,  according  to  the  heat  em- 
ployed. Bismuth  may  also  be  oxidized  by 
heat  in  open  vessels ;  yellow  fumes  arise  which 
may  be  condensed  and  are  found  to  be  the 
oxide. 

18.  Oxides  of  antimony. 

Considerable  difference  of  opinions  exists 
with  regard  to  the  oxides  of  antimony. 
Proust  finds  two  oxides  which  he  determines 
to  consist,  the  first,  of  100  metal  +  22  or 
23  oxygen ;  the  second  of  100  metal  +  30 
oxygen.  Thenard  finds  6  oxides:  J.Davy 
two  oxides,  namely,  100  metal  +  17.7  oxy- 
gen, and  100  4-  30  oxygen.  Berzelius  infers 
from  his  experiments  that  there  are  4  oxides 
of  antimony,  the  first  containing  4.65  oxy- 
gen, the  second  18.6,  the  third  27.9,  and  the 
fourth  37.2  of  oxygen  on  100  metal.  He  ad- 
mits however  that  the  oxide  obtained  by  boil- 
ing nitric  acid  on  antimony  and  expelling  the 
superfluous  acid  by  a  low  red  heat,  consists  of 
100  metal  -I-  29  to  31  oxygen,  as  determined 
by  Proust  and  others.  This  is  certainly  the 
most  definite  of  the  oxides,  next  to  that  which 
is  obtained  from  the  solution  of  antimony  in 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  59 

muriatic  acid.  This  last  may  be  had  by 
pouring  water  into  a  solution  of  muriate  of 
antimony ;  a  white  powder  precipitates,  which 
is  the  oxide  with  a  little  muriatic  acid ;  the 
acid  may  be  abstracted  by  boiling  the  preci- 
pitate in  a  solution  of  carbonate  of  potash. 
This  oxide  is  a  grey  powder,  and  fusible  at 
a  low  red  heat.  It  enters  exclusively  into  va- 
rious well  known  compounds,  as  the  golden 
sulphur  of  antimony,  antimoniated  tartrate  of 
potash,  &c.  Its  constitution,  according  to 
Proust,  is  100  metal  +  23  oxygen ;  but  J.  Da- 
vy finds  only  17.7  oxygen,  andBerzeliiis  18.6. 
As  this  oxide  possesses  the  most  distinct  fea- 
tures, and  besides  is  the  most  important;  it  is 
desirable  its  constitution  should  be  ascertained 
without  doubt.  From  several  experiments  I 
made  on  the  precipitation  of  antimony  by 
zinc,  I  conclude  the  oxide  contains  about  18 
oxygen  on  100  metal.  I  took  the  common 
muriate  of  antimony  with  excess  of  acid,  and 
immersed  a  rod  of  zinc  into  it,  covering  the 
whole  with  a  graduated  bell  glass.  Hydrogen 
gas  was  produced  by  the  excess  of  acid,  and 
its  quantity  was  ascertained;  the  antimony 
was  in  due  time  precipitated,  and  when  the 
operation  ceased,  the  loss  of  zinc  and  the 
weight  of  antimony  were  found.  For  in- 
stance, to  50  measures  of  1.69  mur.  ant.  60 


60  METALLIC   OXIDES. 

water  were  added,  no  precipitation  was  ob- 
served;   a  zinc  rod  was  put  in  and  the  whole 
covered  by  a  bell   glass,  over    water;  in  a 
few  hours  the  operation  had  ceased,  and  there 
appeared  3480  grain  measures  of  hydrogen 
gas  generated ;  the  dried  antimony  weighed 
25f  grains,  and  the  zinc  had  lost  29  grains. 
Now  3480  hydrogen  require  1740  of  oxygen 
=  2.3  grains  in  weight.     But  29  zinc  require 
7  oxygen;    therefore  the  zinc  must  have  got 
4.7  oxygen  from  the  antimony;  that  is,  25.5 
antimony;  were  found  united  to  4.7  oxygen; 
this  gives  100  antimony +18*4  oxygen.     I 
conclude  then  that  the  error  is  with  Proust; 
and  this  appears  to  be  confirmed  by  the  con- 
sideration that  Proust  himself  obtains  only  86 
oxide  of  antimony  from  100  sulphuret,   which 
he  allows  to  contain  74  antimony;  now  if  74: 
12  ::  100: 17  nearly.     I  am  therefore  inclined 
tp  adopt  18  for  the  oxygen  which  combines 
with  100  antimony  to  form    the  grey  oxide. 
Whether  this  is  the  protoxide  or  deutoxide 
may  be  disputed;   and  the  facts  known  con- 
cerning the  other  oxide  or  oxides  will  scarcely 
determine  the  case :  but  the  :  proportions  of 
the  muriate  and  sulphuret  of  antimony  accord 
imjch   better   with   the   former    supposition. 
Now  if;  18:100  ;7:  39,  for  the  weight  of  the 
atom;  of  antimony ;  I  prefer  the  weight  40, 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  61 

deduced  from  the  sulphuret,  as  announced  in 
Vol.  1,  page  264. 

The  oxide  which  contains  30  on  100  must 
be  2  atoms  of  the  deutoxide  and  1  of  the 
protoxide  united.  What  Berzelius  calls  the 
white  oxide  or  antimonious  acid,  may  be  1 
atom  of  each  oxide  united,  containing  27 
oxygen  on  the  100.  The  oxide  supposed  to 
contain  36  or  37  oxygen  on  100,  and  which 
must  be  considered  as  the  deutoxide,  has  not 
been  proved  to  exist  separately.  My  efforts  to 
procure  it  have  failed  as  well  as  those  before 
mine :  by  treating  muriate  of  antimony  with 
oxymuriate  of  lime  I  have  obtained  oxides 
of  30  on  the  100,  but  never  much  higher. 
Whenever  a  greater  proportion  of  oxymuri- 
ate of  lime  is  added,  the  smell  of  the  gas  be- 
comes permanent. 

Antimony  exposed  to  a  red  beat  in  a  current 
of  common  air  or  oxygenous  gas  takes  fire, 
and  white  fumes  arise  formerly  called  flowers 
of  antimony  \  this  oxide  contains  27.  or  30 
oxygen  on  100  metal. 

Antimony  thrown  into  red  hot  nitre  is  oxi- 
dized rapidly ;  the  remaining  powder,  washed 
in  water,  is  found  to  be  a  compound  of  oxide 
of  antimony  and  potash.  Berzelius  calls  the 
oxide  the  antimonic  acid,  and  the  salt  the 
antimoniate of  potash.     It  consists,  according 


62  METALLIC   OXIDES. 

to  his  experience,  of  100  acid  and  26.5  pot- 
ash. A  similar  salt  formed  between  the  anjti- 
monious  acid  and  potash  is  constituted  of  100 
acid  and  30.5  potash. 


19.  Oxide  of  tellurium. 

We  are  chiefly  indebted  to  Berzelius  for 
the  proportions  in  which  tellurium  combines. 
He  finds  100  tellurium  unite  to  24.8  oxygen. 
Also  that  201.5  tellurate  of  lead  gave  157 
sulphate  of  lead.  This  last  contains  116  ox- 
ide of  lead,  which  must  therefore  have  com- 
bined with  85.5  of  the  oxide  of  tellurium. 
Hence  97  oxide  of  lead  would  combine  with 
71.5  oxide  of  tellurium  =  57§  tellurium  +14 
oxygen.  Whether  this  oxide  of  tellurium  is 
the  protoxide  or  deutoxide,  is  somewhat  un- 
certain. The  atom  of  tellurium  will  weigh 
57 1  in  the  latter  case,  but  only  28  or  29  in  the 
former.  The  analogy  of  the  oxide  to  acids 
favours  the  notion  of  a  deutoxide;  but  the 
facility  with  which  the  tellurium  is  volatilized 
by  hydrogen  is  in  favour  of  the  lighter  atom. 
The  oxide  is  a  white  powder;  it  is  produced 
by  dissolving  the  metal  in  nitro-muriatic  acid 
and  precipitating  by  an  alkali. 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  63 

20.  Oxides  of  arsenic. 

There  are  two  distinct  combinations  of  ar- 
senic and  oxygen;  the  one  has  been  long* 
known  as  an  article  of  commerce  under  the 
name  of  arsenic.  It  is  a  white,  brittle,  glassy 
substance,  obtained  during  the  extraction  of 
certain  metals  from  their  ores.  Its  specific 
gravity  is  about  3.7.  According  to  Klaproth 
boiling  water  dissolves  from  7  to  8  per  cent, 
of  the  oxide  of  arsenic;  but  on  cooling  it 
retains  only  about  3  per  cent.;  and  this  I  find 
is  gradually  deposited  on  the  sides  of  the  ves- 
sel till  it  is  reduced  to  2  per  cent,  or  less  in 
cold  weather,  and  by  some  months  standing. 
Water  of  60°  degrees  or  under  dissolves  no 
more  than  J  per  cent,  of  the  oxide.  At  the 
temperature  of  about  400°  the  oxide  sublimes* 
This  oxide  combines  with  the  alkalies,  earths, 
and  metallic  oxides  somewhat  as  the  acids  do, 
but  does  not  neutralize  them,  and  in  other 
respects  it  is  destitute  of  acid  properties;  as 
for  instance,  it  does  not  affect  the  colour  tests. 
It  is  extremely  poisonous. 

The  other  oxide  is  obtained  by  treating 
either  the  white  oxide  or  pure  metallic  arsenic 
with  nitric  acid  and  heat.  One  hundred 
grains  of  white  oxide  require  two  or  three 
times  their  weight  of  nitric  acid,  of  1.3,   to 


64  METALLIC   OXIDES. 

oxidize  them.  The  new  oxide  is  produced 
in  a  liquid  form ;  from  which  the  excess  of 
nitric  acid  may  be  driven  by  a  low  red  heat, 
and  the  oxide  is  obtained  pure  in  the  form  of 
a  white  opake  glass,  which  soon  becomes  li- 
quid  by  attracting  moisture  from  the  atmo- 
sphere. This  oxide,  discovered  by  Scheele, 
has  all  the  properties  of  acids  in  general,  aud 
is  therefore  denominated  arsenic  acid.  When 
just  fluid  by  attracting  moisture  it  has  the 
sp.  gravity  1.65  nearly.  It  is  represented  as 
equally  poisonous  with  the  white  oxide. 

The  proportions  of  the  elements  in  these 
two  oxides  have  been  investigated  with  con- 
siderable success.  Proust  finds  the  white 
oxide  constituted  of  100  metal  and  33  or  34 
oxygen,  and  the  second  of  100  metal  with 
53  or  54  oxygen:  with  these  results  those  of 
Rose  and  Bucholz  nearly  agree.  Thenard 
finds  100  +34.6  for  the  white  oxide,  and  100 
+  56.25 for  the  acid:  and  Thomson  100+52.4 
for  the  acid.  Eerzelius  however,  infers  from 
his  recent  experiments  that  the  oxide  consists 
of  100  metal  +43.6  oxygen,  and  the  acid  of 
100+71.3;  these  last  results  I  have  little 
doubt  are  incorrect  from  my  own  experience. 

It  appears  that  when  arsenic  is  oxidized  by 
nitric  acid,  100  parts  yield  from  152  to  156 
of  acid,  dried  in  a  low  red  heat.     The  differ- 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  65 

ences  may  in  part  be  owing  to  the  metal  being 
partly  oxidized  at  the  commencement  of  the 
operation.  On  this  account  I  should  suppose 
55  or  56  to  be  the  proper  quantity  of  oxygen 
united  to  100  metal  to  form  the  acid.  Proust 
and  Thenard  both  found  that  100  white  oxide, 
when  converted  into  acid  by  nitric  acid¥  gave 
115  or  116.  I  have  found  the  same.,  )  Now 
if  116: 100::  156: 134 ;  hence  the  white  ox- 
ide of  arsenic  must  contain  100  metal  to  34 
oxygen,  if  the  data  be  correct;  or  the  metal 
and  oxygen  are  as  3  to  1  nearly.  It  is  highly 
improbable  that  any  inferior  oxide  subsists, 
as  no  traces  of  such  have  been  found,  if  we 
disallow  a  conjecture  of  Berzelius  on  the 
subject.  The  white  oxide  of  arsenic  must 
then  be  considered  as  the  protoxide,  and  the 
atom  of  arsenic  must  weigh  21  nearly,  and 
that  of  the  protoxide  28. 

It  i$  plain  the  other  is  not  the  deutox- 
ide, as  it  does  not  contain  twice  the,  oxygen 
of  the  protoxide;  but  as  the  proportion  of 
oxygen  in  it  is  to  that  of  the  protoxide,  as 
5:3,  it  may  be  a  compound  of  2  atoms  of 
deutoxide,  and  1  of  protoxide;  that  is,  it 
may  be  the  superarseniate  of  arsenic,  if  we 
consider  the  deutoxide  as  the  acid,  and  the 
protoxide  as  the  base.  According  to  this 
view,  the  compound  oxide,  or  arsenic  acid  of 

VOL.   II.  I 


66  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

Scheele,  is  constituted  of  two  atoms  of  the 
d^utoxide,  weighing  70,  and  1  atom  of  the 
protoxide  weighing  28,  together  making  98, 
for;the  weight  of  an  atom  of  arsenic  acid, =6$ 
arsenic  +  35  oxygen :  and  100  arsenic  take 
55.5  oxygen  to  form  the  acid,  agreeably  to 
the  above  recited  experiments.  Singular  as 
this  conclusion  may  appear,  the  tr nth  of  it 
is  put %&yoftd  dotibt^  I  think,  by  the  follow- 
ing experiments. 

I  have  repeatedly  found  that  28  parts  of 
white  ox itle  in  solution  are  sufficient  to  throw 
down-84  parts  of  lime,  from  lime-water,  so 
as  to  produce' 52;  parts  of  arsenite  of  lihle, 
and  leaVd'the^te^  free  from  both  elements. 
1Fft&  cotoftritts  the  riotiou  of  the  atom  of  prot- 
oxide w^igh^        s 

bt(M  to  24pairts  of  lime  dissolved -in  >  water 
we  put  98  parts  of  dry  arsenic  acid,  'the  com- 
pound <  remains  in  soldtion,  and  is  perfectly 
neutral  to  the  colour  test^  but  so  that  the  addi- 
tion of  !&(  Ismail  quantity  of  either  ingredient 
disturbs  the  -neutrality.'  If  to  this  solution  24 
parts  Of  lime  dissolved  in  water  be  added, 
the  compound  remains  a  limpid  solutiou; f  but 
is  very< limy  to  the  test.  If  to  this  we  putin 
like-  manner^  24  parts  more  of  lime,  the 
whole  compound  is  throwu  down,  and  yields;, 
wh^n  dried,   170  parts  bfarseniate  of  lime, 


METALLIC   OXIDES.  67 

the  liquid  being  now  free  from  both  ele- 
ments. Here  we  see  first,  two  atoms  of 
the  deutoxide,  neutralized  by  two  atoms  of 
base,  namely,  1  of  arsenic  oxide,  and  1  of 
lime;  but  (second),  when  one  atom  more  of 
lime  is  added,  an  union  of  2  deutoxide,  and 
3  of  base  is  effected,  which  of  course  is  an 
alkaline  salt;  when  (third)  more  of  limeis  add- 
ed, the  2  deutoxide  and  the  1  protoxide  each 
attach  1  of  lime,  and  form  a  still  more  alka- 
line salt,  which  being-  insoluble,  is  wholly 
thrown  down,  most  probably  in  a  compound 
state  of  98  parts  arsenic  acid,  combined  with 
72  parts  lime. 

In  like  manner,  I  find  that  42  parts  of  pot- 
ash, 28  of  soda,  and  12  of  ammonia,  seve- 
rally neutralize  98  parts  of  arsenic  acid. 

1st.     24  lime  -f-  32.7  arsenic  acid  c==  insoluble  arseuiate 

2d.   : — —         -j-  49 —  =  soluble  arseniate 

3d.    -f-  98     — — =  neutral  arseniate 

It  is  a  remarkable  fact,  that  when  neutral 
arseniate  of  potash  and  nitrate  of  lead  are 
mixed  together  to  mutual  saturation,  the  pre- 
cipitate is  found  to  consist  chiefly  of  arsenic 
acid  and  oxide  of  lead,  in  proportion  of  1 
of  acid  to  two  of  oxide,  (that  is,  98:194, 
or  100 :  198) ;  which  does  not  differ  much  from 
the  determination  of  Berzelius. 


68  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

I  find  however,  only  one  fourth  of  the 
nitric  acid  in  the  residuary  liquid  in  a  free 
state;  which  leads  me  to  suspect  that  the  pre- 
cipitate is  a  compound  of  subnitrate  and  ar- 
seniate  of  lead,  in  which  the  arsenic  acid 
and  lead  are  in  due  proportion,  or  98  acid, 
to  97  oxide.  This  consideration  may  be 
properly  resumed  hereafter. 

Hence  we  conclude,  the  atom  of  arsenic 
weighs  21  (and  not  42,  as  at  page  264, 
Vol.  1),  that  of  the  protoxide  or  common 
white  arsenic,  28;  and  that  of  arsenic  acid 
=  98,  being  a  compound  of  2  atoms  of  deut- 
oxide,  and  1  of  protoxide.     Or, 

100  Arsenic     -f     33.3  oxygen  =  133.3  protoxide 
•  +     55.5 =  155.5  arsenic  acid 

21.   Oxides  of  cobalt. 

There  are  at  least  two  oxides  of  cobalt, 
the  one  blue,  the  other  black.  Authors  differ 
as  to  the  proportions  of  the  elements.  Proust 
states  the  blue  oxide  to  consist  of  100  metal, 
and  19  or  20  oxygeij,  and  the  black  of  25  or 
26  oxygen.  Klaproth  finds  in  the  blue,  100 
metal  and  18  oxygen.  But  Rolhoff  accord- 
ing; to  Berzelius,  finds  100  metal  and  27.3 
oxygen  in  the  blue  oxide,  and  40.9  in  the 
black.     I  have  taken  some  pains  to  invests 


METALLIC   OXIDES.  69 

2fate  these  oxides,  and  have  been  able  to  sa- 
tisfy  myself  in  a  good  degree,  respecting 
their  constitution.  The  blue  or  protoxide 
consists  of  100  metal  and  19  oxygen,  and 
the  black  oxide  of  100  metal,  and  25  or  26, 
very  nearly  as  Proust  determined. 

Protoxide.  By  repeated  trials  1  have  found, 
that  if  37  parts  of  metallic  cobalt  be  treated 
with  the  due  quantity  of  nitro-muriatic  acid, 
and  a  heat  of  150%  a  rapid  solution  takes 
place,  and  a  disengagement  of  pure  nitrous 
gas;  this  being  carefully  collected,  it  will  be 
found  to  weigh  8  grains,  and  of  course  corres- 
ponds to  7  grains  of  oxygen;  hence  37  co- 
balt, unite  to  7  oxygen,  to  form  44  of  the 
blue  oxide;  and  as  this  is  the  only  oxide  that 
combines  with  acids,  it  must  be  considered 
as  the  most  simple  or  protoxide,  being  1  atom 
of  metal  (37),  and  1  of  oxygen  (7).  The 
estimation  of  the  atom  of  cobalt  at  50  or  60, 
(page  265),  must  therefore  be  corrected. 

Compound  oxides.  When  the  blue  oxide  of 
cobalt  is  precipitated  from,  a  solution,  by  an 
alkali  or  lime  water,  and  oxymuriate  of  lime 
is  gradually  dropped  in,  the  precipitate  chan- 
ges colour  rapidly;  it  passes  from  blue  to 
green  and  olive,  thence  to  a  dark  bottle  green, 
and  finally  becomes  black;  oxygen  gas  is 
given  out  copiously  when  an  excess  of  oxy- 


70  METALLIC     OXIDES. 

muriate  of  lime  is  used.  I  find  the  addi- 
tional oxygen  requisite  to  convert  the  blue 
to  the  black  oxide  is  what  Proust  states  it, 
namely,  -f  of  that  necessary  to  form  the  blue; 
hence  it  must  be  considered  as  a  compound  of 
1  atom  of  oxygen  and  3  of  the  protoxide. 
Probably  the  other  coloured  oxides  are  1  to 
4,  1  to  5,  &c*  The  protoxide  is  blue  when 
precipitated,  but  it  is  supposed  to  contain 
water,  or  to  be  a  hydrate ;  as  it  is  dark  grey 
when  heated.  The  blue  oxide  in:  a  short 
time  after  precipitation  being  still  under  wa- 
ter, changes  to  a  yellowish  or  dead-leaf  co- 
lour; which  also  appears  to  be  a  hydrate  qf 
the  protoxide,  as  it  .dissolves  in  acids  without 
giving  out  /gas,  and  yields  the  blue  oxide  by 
an  alkali*  According  to  Proust,  this  hydrate 
contains  £0  or  2 1  per  cent,  water.  If  we  sup- 
pose the  blue  to  be  1  atom  oxide,  and  1  wa- 
ter, the  yellow  hydrate  may  be  1  water  and  2 
of  the  proto-hydrate ;  or  88  oxide,  and  24 
water,  which  will  be  nearly  21  per  cent, 
water. 

The  black  oxide  gives  out  oxygen  gas  by 
<i  red  heat,  and  is  reduced  to  the  grey  oxide  : 
it  forms  oxymuriatic  acid,  with  muriatic  acid, 
and  the  protoxide  remains  in  solution. 

(See  Tassaert.— An.  de  Chimie28;  The- 
nard,   42;  and  Proust,  60.) 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  71 


22*  Oxides  of  manganese* 


One  of  the  oxides  of  manganese  being  a 
natural  production,  and  sometimes  of  great 
purity,  and  the  metal  not  being  obtainable 
without  skill  and  labour,  it  may  be  most  con* 
venient  to  adopt  the  inverse  method  in  our  in- 
vestigations; that  is,  to  trace  out  the  atom  of 
metal  from  its  oxides. 

Native  oxides  of  manganese.  Of  late,  I  have 
met  with  excellent  specimens  of  this  oxide; 
they  are  in  masses  of  a  greyi  crystalline  ap- 
pearance, sp.  gr.  4,  easily  pulverizable  into  a 
greasy,  shining,  dark  grey  powder.  They 
are  nearly  pure  oxide;  but  the  niore  common 
sort  is  blacker,  and  contains  less  or  more 
of  siliceous  earth.     Some  specimens  are  very 

harsh,    require  an  iron  mortar  to  pulverise 

i  •  K       >rrif  fff»  •  feu 

them,    and  contain  50  or  upwards  per  cent,  of 

siliceous  earth.  Of  the  common  sort  when 
pulverized,  the  black  inclining  to  blue,  is  ge- 
nerally preferable  to  the  black  inclining  to 
brown.  I  have  not  observed  any  earthy  car- 
bonates mixed  with  ihe  oxide  of  manga- 
nese.  Amongst  various  specimens  I  obtained 
the  following  analyses. 


72  METALLIC    OXIDES. 


Oxide.  sand  and  in* 

«  soluble  matter. 

1.  Grey,  crystallized  oxide 100  — - 

2*  Pulverized  black  oxide,  from         7    ftft  9n 

a  bleacher,  reputed  good j 

3.  Another  specimen,  in  the  lump           77  23 

4.  A  light  brown  oxide                            47  53 

5.  A  sparry  oxide,   abounding  with?    g7  .„ 
flint )  black  brown  when  pulverized  ) 


Some  of  the  chemical  characters  of  the 
native  oxide  of  manganese  are,  its  giving 
oxygen  gas  by  a  red  heat,  its  insolubility  in 
nitric  and  sulphuric  acids,  and  its  solubility 
in  muriatic  acid,  but  with  the  accompanying 
circumstance  pf  disengaging  oxymuriaiic 
acid. 

All  these  facts  shew  that  it  is  of  the  higher 
order  of  oxides,  or  analogous  to  the  brown 
and  red  oxides  of  lead.— The  muriatic  acid 
solution  abovementioned,  contains  an  oxide 
of  an  inferior  degree,  which  is  soluble  in  all 
acids,  and  which  is  the  only  oxide  of  manga- 
nese that  appears  to  be  soluble  in  acids.  If 
this  be  considered,  (as  it  may  with  the  great- 
est probability),  the  protoxide,  then  it  will 
appear  from  what  follows,  that  the  common 
native  manganese  is  the  deutoxide,  and  that 
there  is  an  intermediate  one,  which  contains 
a  mean  quantity  of  oxygen. 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  73 

Protoxide.  This  may  be  obtained  in  solu- 
tion with  muriatic  acid  as  above,  from  the 
native  oxide.  Or  the  black  oxide  may  be 
mixed  with  sulphuric  acid  into  a  paste,  and 
heated  in  an  iron  spoon  to  redness;  the  mass 
being  lixiviated,  a  solution  of  the  protoxide 
in  sulphuric  acid  is  obtained,  generally  with 
a  slight  excess  of  the  acid;  in  this  process 
heat  and  the  presence  of  sulphuric  acid,  ex- 
pels the  redundant  oxygen  of  the  black  oxide, 
and  reduce  it  to  the  protoxide,  which  hence 
becomes  soluble.  If  in  either  of  these  solu- 
tions any  oxide  of  iron  be  present,  whether 
from  the  manganese,  or  acquired  during  the 
manipulation,  it  is  easily  discovered,  and  se- 
parated, as  I  have  frequently  found.  Into 
any  solution  containing  a  mixture  of  the  ox- 
ides of  manganese,  the  green  oxide  of  iron, 
and  the  red  oxide  of  iron,  let  lime  water  be 
gradually  poured ;  the  red  oxide  of  iron  will 
be  first  precipitated,  next;  the  green  oxide, 
and  lastly  the  oxide  of  manganese,  which 
may  hence  be  separated  from  each  other. 
Iron  may  also  be  discovered  and  separated  by 
carbonate  of  potash,  which  must  be  dropped 
into  the  solution  as  long  as  any  coloured  pre- 
cipitate appears;  as  soon  as  it  has  subsided, 
the  snow-white  carbonate  of  manganese  suc- 
ceeds.    This  white  carbonate  may  be  very 

VOL.  II.  K 


74  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

conveniently  used  for  obtaining  solutions  of 
pure  manganese  in  any  of  the  acids. 

When   a    solution  of  pure  manganese  is 
treated  With  lime  water,  or  ammonia,  a  light 
buff  oxide,   not  much  differing  in  appearance 
from  the  yellow  oxide  of  iron,  is  obtained. 
This  oxide  is  soluble  in  all  acids,  when  re- 
cently precipitated;   but,  such  is  its  avidity 
for  oxygen,  with  moderate  agitation  of  the 
liquid  it  acquires  oxygen  and  becomes  brown, 
when  it  ceases  to  be  totally  soluble;   if  dried 
in  the  air  quickly,  it  becomes  brown  and  ob- 
tains considerable  oxygen.     The  buff  oxide 
recently  precipitated,  is  probably  a  hydrate; 
for,  when  the  white  carbonate  of  manganese 
is  heated  gradually  to  red,  the  water  and  the 
acid  are  both  expelled,  and  a,  grey  powder 
Remains;  this  is  quite  black  on  the  surface  of 
the  mass,    if  exposed  to  the  air  during  the 
process.     Probably  this  grey  powder  is  the 
ptire  protoxide ;  it  is  soluble  in  acids,  except 
the  black  powder  at   the  surface ;   perhaps 
but  for  the  oxygen  of  the  air,  the  protoxide 
would  be  nearly  white. 

From  its  combinations  with  sulphuric  and 
carbonic  acids,  I  find  the  weight  of  an  atom 
of  the  protoxide  to  be  32,  or  the  same  as  that 
of  iron.  Dr.  John,  a  German  chemist,  who 
seems  to  have  investigated  these  salts  with 

.  ■ 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  75 

more  attention  than  any  other  person,  has  de- 
duced nearly   the  same  results.  (Annals   of 
Philos.  2—172).  He  finds  33^-  sulphuric  acid 
4*31    oxide,  and   34.2    carbonic  acid +55.8 
oxide;  that  is,  when  reduced  to  compare  with 
my  results,  34  sulphuric  acid +  31.3   oxide, 
and  19.4  carbonic  acid  +  32  oxide.     This  near 
agreement  may  be  considered  as  a  confirma- 
tion of  the  accuracy  of  both.     Dr.  John  finds, 
as  I  have  done,  three  distinct  oxides  of  man- 
ganese, the  greyish   green,  the  brown,  and 
the  black.     The  first  of  these  is  the  only  one 
that  combines  with  acids  ;   but  we  differ  mate- 
rially as  to  the  quantity  of  oxygen  in  each. 
He  found  manganese  decompose  water  at  the 
ordinary  temperature ;  by  oxidizing  the  me- 
tal this  way,  100  metal  acquired  15  oxygen 
to  constitute  the  protoxide;  according  to  this, 
28  metal +  4  oxygen  would  make  32  prot- 
oxide; but  this  conclusion  would  be  so  con- 
trary to  all  analogy,  that  it  cannot  be  admit- 
ted as  satisfactory.     The  probability  is,    that 
the  manganese  must  have  contained  a  little 
oxygen  at  the  commencement  of  the  experi- 
ment.    The  general  analogy  of  manganese 
to  iron,  lead,  &c.  requires  that  32  protoxide 
should  contain  7  oxygen.     If  this  be  allowed, 
we  have  the  atom  of   manganese  =  25,  and 
not  40,  (as  at  page  266,  Vol.  I),  the  same  as 


76  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

that  of  iron :  and  this  conclusion  is  corrobo- 
rated by  what  follows. 

2.  Intermediate  or  olive  brown  oxide.  This 
may  be  formed  by  combining  oxygen  directly 
with  the  buff  or  protoxide  recently  precipi- 
tated, and  still  remaining  in  the  liquor;  sim- 
ple agitation  in  oxygenous  gas  or  common  air 
for  a  few  minutes,  is  all  that  is  requisite.  Or 
it  may  be  instantly  formed  by  treating  the 
same  moist  protoxide  with  liquid  oxyttiuriate 
of  lime.  Or  it  may  be  had  by  exposing  the 
purest  black  oxide  to  a  bright  red  heat  for  some 
time,  when  it  will  lose  9  or  10  per  cent,  and 
there  will  remain  the  olive  brown  oxide. 

To  find  the  proportion  of  oxygen  absorbed, 
I  precipitated  3.2  grains  of  the  protoxide  by 
lime  water;  the  liquid  containing  the  oxide 
was  put  into  a  well  stoppered  bottle  of  oxygen 
gas;  on  agitation  the  oxide  changed  colour 
fast,  from  buff  to  brown;  in  a  short  time  it 
absorbed  260  grain  measures  of  gas  =.35  of 
a  grain  in  weight,  and  then  ceased  to  absorb. 
In  another  experiment,  3.2  grains  of  preci- 
pitated protoxide/ took  100  measures  of  a 
solution  of  Oxymuriate  of  lime,  containing 
.35  per  cent,  of  oxygen,  (that  is,  1.45  oxy- 
muriatic  &cid).  Hence  as  32  take  3.5,  64 
m^ttake  7;  \vhieh  shews  the  brown  oxide  to 
■  - (  '     ■■  i  i         '  ?  •  . 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  77 

be  a  compound  of  1  atom  of  oxygen,   and 
2  of  the  protoxide. 

The  characters  of  this  oxide  are,  its  olive 
brown  colour,  its  insolubility  in  nitric  and  sul- 
phuric acids,  without  heat  or  deoxidation,  and 
its  solubility  in  muriatic  acid  after  the  evolu- 
tion of  oxy muriatic  acid.  By  long  exposure 
to  the  air,  it  is  gradually  changed,  in  all  pro- 
bability into  the  black  oxide. 

3.  Deutoxide.  In  order  to  determine  the 
quantity  of  oxygen  deducible  from  the  purest 
native  oxide  of  manganese,  to  convert  it  into 
protoxide,  I  have  successfully  adopted  the  two 
following  methods.  1st.  Let  39  or  40  grains 
of  the  oxide  be  mixed  with  60  common  salt; 
to  this  add  80  grains  of  water,  and  120 
grains  weight  of  strong  sulphuric  acid,  in  a 
gas  bottle.  The  heat  must  be  gradually  raised 
to  boiling,  and  the  oxymuriatic  acid  gas  may 
be  received  in  a  quart  of  lime  water.  This 
will  be  found  sufficient  to  convert  800  mea- 
sures of  test  green  sulphate  of  iron  (1.156) 
into  red  ;  that  is,  it  will  produce  29  grains  of 
oxymuriatic  acid,  which  will  cause  7  grains 
of  oxygen,  to  unite  to  the  green  oxide  of 
iron.  Now  100  measures  of  1.156  sulphate* 
according  to  some  recent  experiments  of 
mine,  contain  8  grains  of  green  oxide,  (I  es- 
timated the  sp.  gr.  of  test  sulphate,  heretofore 


78  METALLIC   OXIDES. 

at  1.149);  hence  800  contain  64  oxide,  and 
these  require  just  7  grains    of  oxygen  to  be 
united  to  them,  to  form  the  red  oxide,  as  has 
been  shewn,  page  34.     In  the  above  experi- 
ment, the  39  grains  of  oxide,  will  be  found 
to   vanish  or  be  dissolved,  if  pure,  and   to 
yield  32  grains  of  protoxide,  making  up  with 
the  7  grains  of  oxygen,  the  original  weight. 
Hence  we  have  39  grains  of  the  oxide  re- 
solved into  32  protoxide,  and  7  oxygen.     If 
then  we  allow  32  protoxide,  to  contain    7 
oxygen,  it  appears  that  39  grains  of  the  na- 
tive oxide,    consists  of   1  atom  manganese 
(25),    and  two  atoms  of    oxygen  (14);    or 
it   is   the   deutoxide   of  the    metal.     2d.  A 
more    direct    and    expeditious    method,    of 
transferring   the   oxygen  from    the  manga- 
nese to  the  iron,  is  as  follows:     Let  39  grains 
of  pure  grey  shining  oxide,  be  mixed  with 
800  of  test  green  sulphate  of  iron;   to  this 
mixture  let  25  or  30  grain  measures  of  strong 
sulphuric  acid  be  added:  after  stirring  the 
mixture  for  5  minutes,  the  oxide  of  manga- 
nese  will  be  completely  dissolved,  and,   on 
precipitating  the  oxide  of  iron  gradually,  by 
lime  water,  it  will  be  found  to  be  wholly  yeU 
lowor  buff;  shewing  that  7  grains  of  oxygen 
have  been  transferred  from  the  oxide  of  man- 
ganese to  that  of  iron. — If  more  green  suU 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  79 

phate  of  iron  be  used,  then  the  surplus  of 
the  oxide  will  be  thrown  down  green;  the 
order  of  precipitation  being  the  yellow  oxide 
of  iron,  the  green  oxide  of  iron,  and  lastly, 
the  yellow  or  buff  oxide  of  manganese,  as 
has  been  stated.  This  affords  an  easy  and 
elegant  method  of  appreciating  the  different 
oxides  of  manganese  of  commerce;  and  it 
was  in  this  mode,  the  valuations  of  the  spe- 
cimens in  the  above  table  were  made. 

The  proportions  of  the  three  oxides  are 
then  as  under : 

r  ■• 

Manganese        Oxygen 

Protoxide  100     +     28  —  buff;  soluble  in  acids. 

Intermediate  oxide- -f-     42  —  brown ;  insoluble. 

Deutoxide  -{-     56  —  black;  insoluble. 

It  may  be  proper  to  subjoin  the  results  of 
others,  who  have  investigated  the  oxides  of 
manganese.  Bergman  finds  3  oxides,  con- 
taining 100  metal  +  25,  35, and  66.6 oxygen; 
Dr.  John  finds  3  oxides,  containing  100  me- 
tal +  15,  25,  and  40  oxygen:  Berzelius  finds 
5  oxides,  containing  100  metal  +  7,  14,  28, 
42,  and  56  oxygen ;  and  Davy  finds  2  oxides, 
containing  100  metal  +  26.6,  and  39.9  oxy- 
gen, respectively. 


80  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

23,  Oxides  of  chromium. 

There  appear  to  be  at  least  two  oxides  of 
chromium,  one  or  other  of  which  is  found  in 
combj^atiqn  with  the  oxides  of  lead  or  iron, 
but  hithertpj  so dtiffljfi  sparingly  that  few  che-; 
mists  have  had  an  opportunity  of  investigating 
the  proportions  of  chrome  and  oxygen,  in  the 
oxides  of  chromium.  The  chief  sources  for 
information  on  this  subject,  (  are  essays  by 
Vauquelin,  An.  de  Chimie,  Vol.  25  and, 70; 
by  Tassaert,  ibid.  31;  by  Mussin  Puschin, 
ibid.  32;  by  Godon,  ibid.  53;  by  Laugier 
ibid.  ,78,  and  by  Berzelius,  Annal.  of  Philo- 
sophy, 3. 

The  oxides  of  chromium,  as  might  be  sup- 
posed, are  distinguished  for  the  colours  which 
they  possess  and  impart  to  the  compounds 
into  which  they  enter.  One  of  the  oxides  is 
green;  it  gives  colour  to  the  emerald.  The 
other  is  yellow,  dissolved  in  water,  but  deep 
red  when  crystallized,  and  possesses  the  cha- 
racters of  an  acid;  it  unites  with  alkalies, 
earths,  and  metallic  oxides;  it  was  first  found 
in  Siberia,  in  combination  with  the  oxide  of 
lead,  a  salt  now  denominated  chromate  of 
lead,  of  a  splendid  yellow  colour,  inclining 
to  orange  or  red.     Since  then,  the  chromate 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  81 

of  iron,  has  been  found  in  France,  America, 
and  Siberia,  with  a  prospect  of  greater  abun- 
dance. 

In  order  to  investigate  the  weight  of  the 
atom  of  chromic  acid,  it  is  necessary  to  at- 
tend to  such  of  the  chromates  as  have  been 
carefully  examined.  The  chromates  of  pot- 
ash, barytes,  lead,  iron,  and  mercury,  are 
those  with  which  we  are  best  acquainted. 

Vauquelin  has  given  us  the  components  of 
the  native  chromate  of  lead  by  analysis,  and 
those  of  the  artificial  chromate  by  synthesis; 
the  results  do  not  accord  very  nearly :  for,  ac- 
cording to  the  analysis  corrected  by  the  mo- 
dern science, 

Chromate  of  lead =  62  acid  -j-  97  oxide 

By  synth.  chromate  of  lead     e=  57| 1-  97  — — 

Berzelius  however,  has  more  lately  given 
us  the  results  of  his  experience,  both  analy- 
tical, and  synthetical;  and  he  finds  both  to 
give  chromate  of  lead  nearly  =  44  acid  4-  97 
oxide. 

Chromate  of  barytes (Vauq.)=47.8  acid  ~f- 68  barytes 

Ditto (Berz.)=44 |-SS 

Native  chromate  of  iron     (Vauq.)=45  acid  4-351  oxide 
Ditto. (Laugier)=55 h35| 

VOL.  II.  L 


82  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

Having*  received  a  small  portion  of  chro- 
mate  of  potash  in  solution,  from  a  chemical 
friend  (J.  Sims),  I  endeavoured  to  satisfy 
myself,  as  far  as  my  materials  would  go,  as 
to  the  nature  and  proportions  of  the  chro- 
mates.  The  solution  was  of  the  sp.  gr.  1.061, 
and  consequently  in  100  measures  contained 
nearly  6.7  grains  of  chromic  acid  and  pot- 
ash, &c- — The  liquid  was  a  beautiful  yellow; 
it  was  alkaline  by  the  colour  test.  By  the 
usual  tests,  I  had  reason  to  believe,  that  the 
solution  contained  as  under  per  cent. — 
namely, 

2.2  gr.  chromic  acid 

2.  potash 

.8  uncomb.  potash 

1.4  carb.  potash 

.3  sulphate  of  potash 

6.7 

... 
With  this  liquid  neutralized  by  nitric  acidf 

I  formed  the  chromates  of  lead,  barytes,  iron, 

and  mercury ;   and  I  am  inclined  to  believe 

these  salts  are  nearly  constituted  as  under : 

Neutral  chromate  of  potash    46  acid  -f-  42  potash 

of  barytes  46 \-  68  barytes 

— of  lead        46 (-  97  oxide 

—  of  iron        46  )  «-f-  32  oxide  (black) 


1 of  mercury  46 p-174  oxide  (black) 


METALLIC   OXIDES.  83 

According  to  these  results,  the  atom  of 
chromic  acid  weighs  46;  it  is  made  44  by  the 
results  of  Berzelius,  and  from  45  to  62  by 
those  of  Vauquelin;  I  would  not  be  under- 
stood to  place  great  confidence  in  the  above 
results  of  mine,  though  I  am  persuaded  they 
will  be  found  good  approximations. 

Is  the  chromic  acid  the  deutoxide,  or  the 
tritoxideof  chromium? 

The  determination  will  evidently  be  affec- 
ted by  the  question,  how  much  oxygen  must 
be  abstracted  from  the  chromic  acid  to  reduce 
it  to  the  green  oxide.  Vauquelin  finds  46 
acid  to  lose  6|  oxygen,  and  Berzelius  lOf , 
when  converted  into  green  oxide  by  heat. 
From  the  former  of  these,  one  would  infer 
chrome  to  be  32,  the  green  or  protoxide  of 
chrome  to  be  39,  and  the  acid  or  deutoxide 
46:  from  the  latter,  chrome  =  25,  protoxide 
=  32  (unknown),  the  green  oxide  =  1  prot- 
oxide and  1  deutoxide  united  [=  71  =  50 
chrome  -f  21  oxygen  =  (25  chrome  +  lOf  oxy- 
gen) x  2=  35f  x  2]  the  deutoxide  =  39,  and 
the  tritoxide  or  chromic  acid  =  46.  I  have 
not  had  an  opportunity  to  perform  any  expe- 
riment that  appears  to  me  decisive  as  to  the 
accuracy  of  one  or  other  of  these  views ;  but 
shall  make  a  few  remarks  relative  to  them. 


84  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

The  green  oxide  being-  the  most  prominent 
compound  next  to  the  chromic  acid,  being 
commonly  produced  from  it  by  any  deoxi- 
dizing process,  being- the  lowest  oxide  known? 
and  combining-  with  acids,  is  on  these  ac- 
counts entitled  to  the  consideration  of  the 
protoxide;  indeed  there  does  not  seem  an  in- 
stance where  the  protoxide  of  a  metal  is  un- 
known, whilst  the  deutoxide  and  compound 
oxides  are  known.  There  is  however,  ano- 
ther oxide  observed  by  Vauquelin  and  by 
Berzelius,  which  is  obtained  by  heating  the 
nitrate,  or  combination  of  nitric  acid  and  the 
green  oxide,  to  dryness  and  expelling  the  acid  ; 
this  oxide  is  brown,  and  gives  oxymuriatic 
acid  when  treated  with  muriatic  acid ;  on 
this  account  it  would  seem  to  be  interme- 
diate between  the  green  oxide  and  the  chro- 
mic acid;  ^t  is  prohably  a  combination  of  the 
two,  or  the  chr ornate  of  chromium.  On  the 
other  view  however,  it  must  be  considered  as 
the  deutoxide.  What  corroborates  the  notion 
of  the  green  oxide  being  39,  is  the  fact  which 
I  have  observed,  of  46  parts  of  chromic  acid 
combining  with  64  of  the  green  oxide  of 
iron  to  form  110  of  chrotnate  of  iron ;  in  this 
combination  the  oxide  of  iron  may  be  said  to 
borrow  1  atom  of  oxygen  from  the  chromic 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  85 

acid,  and  the  compound  may  then  be  consi- 
dered as  the  union  of  the  green  oxide  of 
chrome,  and  the  red  oxide  of  iron.  When 
this  precipitate  is  subjected  to  the  action  of 
muriatic  acid,  a  green  solution  is  obtained 
containing-  the  oxide  of  chrome,  and  red  oxide 
of  iron  is  precipitated,  as  Vauquelin  has  ob- 
served. To  form  the  above  chromate  (or  ra- 
ther subchromate)  of  iron,  let  a  given  portion 
of  neutral  chromate  of  potash  be  treated  with 
green  sulphate  of  iron,  and  lime-water  be 
added,  sufficient  to  saturate  the  sulphuric 
acid,  a  brown  red  precipitate  is  obtained; 
more  sulphate  and  lime  water  must  be  gradu- 
ally added  to  the  clear  liquid  till  the  precipi- 
tate become  green,  when  the  proportions  will 
be  found  as  above  stated.  This  artificial 
compound  seems  a  subchromate;  whereas  the 
native  compound  seems  to  be  a  chromate. 
That  there  is  some  uncertainty  in  decompos- 
ing a  chromate  by  heat  with  a  view  to  obtain 
the  green  oxide,  I  have  reason  to  suspect  from 
having  decomposed  54-  grains  of  chromate  of 
mercury  by  a  moderate  red  heat;  this  com- 
pound contained  1.1  chromic  acid,  and  it 
'yielded  only  .6  of  green  oxide,  whereas  it 
should  have  been  .9  or  .8  at  least. 

Upon  the  whole  I  think  the  evidence  is  in 
favour  of  the  opinion  that  the  atom  of  chrome 


86  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

is  32,  the  green  or  protoxide   39,   and  the 
deutoxide  or  chromic  acid  is  46. 


24.   Oxides  of  uranium. 

There  appear  to  be  two  oxides  of  uranium 
from  the  experiments  of  Klaproth,  Bucholz, 
and  Vauquelin ;  but  the  proportions  of  metal 
and  oxygen  have  not  been  very  nearly  ascer- 
tained, from  the  great  scarcity  of  the  mine- 
rals containing  this  metal.  (Vid.  Bucholz, 
An.  de  Chimie,  56 — 142.  Vauquelin,  ibid.  68 
—277;  or  Nicholson's  Journ.  25— 69).  The 
oxides  are  obtained  by  precipitation  from  so- 
lutions of  the  minerals  in  the  nitric  or  muria- 
tic acid,  the  foreign  substances  being  first  se- 
parated. 

The  protoxide  of  uranium  precipitates 
dark  bottle  green  by  caustic  alkalies,  and 
forms  crystallizable  salts  with  acids;  the  other, 
probably  the  deutoxide,  precipitates  orange 
yellow,  and  forms  un crystallizable  salts  with 
acids;  in  these  respects  the  oxides  bear  a  near 
resemblance  to  those  of  iron. 

Bucholz  estimates  the  yellow  oxide  at  100 
metal  +  from  25  to  32  oxygen;  as  it  yields 
oxymuriatic  acid  when  treated  with  muriatic, 
it  is  most  likely  to  be  the  deutoxide;  now  if 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  87 

we  take  28  for  the  oxygen  combined  with  100 
metal,  the  protoxide  must  consist  of  100  me- 
tal +  14  oxygen,  or  of  50  metal  +  7  oxygen, 
and  the  atom  of  uranium  =  50.  From  his  ac- 
count of  the  sulphate  and  nitrate  of  uranium 
the  weight  of  the  atom  might  be  inferred  to 
be  double  of  the  above  or  100a  These  diffe- 
rent conclusions  can  only  be  elucidated  by  fu- 
ture experiments. 

25.   Oxides  of  molybdenum. 

The  latest  and  as  it  should  seem  most  ac- 
curate experiments  on  the  oxides  of  molybde- 
num were  made  by  Bucholz.  (Vid.  Nichol- 
son's Journal,  20,  p.  121).  There  appear  to 
be  3  oxides  or  combinations  of  molybdenum 
and  oxygen,  namely,  the  brown,  the  blue,  and 
the  white  or  yellow.  The  two  last  have  the 
character  of  acids,  and  none  of  them  seem  to 
form  salts  with  acids,  like  oxides  in  general. 
Bucholz  ascertained  the  above  gradation, 
and  that  the  white  oxide  or  molybdic  acid  con- 
tains 4-  of  its  weight  of  oxygen;  (which  has 
since  been  corroborated  by  Berzelius) ;  he  also 
found  that  the  blue  was  best  formed  by  mixing, 
triturating,  and  boiling  in  water  3  parts  of 
brown  oxide,  and  4  of  white,  or  one  of  me- 
tal, and  two  of  acid ;  and   that  it  has  acid 


88  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

qualities  as  well  as  the  white.  Bucholz  also 
found  3  parts  of  liquid  ammonia  of  the  sp.  gr. 
.97  dissolve  1  of  molybdic  acid;  now  3  parts; 
of  ammonia— .186  real  (Vol.  1,  p.  422); 
and  1:. 186::  64-:  12,  the  quantity  of  ammo- 
nia usually  saturated  by  one  atom  of  acid; 
and  Berzelius  found  100  molybdic  acid 
saturate  155  oxide  of  lead,  or  63  acid  to  07 
oxide.  The  native  sulphuret  of  molybdenum 
(the  state  in  which  this  metal  is  usually  found) 
was  analyzed  by  Bucholz  and  found  to  consist 
of  60  metal  and  40  sulphur. 

The  molybdic  acid  may  be  obtained  by 
roasting  the  sulphuret  in  a  crucible  and  stir- 
ring" it  frequently;  the  sulphur  in  great  part 
escapes  in  the  form  of  sulphurous  acid  and 
the  metal  becomes  oxidated:  carbonate  of 
soda  in  solution  may  be  added  to  the  residuum 
as  long  as  any  effervescence  is  observed;  mo- 
lybdate  of  soda  remains  in  solution  and  the 
acid  may  be  precipitated  by  nitric  acid.  The 
brown  oxide  is  best  obtained  by  heating  mo- 
lybdate  of  ammonia  to  red;  the  ammonia  and 
part  of  the  oxygen  are  expelled,  and  the 
brown  oxide  remains. 

There  are  two  views  with  which  the  pre- 
ceding results  may  be  reconciled;  namely,  1st. 
supposing  the  atom  of  molybdenum  to  weigh 
21 ;  and  2d,  by  supposing  it  to  weigh  42  or 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  89 

twice  that  number.  In  the  first  case  the 
brown  oxide  will  weigh  24|  (49)  being*  sup- 
posed 2  atoms  of  metal  and  1  of  oxygen,  the 
blue  or  protoxide  will  weigh  28,  and  the 
white  oxide  or  molybdic  acid  will  weigh  63, 
being  a  compound  of  the  protoxide  and  deut- 
oxide,  molybdena  or  native  sulphuret  will  then 
be  as  usual,  the  protosulphuret,  consisting  of 
21  metal  and  14  sulphur,  or  60  metal  and  40 
sulphur.  In  the  2d.  case  the  brown  or  prot- 
oxide will  weigh  49,  the  blue  or  deutoxide 
56,  and  the  acid  or  tritoxide  63.  The  na- 
tive sulphuret,  molybdena,  must  in  this  view 
be  the  deutosulphuret,  or  42  metal  and  28 
sulphur. 

The  former  of  these  views  exhibits  the  ox* 
ides  somewhat  complicated,  but  agrees  well 
with  the  sulphuret;  the  latter  shews  the  oxides 
in  a  more  regularirain,  but  does  not  appear  so 
probable  from  the  sulphuret;  besides,  the  no- 
tion of  a  metallic  tritoxide  is  rather  singular, 
especially  in  a  metal  that  is  rarely  if  ever 
found  in  combination  with  oxygen.  Upon 
the  whole  I  prefer  the  former  view ;  but  it 
must  be  considered  as  problematical  only, 
The  atom  of  60  (see  page  267  Vol.  1)  must 
doubtless  be  erroneous. 

VOL.   II.  M 


90  METALLIC     OXIDES. 


26.   Oxides  of  tungsten. 

From  the  experiments  of  D'Elhuiarts,  Bu- 
cholz*  and  Berzeliusf  it  seems  very  probable 
that  the  tungstic  acid  is  composed  of  about 
100  metal  +  25  oxygen.     It  is  a  yellow  pow- 
der of  the  sp.  gr.  6.12,   and  is  best  obtained 
from  the  native  tungstate  of  lime  (a  scarce 
mineral).     One  part  tungstate  of  lime  and 
four  of  carbonate  of  potash  are  fused  together, 
dissolved  in  water,  and  then  the  tungstic  acid 
may  be  precipitated  by  nitric  acid.     There  is 
an  inferior  oxide  that  is  black  or  dark  brown ; 
Berzelius  reduced  the  yellow  oxide  to  a  flea- 
brown  colour,    by  sending  a  current  of  hy- 
drogen gas  through  it  in  a  glass  tube  heated 
red  hot.     100  parts  of  this  oxide  burnt  be- 
107  yellow  oxide.     Hence  100  metal  must 
combine  with  about  16|  or  17  oxygen  to  form 
this  oxide,   which  is  |>  of  that  in  the  yellow 
or  tungstic  acid. — Upon  the  whole  it  does 
not  seem  improbable,  considering  the  great 
sp.  gravity  of  this  metal,  that  it  forms  three 
oxides  and  that  the  acid  or  yellow  oxide  is 

*  An.  of  Philos.  6—198 
fAn.  of  Philos.  3—244 


METALLIC    OXIDES  91 

the  3d.  Hence  the  atom  of  tungsten  must 
be  84,  that  of  the  protoxide  91,  the  deutox- 
ide  98,  and  the  tritoxide  or  tungstic  acid  105. 
The  native  tungstate  of  lime,  if  pure,  ac- 
cording to  this  would  be  81.4  acid  +18.6  lime, 
which  is  not  far  from  Klaproth's  analysis ;  he 
having  found  18.7  lime  in  one  specimen;  nor 
from  that  of  Berzelius,  he  having  found 
80.4  tungstic  acid  and  19.4  lime  in  99.8 
tungstate  of  lime.* 

There  is  another  view  however,  which 
would  accord  with  the  experiments  and  per- 
haps will  be  found  preferable  in  other  res- 
pects; that  is,  to  suppose  the  tungstic  acid  to 
be  composed  of  1  atom  deutoxide  and  1 
atom  protoxide  united ;  in  this  case  the  atom 
of  tungsten  =  42,  that  of  the  protoxide  =  49, 
that  of  the  deutoxide  #  56,  and  the  tungstic 
acid  =  105  as  before. 


27.  Oxides  of  titanium. 

Nothing  certain  is  known  respecting  the 
oxides  of  titanium.  An  observation  of  Rich- 
ter,  quoted  by  Berzelius  (An.  of  Philos. 
3—251),  if  it  could  be  relied  upon,  furnishes 
an  important  fact,  namely,  that  a  solution  of 

*An.  of  Philos.  8—237 


92  METALLIC    OXIDES. 

muriate  of  titanium  containing'  84.4  oxide, 
gave  150  muriate  of  silver.  Now  150  muri- 
ate of  silver  contain  28  acid ;  hence  28  acid 
must  have  combined  with  84.4  oxide )  but  if 
28  :  84.4  ::  22 :  66  nearly  for  the  weight  of  an 
atom  of  the  oxide.  This  would  indicate  59 
for  an  atom  of  the  metal. 

2 8 .   Oxides  of  columbium . 

The  white  oxide  or  acid  of  columbium  is 
found  in  combination  with  the  oxides  of  iron 
and  manganese  in  proportion  nearly  as  4  of 
the  acid  to  1  of  the  aggregate  oxides.  The 
two  minerals,  columbiteand  tantalite,  though 
yielding  these  substances  nearly  in  the  same 
proportions,  are  found  to  differ  remarkably  in 
specific  gravity,  the  former  being  about  5.9 
and  the  latter  about  7.9.  Dr.  Wollaston 
concludes  however,  from  the  agreement  of 
the  white  oxides  extracted,  that  they  must  be 
the  same.  The  white  oxide  of  columbium 
is  insoluble  in  the  mineral  acids;  it  unites 
with  potash  by  fusion,  and  may  be  precipi- 
tated by  most  acids.  Some  of  the  vegeta- 
ble acids,  the  oxalic,  the  tartaric,  and  the 
citric  dissolve  the  white  oxide.  When  the 
alkaline  solution  of  columbium  previously 
neutralized  by  an  acid  is  treated  with  infusion 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  93 

of  galls,  an  orange  precipitate  is  produced 
which  is  characteristic  of  columbium.  No- 
thing certain  has  been  determined  respecting 
the  proportions  of  metal  and  oxygen;  but 
from  the  great  proportion  of  the  columbic 
acid  found  with  the  oxides  of  iron  and  man- 
ganese, together  with  the  great  sp.  gravity  of 
the  compound,  one  may  pretty  clearly  infer 
the  great  weight  of  the  atom  of  columbium. 
Supposing  the  white  oxide  or  acid  to  consist 
of  1  atom  metal  4-  3  oxygen  and  that  the  co- 
lumbite  is  formed  by  1  atom  of  acid  to  1  of 
oxide,  we  should  have  128  acid  4*  32  oxide. 
This  would  give  107  for  the  weight  of  an  atom 
of  metal,  and  128  for  that  of  the  tritoxide 
or  columbic  acid;  but  it  is  unnecessary  to 
dwell  upon  such  conjectures. 

In  a  recent  memoir  of  Messrs.  Gahn, 
Berzelius,  and  Eggertz  (An.  de  Chimie, 
Octo.  1816),  it  is  maintained  as  probable  that 
there  is  only  one  oxide  of  columbium  or  tanta- 
lum, and  that  100  metal  take  5.485  oxygen, 
or  121  metal  take  7  oxygen.  If  this  be  cor- 
rect, the  atom  of  columbium  must  be  121  and 
the  protoxide  128. 

(See  also  An.  de  Chimie,  43 — 271 ;  Philos. 
Trans.  1802;  Nichols.  Journ.  2— 129;  ibid. 
3—251 ;  ibid.  25—23). 


94  METALLIC    OXIDES. 


29.  Oxides  of  cerium. 

The  mineral  cerite  is  of  the  sp.  gr.  4.53, 
and  constituted  of  50  or  60  per  cent,  of  oxide 
of  cerium,  with  silex,  lime,  and  iron.  This  mi- 
being  calcined  and  dissolved  in  nitro-muriatic 
acid,  the  solution  is  to  be  neutralized  by 
caustic  potash,  and  then  treated  with  tar- 
trate of  potash.  The  precipitate,  well  washed 
and  afterwards  calcined,  is  pure  oxide  of  ce- 
rium. •  This  oxide,  which  is  white,  when 
calcined  in  the  open  air  becomes  red  and  ac- 
quires more  oxygen.  These  oxides,  parti cu  J 
larly  the  white,  are  soluble  in  most  acids; 
the  red  oxide  with  muriatic  acid  gives  oxy- 
muriatic  acid. 

The  experiments  hitherto  made  on  this  sub- 
ject scarcely  enable  us  to  decide  respecting 
the  proportions  of  metal  and  oxygen,  nor  the 
relative  weights  of  these  oxides. 

Both  Vauquelin*  and  Hisingerf  agree  that 
the  proto-carbonate  of  cerium,  when  expo- 
sed to  a  red  heat,  yields  57  or  58  oxide, 
which  the  former  says  is  the  red  oxide,  being 

*  An.  de  Chimie,  54—28 
fAii.ofPhilos.— 4—356 


METALLIC    OXIDES.  95 

changed  by  the  calcination.  Hisinger  finds 
the  percarbonate  to  consist  of  36.2  acid  and 
63.8  oxide :  also  that  the  muriate  of  cerium 
consists  of  100  acid  and  197.5  oxide;  but 
Vauquelin  remarks  that  the  sulphate,  nitrate, 
and  muriate  of  cerium  are  always  more  or 
less  acid,  however  dried;  and  he  found  the 
protoxalate  of  cerium  to  yield  45.6  red  oxide 
by  calcination,  on  a  mean  of  3  experiments 
not  much  differing  from  each  other.  Sup- 
posing all  these  facts  accurate,  they  may  be 
reconciled  by  a  few  suppositions  by  no  means 
improbable.  Let  the  atom  of  cerium  be  22, 
the  protoxide  29,  and  the  red  oxide  32§  (that 
is,  1  oxy.  4-  2  protox.  =65)',  and  let  the 
protocarbonate  be  1  atom  of  acid,  1  of  oxide, 
and  1  of  water;  the  percarbonate,  1  acid  1 
oxide;  the  oxalate,  1  acid (40)  and  1  oxide; 
and  the  muriate,  saturated  with  base,  3  ox- 
ide and  2  acid.     Then  it  will  be  found  that, 

The  decomposed  protocarbonate  will  yield  57.5  red  oxide; 
The  decomposed  percarbonate  will  yield,  36.7  acid,  63.3 

oxide; 
The  decomposed  oxalate  will  yield  47  red  oxide;  and 
The  muriate  will  yield  100  acid  (22),  and  197.7  oxide. 

All  of  which  agree  very  nearly  with  the  re- 
sults above  obtained. 


96  SULPHURETS. 

Hence  it  appears  to  me  very  probable  that 
the  several  atoms  of  the  metal  and  the  oxides 
are  as  stated  above;  and  that, 

100  cerium  +  31.8  oxygen  =  131.8  protoxide,   white 

f-  47.7  —  — ■  =•  147.7  intermediate,  red. 

Hisinger,  from  some  of  the  same  data  uni- 
ted to  other  hypothetical  facts  than  those  as- 
sumed above,  deduces  the  two  oxides  very 
different;  viz.  100  metal  4-  17.4  oxygen  for 
the  protoxide,  and  100  +  26.1  for  the  per- 
oxide. 


SECTION    14. 

EARTHY,  ALKALINE  AND  METALLIC 
SULPHURETS. 

The  sulphurets  exhibit  a  very  important 
class  of  combinations  of  two  elements.  Many 
of  the  metals  are  found  chiefly  in  the  state  of 
native  sulphurets,  and  are  extracted  by  par- 
ticular processes.  Artificial  combinations  of 
sulphur  and  the  metals,  and  of  sulphur  and 
the  earths  and  alkalies  are  commonly  prac- 
tised, and  are  found  useful  in  chemical  inves- 


SULPHURETS.  97 

ligations.  The  alkaline  and  earthy  sulphu- 
rets  will  scarcely  be  allowed  perhaps  to  be 
combinations  of  two  elements  only ;  but  their 
analogy  with  the  other  compounds  is  such  as 
to  induce  us  to  treat  of  them  under  this  head, 
especially  as  they  are  agents  occasionally  in 
the  formation  of  metallic  sulphurets,  and  these 
cannot  be  so  well  understood  without  some 
knowledge  of  the  other.  For  like  reasons 
the  compounds  of  three  elements,  sulphur, 
metal,  and  oxygen,  called  sulphuretted  ox- 
ides, and  sulphuretted  sulphites,  and  those  of 
four  elements,  sulphur,  metal,  oxygen  and  hy- 
drogen, called  hy drosulphurets,  may  be  con- 
sidered at  the  same  time,  having  an  intimate 
relation  with  the  sulphurets  strictly  so  called, 
or  the  compounds  formed  with  sulphur  and 
the  undecompounded  bodies. 

Sulphur  may  be  combined  with  the  earths, 
alkalies  and  metals,  by  heat,  of  various  de- 
grees according  to  the  nature  of  the  subjects. 
The  union  is  attended  in  many  cases  with  a 
glowing  ignition,  indicating  the  evolution  of 
heat.  The  metallic  oxides  and  sulphur  when 
heated  together  commonly  produce  a  sulphu- 
ret  of  the  metal,  whilst  the  oxygen  escapes 
with  part  of  the  redundant  sulphur  in  the  form 
of  sulphurous  acid,  and  the  rest  of  the  sul- 
phur sublimes. 

VOL.  II.  K 


98  SULPHURETS. 

In  the  humid  way  sulphur  may  be  combined 
with  earths,  alkalies,  and  metals,  by  means  of 
sulphuretted  hydrogen,  hydrosulphurets  (that 
is,  sulphuretted  hydrogen  united  to  other  alka- 
line or  earthy  bases),  and  hydroguretted  sul- 
phurets  (a  name  given  to  certain  earthy  and 
alkaline  sulphurets  formed  mostly  by  boiling 
mixtures  of  the  respective  bases  and  sulphur 
in  water.)    The  sulphuretted  hydrogen  may 
be  used  in   this   state   of  gas  or  combined 
with  water;  the  hydrosulphurets  and  hydro- 
guretted sulphurets  are  best  applied  in  their 
watery  solutions.     The  metals  are  to  be  used 
in  this  case  in  the  state  of  salts,  that  is,   ox- 
ides united  to  acids,  and  in  solution;  or  their 
oxides  may  in  some  instances  be  precipitated 
previously  to  the  addition  of  the  sulphur  com- 
pound ;   the  alkalies  and  earths  are  sometimes 
directly  sulphurized  in  the  state  of  hydrates, 
and  at  other  times  by  double  affinity,   in  the 
state  of  salts  or  combined  with  acids.     The 
phenomena  in  the  case  of  sulphurets  formed 
in  the  humid  way,  are  various  and  often  com- 
plicated, and  the  true  results  are  not  always 
to  be  obtained  without  considerable  difficulty 
and  uncertainty. 


tIME.  99 


1.  Sulphurets  of  lime. 

When  pounded  liine  and  sulphur  are  mixed 
together,  and  heated  in  a  crucible  scarcely  any 
union  takes  place;  the  sulphur  sublimes  or 
burns  away  and  leaves  the  lime  unaltered.  If 
for  lime  we  substitute  carbonate  of  lime,  it 
also  remains  unaltered.  But  if  hydrate  of 
lime  and  sulphur  are  heated  together  in  equal 
weights,  the  hydrate  is  decomposed,  and  the 
lime  unites  to  a  portion  of  the  sulphur,  whilst 
the  excess  of  sulphur  sublimes  or  burns  and 
escapes  at  a  low  red  heat.  The  residue,  about 
60  per  cent,  of  the  original  weight,  is  a  yel- 
lowish white  powder,  composed  of  sulphur 
and  lime.  If  this  be  again  treated  with  sul- 
phur and  heated,  it  undergoes  no  material 
change;  the  last  sulphur  entirely  escaping, 
leaves  the  sulphuret  unaltered,  and  hence 
shews  that  it  must  be  a  true  chemical  com- 
pound. 

Now  if  32  parts  hydrate  of  lime,  which 
consist  of  24  lime  and  8  water,  be  mixed  with 
32  sulphur  and  heated  as  above,  they  will 
yield  38  parts  sulphuret,  which  must  be  com- 
posed of  24  lime  and  14  sulphur,  or  sulphur 
and  water;  but  it  appears  from  the  analysis 


100  SULPHURETS. 

hereafter  to  be  given,  that  the  whole  of  this 
last  part  is  sulphur;  therefore  the  compound  is 
formed  of  1  atom  of  lime,  and  1  of  sulphur, 
and  is  the  protosulpkuret  of  lime. 

When  32  parts  of  common  hydrate  of  lime 
and  56  sulphur,  are  boiled  together  in  1000 
parts  water  for  half  an  hour,  or  more,  occasion- 
ally adding  water  to  supply  the  waste,  a  fine 
yellow  liquid  is  obtained,  with  a  few  grains 
of  residuum  containing  both  lime  and  sulphur 
nearly  in  the  original  proportion  with  a  few 
grains  of  alumine.  This  liquid  of  course 
contains  in  solution,  a  combination  of  1  atom 
of  lime,  or  perhaps  hydrate  of  lime,  and  4 
atoms  of  sulphur ;  and  may  therefore  be  called 
a  quadrisulphuret  of  lime.  If  more  sulphur 
or  lime  than  the  above  proportion  be  used,  the 
surplus  will  remain  in  the  residuum  uncom- 
bined,  shewing  that  by  this  process  no  other 
than  a  quadrisulphuret  can  be  formed.  A 
similar  solution  may  be  obtained  in  cold  water 
by  frequent  agitation;  bflt  it  is  much  slower 
in  producing  the  effect.  The  strength  of  li- 
quid quadrisulphuret  depends  upon  the  relative 
quantity  of  the  ingredients.  I  have  boiled  it 
down  till  the  water  was  only  5  times  the  other 
materials,  which  appears  to  be  its  maximum 
strength  in  the  common  temperature;  its  spe- 


LIME.  101 

cific  gravity  was  1.146;  but  in  general  I  have 
used  it  of  less  than  1.07  density.  It  may 
be  proper  to  remark  here  that  I  find  the  decimals 
multiplied  by  4  express  very  nearly  the  num- 
ber of  grains  of  lime  in  1000  grains  measures 
of  the  solution,  and  multiplied  by  9  those  of 
the  sulphur;  on  this  account  a  solution  of  the 
sp.  gravity  1.06  facilitates  the  calculations,  as 
100  measures  of  it  contain  2.4  grains  of  lime, 
and  5.4  or  5.6  of  sulphur  nearly. 

It  is  rather  surprising  that  no  bisulphuret 
nor  trisulphuret  of  lime  should  be  formed  this 
way.  One  would  suppose  that  the  sul- 
phuret  of  lime  in  its  progressive  changes 
would  have  passed  through  the  forms  of  bi- 
sulphuret, &c.  till  it  had  obtained  itsmaximum 
of  sulphur  when  that  was  in  excess;  but, 
as  has  been  observed,  the  quadrisulphuret  is 
the  only  one  formed,  whatever  may  be  the 
proportions  of  the  ingredients.  I  imagine 
the  reason  to  be,  that  the  sulphur  has  to  de- 
compose the  hydrate  of  lime,  and  that  no 
fewer  than  4  atoms  of  sulphur  are  adequate 
to  that  effect;  it  is  known  that  water  adheres 
so  strongly  to  lime  as  to  require  a  red  heat  to 
separate  it.  When  therefore  we  mix  lime 
water  with  quadrisulphuret  of  lime,  it  must 
be  considered  as  a  mere  mixture  of  the  two, 
and  that  the  lime  does  not  divide  the  sulphur 


10£  SULPHURETS. 

Equally.  Consistently  with  this  reasoning, 
whenever  the  lime  is  in  excess  in  forming  qua- 
drisulphuret  of  lime,  we  ought  to  consider 
the  liquid  solution  as  lime  watey  holding  qua- 
drisulphuret  of  lime.  This  distinction  will 
be  of  some  importance  when  the  solution  is 
weak,  because  then  the  lime  in  the  lime  water 
will  be  considerable,  compared  with  the  lime 
combined  with  sulphur. 

1.  Protosulphuret.  The  properties  of  this 
compound  are; — about  1  grain  is  soluble  in 
1000  water;  this  water,  as  well  as  the  powder 
itself,  tastes  like  the  white  of  an  egg;  salts 
of  lead  are  thrown  down  black  by  the  solu- 
tion; weak  nitric  and  muriatic  acids  dissolve 
the  lime,  and  leave  the  sulphur;  100  parts  of 
test  acid  require  19  of  the  powder,  and  yield 
7  of  sulphur;  indicating  the  compound  to  be 
12  lime  and  7  sulphur.  The  same  conclusion 
may  be  obtained  by  means  of  a  solution  of 
lead;  if  water  containing  1.9  grains  of  the 
powder  be  precipitated  by  nitrate  of  lead,  it 
will  require  7  grains  of  the  salt  =  2.2  acid  and 
4.8  oxide,  or  4.5  lead,  and  about  5  or  5 J 
grains  of  sulphuret  of  lead  will  be  formed, 
and  the  liquid  will  contain  3.4  grains  of  neu- 
tral nitrate  of  lime. 

2.  Quadrisulphuret.  This  combination  has 
been  long  known,  and  some  of  its  properties 


LIME.  103 

observed;    but  I  have  not  found  in  authors 
any  determination  of  its  proportions.     It  is  of 
a  beautiful  yellow  or  orange  colour,  and  1 
grain  imparts  very  sensible  colour  to  1000  of 
water;   it   has   a  disagreeable   bitter   taste; 
when  evaporated  down,   it  crystallizes  or  ra* 
ther  perhaps  solidifies  into  a  yellowish  mass; 
but  its  properties  are  affected  by  the  process 
from  the  acquisition  of  oxygen.     This  mass 
when  dried,  burns  with  a  blue  flame  and  loses 
40  per  cent. ;  the  remainder  is  a  white  powder, 
a  mixture  of  sulphite  and  protosulphuret  of 
lime.     Liquid  quadrisulphuret  exposed  to  the 
atmosphere  soon  becomes  covered  with  a  white 
film  which  arises  from  the  sulphur  displaced  by 
oxygen  gas;  this  film  being  broken  subsides, 
and  another  is  formed,  and  so  on  successively 
till  at  length  the  acquisition  of  oxygen  ceases 
with  the  deposition  of  sulphur,  and  the  li- 
quid remains  quite  colourless.     It  is  intensely 
bitter,  and  contains  lime,  sulphur  and  oxygen 
in   proportions  to   be   presently  determined. 
This    colourless  liquor  undergoes  a  gradual 
change  by  being  kept  for  years  in  a  bottle 
with  a  common  cork ;    a  deposition  of  some 
sulphur  and  sulphate  of  lime  takes  place,  but 
whether  from  a  further  acquisition  of  oxygen 
gas  or  from  some  internal  chemical  action,  I 
have  not  had  an  opportunity  of  observing. 


104  SULPHURETS. 

From  the  above  observations  it  is  obvious 
that  to  form  pure  quadrisulphuret  of  lime  the 
atmospheric  air  should  be  excluded,  as  the 
agitation  by  ebullition  would  promote  the  oxi- 
dizement  of  the  compound.  I  mixed  168 
grains  of  sublimed  sulphur  with  96  hydrate 
of  lime,  which  by  previous  trials  I  had  found 
to  consist  of  70  lime  including1  2  or  3  grains 
of  alumine,  and  26  water;  the  mixture  was 
put  into  a  small  florence  flask,  which  was 
then  filled  with  water  up  to  the  neck  and 
loosely  corked.  This  was  immersed  in  a  pan 
of  water  and  boiled  for  2  or  3  hours,  the 
flask  was  continually  turned  round  to  agitate 
the  mixture  and  promote  the  solution.  After 
the  undissolved  part  had  subsided  the  clear 
liquor  was  decanted  an  d  found  to  be  2800  grain 
measures  of  the  sp.  gr.  1.056;  the  residuum 
moderately  dried  weighed  34  grains ;  it  was 
found  to  contain  8  of  lime  and  alumine,  and 
25  of  sulphur.  Hence  the  liquid  contained 
62  lime  and  143  sulphur,  or  2.2  lime  and  5.1 
sulphur  per  cent. ;  that  is,  after  the  rate  of 
24  lime  to  56  sulphur,  or  1  atom  of  lime  to 
4 of  sulphur,  and  its  weight  =  80,  the  atom  of 
sulphur  being  supposed  14.  Here  then  we 
have  a  synthetic  proof  of  the  composition  be- 
ing a  quadrisulphuret.  Innumerable  other 
experiments,  though  made  with  less  rigid  ac- 


LIME.  105 

curacy,  had  convinced  me  that  the  liquid  is 
essentially  the  same  whatever  the  proportions 
of  the  ingredients,  and  that  the  residuum  only 
varies  in  such  cases. 

I  have  made  many  experiments  occasionally 
since  1805,    on  the  quantities  of  oxygen  ab- 
sorbed and  sulphur  deposited  by  quadrisulphu- 
ret  of  lime.     They  all  concur  in  establishing 
the  same  conclusion ;    namely,  that  each  atom 
of  the  compound  takes  2  of  oxygen  and  de- 
posits 2  of  sulphur,  in  its  transformation  from 
the  yellow  to  the  colourless  state.     For  in- 
stance, 100  measures  of  the  above  1.056  took 
900  of  oxygen  gas  ==  1.22  grains,   and  let  fall 
2  grains  of  sulphur,  besides  a  small  portion 
which  adhered  to  the  bottle,  which  was  esti- 
mated at  a  few  tenths  of  a  grain.     The  me- 
thod is  to  put  100  measures  into  a  graduated 
and  well  stoppered  bottle  filled  with  oxygen; 
to  agitate  briskly  for  half  an  hour,  occasion- 
ally opening  the  stopper  a  little  under  water 
to  admit  its  entrance  into  the  place  of  the 
oxygen  absorbed.     Whenever  the  agitation 
has  been  continued  for  five  minutes  without  any 
sensible  increase  in  absorption,  and  the  liquor, 
after  standing  to  let  the  sulphur  subside,   ap- 
pears colourless,  the  experiment  is  finished. 
This  new  combination  then  consists  of  1  atom 
lime,  2  sulphur,  and  2  oxygen  =  66;  it  will 

VOL.  II.  O 


106  SULPHURETS. 

be  necessary  to  give  it  a  name :  I  propose 
calling*  it  sulphuretted  sulphite  of  lime,  as  it 
is  an  atom  of  sulphur  united  to  sulphite  of 
lime;    and  the  rather,  as  it  will  appear  in  the 
sequel  that  other  neutral  salts  do  combine  oc- 
casionally  with   an  atom  of  sulphur.     This 
sulphuretted  sulphite  may  be  boiled  down  to 
the  sp.  gr.  1.1  before  it  precipitates:   the  li- 
quid then  contains  about  12  per  cent,  of  the 
salt,    or  5  sulphur,    2§  oxygen,   and  4|  lime. 
The  salt  precipitates  from  the  liquid  by  eva- 
poration in  the  form  of  a  white  powder;   it 
burns  with  a  feeble  blue  flame,  and  loses  about 
20  per  cent. ;  the  remainder  is  sulphite  of  lime. 
When  100  grain  measures  of  the  liquid  sul- 
phuretted sulphite  (1.1)   are  saturated  with 
oxymuriate  of  lime,  they  acquire  5  grains  of 
oxygen,  and  then  yield  12|  grains  of  sulphu- 
ric acid  (containing  5  sulphur  and  7{  oxygen), 
as  may  be  found  by  the  barytic  tests.     The 
point  of  saturation  is  known  by  the  smell  of 
oxymuriatic   acid   being   given   out  perma- 
nently. 

If  however  we  oxidize  the  quadrisulphuret 
of  lime  by  oxymuriate  of  lime,  the  results  are 
somewhat  different.  As  soon  as  an  atom  of 
the  quadrisulphuret  has  received  two  atoms  of 
oxygen  it  becomes  colourless  as  before,  but  f 
of  the  sulphur  is  thrown  down  instead  of  § ; 


LIME.-  107 

and  when  more  oxyinuriate  is  added,  so  as  to 
impart  3  atoms  of  oxygen  to  one  of  the  salt, 
a  complete  sulphate  of  lime  is  formed.  The 
point  of  saturation  is  determined  by  adding  a 
small  portion  of  muriatic  acid  to  the  liquid, 
which  developes  the  oxymuriatic  acid  as  soon 
as  it  becomes  in  excess.  This  method  e  eels 
in  the  analysis  of  the  alkaline  and  earthy 
sulphurets  in  general. 

When  quadrisulphuret  of  lime  is  treated 
with  an  alkaline  carbonate,  a  reciprocal  change 
takes  place;  the  carbonic  acid  takes  the  lime, 
and  the  alkali  the  sulphur,  leaving  however 
1  atom  of  sulphur  with  the  carbonate  which 
precipitates.  Hence  a  sulphuretted  carbonate 
of  lime  is  obtained  and  a  trisulphuret  of  the 
alkali.  The  sulphur  burns  off  from  the  car- 
bonate below  a  red  heat  and  leaves  75  per 
cent,  of  carbonate  of  lime;  this  affords  an 
excellent  analysis  of  quadrisulphuret  of  lime 
as  far  as  lime  is  the  object.  Thus  540  of  the 
above  1.056  quadrisulphuret  took  100  test 
carbonate  of  potash  (1.25),  and  gave  a  pre- 
cipitate of  29  grains,  which  burned  blue  and 
left  22  grains  =  12  lime,  and  10  acid ;  but  if 
540  :  12  ::  100:  2.2,  as  above  determined 
synthetically :  moreover,  12  lime,  10  acid,  and 
7  sulphur,  are  as  24  lime,  20  acid,  and  14 
sulphur;  the  composition  of  an  atom  of  sul- 


108  SULPHURETS. 

phuretted  carbonate  of  lime,  which  is  analo- 
gous to  the  sulphuretted  sulphite  of  lime,  as 
found  above. 

When  quadrisulphuret  of  lime  is  treated 
with  as  much  sulphuric  acid  as  is  sufficient  for 
the  lime,  the  sulphur  is  in  part  precipitated, 
but  it  is  in  union  with  the  sulphate  of  lime, 
or  at  least  they  are  not  separable  by  mechani- 
cal means.  This  compound  is  sold  in  the 
shops  under  the  name  of  precipitated  sulphur. 
It  is  about  one  half  sulphate  of  lime,  and 
the  other  half  sulphur.  The  nitric  and  mu- 
riatic acids  precipitate  the  sulphur  partially 
from  quadrisulphuret,  but  the  sulphur  assumes 
a  viscid  form  and  exhales  sulphuretted  hydro- 
gen, and  the  proportion  of  the  elements  of 
quadrisulphuret  are  not  easily  obtained  by  any 
of  these  acids. 

The  mutual  action  of  quadrisulphuret  of 
lime,  and  the  metallic  salts  is  curious  and  in- 
teresting ;  for  instance,  with  nitrate  of  lead. 
Let  a  solution  of  nitrate  of  lead,  containing 
97  oxide,  be  treated  with  a  solution  of  qua- 
drisulphuret of  lime  by  degrees,  as  long  as 
a  black  precipitate  appears,  marking  the  ex* 
act  point  of  saturation  ;  this  will  be  found  when 
36  parts  of  lime  have  entered,  and  84  of  sul- 
phur; the  sulphuret  of  lead  will  fall,  and 
When  dried  will  weigh  145  parts,  and  contain 


LIME.  109 

90  lead,  and  55  sulphur ;  that  is,  1  atom  of 
lead,  and  4  of  sulphur,  and  is  consequently 
a  quadrisulphuret  of  lead.  The  liquid  re- 
mains clear  and  colourless,  and  contains  the 
nitric  acid,  lime,  oxygen  of  the  lead,  and -^ 
of  the  sulphur  ;  each  atom  of  nitric  acid  com- 
bines with  one  of  lime,  which  retains  one 
of  the  4  atoms  of  sulphur,  forming  a  sul- 
phuretted nitrate  of  lime,  consisting  of  45 
acid,  24  lime,  and  14  sulphur;  the  7  parts 
of  oxygen  unite  with  7  of  sulphur  to  form 
sulphurous  acid,  which  require  12  parts  of 
lime  to  saturate  them  and  7  of  sulphur,  form- 
ing a  sulphuretted  sulphite  of  lime :  hence 
we  see  that  28  parts  of  sulphur  remain  in  the 
liquor,  and  the  rest  (56)  unite  with  the  lead. 
If  now  we  add  gradually  more  nitrate  of  lead, 
a  silvery  white  precipitate  appears,  increasing 
till  half  the  original  quantity  is  added,  and 
then  the  liquid  is  saturated.  This  white  pre- 
cipitate is  sulphuretted  sulphite  of  lead;  when 
heated  it  soon  grows  black  and  loses  15  or  20 
percent.,  being  then  a  protosulphuretof  lead. 
The  liquid  now  contains  sulphuretted  nitrate 
and  simple  nitrate  of  lime;  nitrate  of  lead 
has  no  effect,  but  nitrate  of  mercury  preci- 
pitates a  black  sulphuret. 

Quadrisulphuret  of  lime  saturated  with  oxy- 
gen, as  has  been  observed,  contains  sulphu- 


110  SULPHURETS. 

retted  sulphite  of  lime  in  solution,  and  de- 
posits sulphur :  the  liquid  treated  with  nitrate 
of  lead,  gives  as  above  the  white,  silvery  sul- 
phuretted sulphite  of  lead  as  a  precipitate, 
and  holds  nitrate  of  lime  in  solution. 

Hydrosulphuret  of  lime.  This  compound 
may  be  formed  by  passing  sulphuretted  hy- 
drogen into  lime  water;  the  water  assumes  a 
brownish  colour,  but  the  point  of  saturation 
is  not  easily  found,  as  the  lime  water  is  not  neu- 
tralized so  as  to  shew  by  the  colpur  test, 
and  water  of  itself  absorbs  above  twice  its 
volume  of  the  gas.  By  means  of  a  neutral 
solution  of  nitrate  of  lead  it  may  be  found 
that  1000  lime  water  in  volume,  require 
about  600  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  because 
then  a  mutual  saturation  is  observed  by  dou- 
ble affinity;  that  is,  sulphuret  of  lead  and 
neutral  nitrate  of  lime  are  formed;  but  other- 
wise the  liquid  remaining  is  either  acid  or  al- 
kaline. Hydrosulphuret  of  lime,  as  well  as 
the  other  hydrosulphurets,  has  a  peculiar  bit- 
ter taste.  It  forms  a  useful  reagent  in  regard 
to  metals,  but  is  apt  to  be  spoiled  by  keeping? 
owing  to  the  acquisition  of  oxygen* 


MAGNESIA.  Ill 


2.  Sulphuret  of  magnesia, 

I  have  not  succeeded  in  endeavouring  to 
combine  sulphur  and  magnesia  in  the  dry 
way ;  but  a  liquid  sulphuret  is  easily  formed 
by  the  action  of  double  affinity. 

Let  a  quantity  of  the  liquid  quadrisulphu- 
ret  of  lime  be  treated  with  a  solution  of  sul- 
phate of  magnesia,  so  that  the  sulphuric  acid 
may  be  sufficient  for  the  lime;  by  digesting 
in  a  moderate  heat,  the  sulphate  of  lime  is 
precipitated,  carrying  with  it  one  fourth  of 
the  sulphur,  and  a  trisulphuret  of  magnesia 
remains  in  solution.  I  have  not  observed  any 
remarkable  feature  of  distinction  between  this 
sulphuret  and  that  of  lime,  except  as  above 
noticed  in  the  proportions  of  their  com- 
pounds. 

Hydrosulphuret  of  magnesia.  This  com- 
pound may  be  formed  by  pouring  sulphuret- 
ted hydrogen  water  into  recently  precipitated 
magnesia;  it  does  not  differ  much  from  that, 
of  lime.  One  atom  of  sulphuretted  hydro- 
gen (15),  combines  with  one  of  magnesia 
(17),  and  the  compound  is  soluble  in  water. 


112  SULPHURETS. 


3.  Sulphur et  of  barytes. 

Protosulphuret.  The  protosulphuret  of  ba- 
rytes may  be  procured  the  same  way  as  that 
of  lime,  by  heating  hydrate  of  barytes  and 
sulphur  till  the  mixture  becomes  red.  It  is 
very  little  soluble  in  water,  and  accords  in 
other  respects  with  the  like  compound  of  lime. 
It  consists  of  68  barytes  and  14  sulphur,  or 
100  barytes  and  20|  sulphur. 

Quadrisulphuret.    The   quadrisulphuret   of 
barytes  may  be  formed  the  same  way  as  qua- 
drisulphuret of  lime,   by  boiling  the  hydrate 
of  barytes  and  sulphur  together.     A  yellow 
solution  of  the  compound  is  formed,  not  dis- 
tinguishable in  appearance  from  that  of  lime ; 
and  it  appears  to  be  analogous  to  it  in  most  of 
its  properties.     By  acquiring  oxygen  it  be- 
comes colourless  sulphuretted  sulphite  of  ba- 
rytes, and  crystalizes  in  needles;    in  this  last 
respect  it  differs  from  that  of  lime.  The  maxi- 
mum density  of  liquid  quadrisulphuret  I  have 
not  had  an  opportunity  of  ascertaining  ;  it  is 
1.07  or  upwards;  that  of  the  liquid  sulphuret- 
ted sulphite  is  much  less  than  that  of  lime ; 
the  crystals  are  found  in  a  liquid  so  low  as 
1.004  sp.  gr.     They  have  a  fine  silky  lustre 
when  dry,  and  a  yellowish  colour;  heated 


STRONTLTES.  113 

they  burn  with  a  blue  flame  and  leave  a  white 
mass  of  sulphate  preserving  the  same  crystal- 
line appearance  as  before,  and  lose  about  20 
per  cent,  of  weight.     Ten  grains  of  the  crys- 
tals  of  sulphuretted   sulphite,  when    treated 
with  liquid  oxymuriate  of  lime  to  safuration, 
require  2-f-  grains  of  oxygen  and  yield  8  grains 
of  sulphate  of  barytes,  together  with  an  ex- 
cess of  sulphuric  acid   which   with   muriate 
of  barytes  gives  8  grains  more  of  sulphate. 
From  these  facts  it  may  be  concluded  that  the 
sulphuretted  sulphite  consists  of  one  atom  ba- 
rytes, 2   sulphur,    2   oxygen,    and   2  water, 
and  that  4  more  of  oxygen  are  derived  from 
the  oxymuriatic  acid  to  convert  the  sulphur- 
ous oxide  into  sulphuric  acid.     The  sulphu- 
retted sulphite  of  barytes  seems  to  pass  into 
sulphate  by  length  of  time.     The  weight  of 
the   atom   of  quadrisulphuret   of  barytes   is 
124;  the  compound  in  mass  consists  of  100 
barytes  and  82  sulphur. 

Hydrosulphuret  of  barytes.  This  com- 
pound may  be  formed  in  the  same  manner  as 
that  of  lime,  and  is  found  to  have  similar 
properties.  The  proportions  for  mutual  sa- 
turation are,  I  find,  as  in  the  case  of  lime,  15 
sulphuretted  hydrogen  to  68  barytes  by 
weight,  or  one  atom  of  each. 

VOL.  II.  P 


114  SULPHURETS. 


4.  Sulphurels  of  strontites. 

The  protosulphuret  and  quadrisulphuret  of 
strontites  may  be  formed  in  the  same  way  as 
those  of  lime  and  barytes.  From  a  few  ex- 
periments made  on  these  compounds  I  have 
not  observed  any  remarkable  feature  of  dis- 
tinction between  them  and  the  correspond- 
ing ones  of  the  other  earths. 

Hydrosulphuret  of  strontites.  This  com- 
pound may  be  formed  in  the  same  way  as  that 
of  lime;  the  proportions  to  produce  mutual 
saturation  will  be  1  atom  of  each,  or  15 
parts  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  to  46  strontites 
by  weight. 


5,  6*7,  8,  and  9.    Sulphur ets  ofalumine,  silex, 
yttria,  glucine,  and  zircone. 

I  made  several  unsuccessful  attempts  to 
combine  alumine  and  sulphur.  When  alu- 
mine  and  sulphur  mixed  together  are  heated, 
the  sulphur  sublimes  chiefly,  and  leaves  the 
alumine  with  traces  of  sulphate  of  alumine. 

In  the  humid  way,  recently  precipitated 
and  moist  alumine  mixed  with  sulphur  and 


POTASH.  115 

boiled  in  water,  give  a  liquid  with  some  tra- 
ces of  sulphuric  acid,  but  no  sulphuret  of 
alumine;  the  sulphur  and  alumine  both  sub- 
side, and  when  the  sulphur  is  either  sublimed 
or  burnt,  the  alumine  remains  much  the  same 
as  at  first.  When  a  solution  of  alum  is 
treated  with  sulphuret  of  lime,  sulphate  of 
lime  is  precipitated  along*  with  the  greatest 
part  of  the  sulphur  in  a  kind  of  feeble  union 
rather  than  mechanical  mixture,  it  should 
seem ;  the  alumine  is  at  the  same  time  pre- 
cipitated probably  in  mechanical  mixture; 
there  remain  in  solution  a  little  sulphuret  of 
potash  and  sulphate  of  lime. 

Sulphuret  of  silex  is  not  known,  I  appre- 
hend, to  exist.  When  silicated  potash  in  so- 
lution is  treated  with  quadrisulphnret  of  lime, 
a  copious  dark  brown  or  black  precipitate  in- 
stantly appears;  the  liquid  when  filtered  is 
of  a  pale  yellow  colour,  and  seems  to  contain 
about  one  half  of  the  sulphur  and  potash, 
whilst  the  other  half  is  thrown  down  in 
union  with  the  lime  and  silex.  This  black 
compound  is  probably  1  atom  of  lime,  2  of 
sulphur,  2  of  potash,  and  2  of  silex;  it  can- 
not therefore  be  accounted  a  sulphuret  of 
silex. 

Sulphurets  of  yttria,  glucine%  and  zircone, 
are  as  yet,  I  presume,  unknown. 


116  SUI/PHURETS. 

10.  Sulphurets  of  potash. 

Potash  has  a  strong  affinity  for  sulphur 
and  unites  with  it  in  various  ways  and  pro- 
portions. 

1st.  In  the  dry  way  by  heat.  When  either 
pure  potash  or  the  carbonate  (salt  of  tartar) 
is  heated  in  a  covered  crucible  with  sulphur, 
a  chemical  union  of  the  two  principles  takes 
place.  Eight  parts  of  dried  hydrate  of  pot- 
ash unite  to  six  or  seven  of  sulphur:  a  heat  of 
4  or  500°  of  Fahrenheit  is  convenient  for  the 
purpose.  If  the  carbonate  of  potash  be  used* 
then  12  parts  dried  in  a  low  red  heat  will  re- 
quire 8  of  sulphur  for  their  complete  satu- 
ration :  in  this  case  a  higher  degree  of  heat  is 
requisite  in  order  to  expel  the  carbonic  acid; 
alow  red  heat  seems  sufficient  from  my  trials. 
When  the  heat  does  not  exceed  3  or  400°  a 
partial  union  takes  place;  the  carbonate  of 
potash,  without  losing  any  acid,  unites  to  ^ 
of  the  sulphur,  and  the  rest  of  the  sulphur 
remains  uncombined;  when  intermediate  de- 
grees of  heat  are  used,  I  have  found  the  re- 
sult a  mixture  of  the  pure  sulphuret  and  the 
carbonated  sulphuret,  with  more  or  less  of 
sulphate  of  potash.  A  high  degree  of  heat 
and  exposure  to  the  atmosphere  produces  a 


POTASH.  117 

sulphate  instead  of  a  sulphuret.  The  sul- 
phurets  obtained  this  way  are  in  fusion  till 
poured  out  and  cooled ;  they  are  of  a  liver 
colour,  and  hence  were  formerly  called  livers 
of  sulphur.  They  are  largely  soluble  in  wa- 
ter,  and  give  a  brownish  yellow  solution. 

2d.  In  the  humid  way  by  solution.  Pure 
caustic  potash  in  solution  when  boiled  with 
sulphur  dissolves  it  largely,  42  parts  of  real 
potash  being  saturated  with  about  56  of  sul- 
phur. If  we  boil  a  solution  of  carbonate  of 
potash  with  sulphur,  for  an  hour  or  more, 
a  brown  liquor  is  obtained,  which  consists  of 
60  parts  carbonate  of  potash  and  14  sulphur 
in  chemical  union. — It  has  already  been  ob- 
served that  a  trisulphuret  of  potash  may  be 
obtained  by  double  affinity  from  quadrisul- 
phuret  of  lime  and  carbonate  of  potash,  to- 
gether with  sulphuretted  carbonate  of  lime. 

From  what  has  been  stated  we  may  infer  at 
least  three  varieties  in  the  compounds  of  sul- 
phur and  potash,  viz.  1 

1st.  Sulphuretted  carbonate  of  potash,  ^his 
consists  of  1  atom  carbonate  of  potash  (61) 
with  I  atom  of  sulphur  (14).  Its  analysis 
may  be  effected  as  follows  :  the  quantity  of 
carbonic  acid  may  be  found  by  the  lime  water 
necessary  to  saturate  it ;  the  potash  may  be 
known  from  the  quantity  previously  entering 


118  SULPHURETS. 

into  the  mixture;  and  the  sulphur  in  the 
same  manner,  or  from  the  quantity  of  sul- 
phuretted carbonate  of  lead  that  it  forms. — 
The  sulphur  may  also  be  known,  from  the 
quantity  of  oxygen  it  requires  by  means  of 
oxymuriate  of  lime  to  produce  saturation  ; 
this  I  find  to  take  place  when  the  oxygen  is 
half  the  weight  of  the  sulphur,  or  one  atom 
to  one  of  sulphur ;  it  soon  happens,  that  one 
atom  of  sulphur  deprives  two  others  of  their 
oxygen,  and  sulphuric  acid  is  formed  whilst 
the  other  two  atoms  of  sulphur  join  the  car- 
bonate of  lime  and  are  precipitated  along 
with  it.  As  it  may  frequently  happen,  that 
the  sulphuretted  carbonate  is  mixed  with 
common  carbonate  of  potash,  the  propor- 
tions may  be  found  by  means  of  nitrate  of 
lead,  which  being  cautiously  dropped  into 
the  solution,  lets  fall  first  the  brown  sulphu- 
retted carbonate  of  lead,  and  then  the  com- 
mon white  carbonate  of  lead. 

The  sulphuretted  carbonate  of  potash  ab- 
sorb oxygen  and  precipitates  metals  much 
the  same  in  appearance  as  the  other  sulphu- 
rets;  but  essential  distinctions  are  observable, 
some  of  which  are  noticed  above,  and  others 
will  appear  in  the  sequel. 

2  and  3.  The  irisulphuret  and  quadrisul~ 
phuret  of  potash  so  nearly  resemble  the  qua- 


AMMONIA.  119 

drisulphuret  of  lime  in  their  properties,  as 
not  to  require  any  additional  remarks. 

Hydrosulphuret  of  potash.  This  combina- 
tion, when  duly  proportioned,  consists  of  15 
parts  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  and  42  potash 
by  weight,  or  one  atom  of  each.  It  may  be 
formed  by  directly  uniting*  the  two  elements, 
or  by  decomposing  hydrosulphuret  of  lime  by 
carbonate  of  potash.  Its  properties  agree 
with  those  of  the  other  hydrosulphurets. 


11.  Sulphur ets  of  soda. 

I  have  repeated  most  of  the  experiments 
on  the  sulphurization  of  potash  with  soda,  and 
have  not  found  anyone  remarkable  feature  of 
distinction,  besides  those  which  arise  from 
the  weights  of  the  atoms. 

1 .  Sulphuretted  carbonate  of  soda  consists 
of  1  atom  of  carbonate  of  soda  united  to  1 
of  sulphur ;  or  of  47  parts  of  the  former  and 
14  of  the  latter. 

2.  Trisulphuret  of  soda  consists  of  1  atom 
soda  (28)  and  3  of  sulphur  (42). 

3.  Quadrisulphuret  of  soda  consists  of  1 
atom  soda  (28)  and  4  atoms  of  sulphur  (56). 

Hydrosulphuret  of  soda.  This  compound 
consists'of  one  atom  of  each  of  the  elements, 


120  SULPHURETS. 

or  15  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  and  28  soda, 
In  other  respects  it  agrees  with  hydrosulphu- 
ret  of  potash. 


12.  Sulphuret  of  ammonia, 

The  best  way  which  I  have  found  of  pro- 
curing  sulphuret  of  ammonia,  is  to  treat  qua- 
drisuiphuret  of  lime  with  the  carbonate  of 
ammonia  as  long  as  any  precipitate  takes 
place ;  the  precipitate  is  sulphuretted  carbo- 
nate of  lime,  3  atoms  of  sulphur  to  1  of 
carbonate  of  lime.  The  liquid  is  of  a  pale 
yellow,  and  contains  ammonia  and  sulphur 
united  in  the  ratio  of  1  atom  (of  6)  to  1 
of  sulphur:  it  may  therefore  be  denomi- 
nated the  protosulphuret  of  ammonia. 

The  carbonate  of  ammonia  is  best  procur- 
ed by  heating  the  common  subcarbonate  of, 
ammonia,  first  pulverized,  in  a  temperature  of 
100°  for  half  an  hour,  or  exposing  it  for  a 
few  days  to  the  atmosphere.  What  remains 
of  the  salt  is  almost  without  smell;  it  should 
consist  of  19  parts  acid,  6  ammonia,  and  8 
water  nearly :  the  ammonia  is  usually  however 
a  small  degree  in  excess. 

Hydromlphuret  of  ammonia.  This  com- 
pound may  be  formed  in  the  dry  state  by  com- 


GOLD.  121 

bining-  the  two  gases  of  sulphuretted  hydro- 
gen and  ammonia  over  mercury;  it  is  of  a 
white  crystalline  appearance,  and  very  solu- 
ble in  water,  and  forms  a  fuming  liquor  of  a 
very  pungent  smell.  It  may  also  be  obtained 
by  passing  sulphuretted  hydrogen  into  a  ves- 
sel containing  liquid  ammonia.  I  find  about 
110  or  120  measures  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen 
require  100  of  ammoniacal  gas.  Hence  it  is 
1  atom  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  (15),  that 
unites  to  1  of  ammonia  (6). 

13.  Sulphurets  of  gold. 

There  exist  at  least  two  sulphurets  of  gold, 
the  nature  and  proportions  of  which  are  ea- 
sily ascertained  \  though  several  authors  as- 
sert that  no  combinations  of  gold  and  sul- 
phur are  known;  amongst  these  it  is  surpriz- 
ing to  find  Proust :  indeed  most  of  the  others 
have  probably  been  led  by  his  authority  to 
adopt  the  opinion  without  examination.  It  is 
not  very  easy  to  account  for  his  deception. 

Obercampf,  in  the  Annal.  de  Chimie, 
torn.  80.  1811,  is  the  first  author  I  have  seen 
who  distinctly  maintains  the  existence  of  one 
or  more  sulphurets  of  gold,  though  it  seems 
to  have  been  admitted  previously  by  Bucholz. 
The  last  author  finds  82  gold  unite  to  18  sul- 
phur, and  the  former  80  to  20  nearly. 

vol.  it.  a 


122  SULPHURETS. 

Prolosulphuret  of  gold.  This  compound  is 
formed  whenever  a  solution  of  muriate  of 
gold  is  agitated  with  sulphuretted  hydrogen 
gas,  or  with  the  same  united  to  a  base,  as 
lime  or  alkali.  A  black  or  deep  brown  pow- 
der falls  down  by  the  addition  of  more  gas, 
till  the  whole  of  the  gold  is  precipitated. 
The  oxide  of  gold  loses  one  atom  of  oxygen, 
and  receives  one  of  sulphur  in  its  place, 
whilst  the  hydrogen  of  the  gas  is  carried  off 
along  with  the  oxygen  of  the  oxide.  The 
sulphuret  dried  and  heated,  burns  with  a  blue 
flame,  leaving  the  gold  nearly  pure.  This 
compound  consists,  I  find,  of  81  gold  and  19 
sulphur  per  cent.;  or  100  gold  unite  to  23 
sulphur. 

Trisulphuret  of  gold.  This  compound  is 
obtained  whenever  quadrisulphuret  of  lime 
is  gradually  dropped  into  a  solution  of  mu- 
riate of  gold ;  it  is  a  black  powder,  not  quite 
so  deep  as  the  former.  Care  must  be  taken 
to  saturate  the  excess  of  acid  previously  by 
lime-water,  to  prevent  any  uncombined  sul- 
phur precipitating.  Trisulphuret  of  gold  be- 
ing heated,  burns  with  a  blue  flame,  and  leaves 
the  gold  nearly  pure;  it  loses  from  40  to  45 
per  cent,  by  the  process.  It  is  constituted 
of  1    atom   gold  and  3  sulphur,   or  60  gold 


PLATINA.  123 

and  42  sulphur,  nearly  ;  or  100  gold  combine 
with  70  sulphur. 

From  several  experiments  I  am  led  to  con- 
clude that  each  atom  of  oxide  of  gold  takes 
3  of  sulphur,  and  parts  with  1  of  oxygen  to 
the  remaining  sulphur;  thus  a  trisulphuret  of 
gold  is  formed,  and  an  oxide  of  sulphur ;  the 
liquid,  being  afterwards  treated  withoxymu- 
riate  of  lime,  is  found  to  require  twice  the 
oxygen  of  the  gold  for  its  saturation,  when 
a  corresponding  portion  of  sulphuric  acid  may 
be  precipitated  by  muriate  of  barytes. 

14.  Stdplmret  of  platina. 

Sulphur  may  be  combined  with  platina  in 
several  ways,  and  probably  in  different  pro- 
portions; but  the  combination  is  not  so  easily 
and  elegantly  effected  as  with  many  other  me- 
tals, and  hence  some  uncertainty  still  remains 
on  the  subject. 

When  a  salt  of  platina  is  treated  with  sul- 
phuret  or  hydrosulphuret  of  lime,  or  sulphu- 
retted hydrogen  water,  the  liquid  slowly  and 
gradually  grows  dark  brown  and  finally  black ; 
after  agitation  and  standing  a  few  hours,  the 
liquid  is  semitransparent,  and  a  black  floccu- 
lent  precipitate  appears  at  the  bottom .  Some- 
times after  violent  agitation,  the  liquid  on  stand- 
ing a  few  minutes  becomes  a  transparent  brown , 


124  SULPHURETS. 

but  soon  grows  turbid  again.  In  the  course 
of  a  few  days,  and  by  occasional  agitation, 
the  liquid  finally  becomes  clear  and  nearly  free 
from  platina,  and  the  precipitate  may  be  col- 
lected on  a  filter  and  dried.  This  circum- 
stance of  slow  and  indolent  precipitatiou  can- 
not be  prevented  by  any  means  I  have  found, 
such  as  saturating  the  excess  of  acid,  &c. 

Mr.  Edmund  Davy,  in  the  40th  Vol.  of  the 
Philos.  Magazine,  has  given  us  the  results  of 
his  experiments  and  observations  on  the  sul- 
phurets  of  platina,  containing  some  useful  and 
original  information.  He  combines  platina 
with  sulphur  by  heating  the  ammonia-muriate 
of  platina  with  sulphur;  also  by  heating1  pla- 
tina and  sulphur  in  an  exhausted  tube;  and 
by  sending  sulphuretted  hydrogen  gas  or  wa- 
ter into  a  solution  of  muriate  of  platina;  this 
precipitate  he  calls  hydrosulphuret  of  platina. 

He  has  just  noticed  the  precipitate  formed 
by  sulphuret  of  potash  with  muriate  of  pla- 
tina, but  gives  no  opinion  as  to  the  compound 
obtained  this  way.  He  determines  three  sul- 
phurets,  namely, 

Subsulphuret,        100    platina    +     19  sulphur 

Sulphuret,  100      -f     28.2 

Supersulphuret,    100      -f     38.8  

I  have  obtained  the  sulphuret  of  platina  in 
five  ways  :   1st.  By  pouring  sulphuret  of  lime 


PLATINA.  125 

solution  by  degrees  into  muriate  of  platina, 
and  agitating  the  mixture  well  or  till  it  grew 
black  each  time;  after  digesting  for  some 
days,  repeated  filtering,  and  drying,  a  black 
powder  is  obtained:  2.  Instead  of  suiphuret, 
hydrosulphuret  of  lime  was  used;  the  preci- 
pitate was  obtained  under  like  circumstances : 
3d.  Sulphuretted  hydrogen  water  was  used, 
and  the  precipitate  obtained  in  like  manner  : 
4th.  Ten  grains  of  ammonia-muriate  of  pla- 
tina were  treated  with  sulphuretted  hydro- 
gen water;  by, continued  agitation  the  yellow 
powder  disappeared,  the  liquid  looked  uni- 
formly black,  and  at  length  a  precipitate  was 
formed;  by  ^repeated  filtration  and  addition 
of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  water,  the  whole 
of  the  platina  was  thrown  down,  and  the 
liquid  remained  colourless;  but  it  is  difficult 
to  discover  the  exact  quantity  of  sulphuretted 
hydrogen  requisite  for  any  weight  of  the  am- 
monia-muriate from  the  tediousness  of  the 
operation;  6  grains  of  well  dried  black  pow- 
der were  obtained,  besides  perhaps  1  grain 
of  loss  on  the  filters:  5th.  Ammonia-muriate 
of  platina  was  heated  in  a  covered  crucible 
along  with  sulphur  till  it  was  judged  that  all 
the  uncombined  sulphur  was  sublimed  or  dis- 
sipated. 

All  these  sulphurets  appear  to  me  to  be  the 


126  SULPHURETS. 

same  when  dried  in  a  moderate  heat.  When 
exposed  to  a  low  red  heat  they  yield  water  and 
sulphurous  acid,  and  lose  about  £  of  their 
weight. 

The  subject  however,  requires  further  in- 
vestigation. The  sulphurets  of  platina  ap- 
pear of  a  complex  nature,  and  the  propor- 
tions of  their  elements  are  not  yet  determined 
with  precision. 

15.  Sutyhurets  of  silver. 

Silver  combines  with  sulphur  in  two  diffe- 
rent proportions,  and  forms  two  sulphurets, 
both  of  them  black  or  dark  brown. 

1.  Protosidphuret  of  silver.  This  may  be 
formed  either  by  the  dry  or  humid  way :  if 
thin  lamina  of  silver  be  heated  with  sulphur, 
they  combine  and  form  this  sulphuret;  a 
higher  degree  of  heat  expels  the  sulphur  again. 
It  is  formed  too  by  passing  sulphuretted  hy- 
drogen or  a  hydrosulphuret  through  a  solu- 
tion of  silver  in  nitric  or  other  acids.  The 
atom  of  silver  unites  with  that  of  sulphur, 
whilst  the  hydrogen  unites  with  the  oxygen. 
Of  course  this  compound  is  composed  of  90 
silver,  and  14  sulphur,  and  the  atom  weighs 
104;  or  100  silver  unite  with  15.5  sulphur. 
Klaproth  finds  100  silver  and  17.6  sulphur; 
Wenzel  100  silver,  and  14.7  sulphur;   Ber- 


MERCURY.  127 

zelius  100  silver,  and  14.9  sulphur  \  and  Vau- 
quelin  100  silver,  and  14  sulphur. 

Trisulphuret  of  silver.  This  compound 
is  formed  whenever  neutral  nitrate  of  silver 
is  dropped  into  a  solution  of  quadrisulphuret 
of  lime  or  alkali.  Mutual  saturation  seems 
to  take  place  when  eight  atoms  of  nitrate 
meet  with  seven  of  quadrisulphuret.  Tri- 
sulphuret of  silver  is  constituted  of  90  silver, 
and 42  sulphur;  orof  100  silver,  and  46.5  sul- 
phur. Its  colour  is  not  so  dark  as  that  of  the 
protosulphuret.  The  residuary  liquid  con- 
tains sulphurous  acid,  which  is  easily  con- 
verted into  sulphuric  by  the  addition  of  a  por- 
tion of  lime;  and  the  quantity  of  acid  may 
then  be  determined  by  muriate  of  barytes. 

16.  Sulphur ets  of  mercury. 

Mercury  combines  readily  with  sulphur 
both  in  the  dry  and  humid  way,  and  that  in 
several  proportions,  as  under:    namely, 

1.  Protosulphuret  of  mercury .  This  is  most 
conveniently  formed  by  passing  sulphuretted 
hydrogen  gas  through  a  solution  of  the  pro- 
tonitrateof  mercury,  or  by  pouring  hydrosul- 
phuret  of  lime,  &c.  into  the  same  solution. 
The  protosulphuret  falls  down  in  the  state  of 
a  black  powder.  •  It  consists  of  167  mercury, 


128  SITLPHURETS. 

and  14  sulphur;  or  of  100  mercury,  and  8.4 
sulphur.  The  theory  of  its  formation  is  the 
same 'as' that  of  silver. 

2.  Deutosulphuret  of 'mercury.  This  is  form- 
ed in  the  humid  way  whenever  sulphuretted 
hydrogen  or  ahydrosulphuret  in  excess  is  mix- 
ed with  the  deutonitrate  or  deutomuriate  of 
mercury  (corrosive  sublimate)  ;  a  brown  pow- 
der is  precipitated  which  is  the  deutosulphu- 
ret. If  the  sulphuretted  hydrogen  be  only  one 
half  what  is  sufficient  to  form  the  deutosul- 
phuret, then  we  obtain  no  sulphuret,  but  in- 
stead of  it  a  protonitrate  or  protomuriate,  as 
was  first  intimated  by  Proust ;  I  find  however, 
the  atom  of  sulphur  adheres  to  the  atom  of 
salt,  and  that  it  is  therefore  a  sulphuretted 
protonitrate  or  muriate,  whilst  1  atom  of 
oxygen  unites  with  the  hydrogen.  The  brown 
precipitate  does  not  change  to  yellow,  orange, 
and  red,  when  left  undisturbed  for  a  few  days, 
in  my  experience;  though  this  is  stated  to 
have  been  observed  by  Mr.  Accum.  Not- 
withstanding the  difference  in  colour,  this 
deutosulphuret  must  be  the  same  nearly  as  the 
cinnabar  and  Vermillion  of  commerce,  if 
Proust  and  others  are  right  in  their  analysis 
of  thes«  articles.  The  combination  of  the  ele- 
ments of  sulphur  and  mercury  when  intended 
to  form  cinnabar  is  made  in  the  dry  way  by  tri- 


MERCURY.  129 

turation,  and  a  moderate  heat;  the  compound, 
at  first  black,  is  afterwards  sublimed  by  a 
duly  regulated  heat  and  becomes  red.  This 
compound  must  consist  of  100  mercury  and  17 
sulphur  nearly. 

3.  Quadrisulphuret  of  mercury.  This  com- 
pound is  formed  when  a  solution  of  protoni- 
trate  of  mercury  is  treated  with  quadrisulphu- 
ret of  lime,  added  by  degrees  till  the  clear 
liquid  no  longer  gives  a  dark  coloured  precipi- 
tate. The  oxygen  of  the  mercurial  salt  unites, 
it  should  seem,  to  part  of  the  sulphur,  and 
forms  sulphuric  acid,  whilst  the  rest  of  the 
sulphur  unites  to  the  mercury.  This  sulphuret 
is  a  black  or  dark  brown  powder,  and  when 
heated  burns  with  a  blue  flame.  It  consists  of 
100  mercury,  and  33  or  34  sulphur,  as  ap- 
pears to  me  from  the  synthesis. 

When  the  insoluble  muriate  of  mercury 
(calomel),  is  triturated  in  liquid  quadrisul- 
phuret of  lime,  it  is  soon  decomposed ;  qua- 
drisulphuret of  mercury  is  formed,  with  mu- 
riate of  lime  and  sulphuric  or  sulphurous 
acid. 

When  the  soluble  muriate  (corrosive  subli- 
mate), has  quadrisulphuret  of  lime  dropped 
into  it  by  degrees ;  at  first  a  yellowish  white 
precipitate  is  obtained,  which  increases  till 
it  is  one  half  saturated  \  after  this,  by  conti- 

VOL.    II.  R 


130  SULPHURETS. 

nually  adding"  more  sulphuret,  the  precipitate 
grows  darker,  and  ends  in  being1  quite  black. 
It  is  at  least  as  high  as  quadrisulphuret.  Much 
sulphurous  acid  is  found  in  the  liquid. 

The  deutonitrate  of  mercury,  produces  a 
copious  yellow  precipitate  with  quadrisul- 
phuret of  lime.  Exposed  to  the  sun,  it 
grows  black  in  a  few  minutes  on  the  light 
side,  but  continues  yellow  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  jar;  at  the  same  time,  an  effer- 
vescence and  disengagement  of  oxygen  gas 
are  observed.  Finally,  the  precipitate  be- 
comes the  common  quadrisulphuret,  and  the 
liquid  contains  sulphurous  and  sulphuric  acids. 

The  recently  precipitated  and  washed  ox- 
ides of  mercury  act  upon  quadrisulphuret  of 
lime.  The  black  oxide  seems  to  take  4 
atoms  of  sulphur  and  part  with  its  oxygen  to 
another  portion  of  sulphur;  but  the  red  oxide 
becomes  light  brown  and  retains  the  colour 
when  dried.  It  seems  to  take  the  same  sul- 
phur as  the  black,  but  whether  it  retains  any 
of  the  oxygen,  I  have  not  ascertained.  The 
action  is  more  slow  than  when  the  nitrates  are 
used,  and  more  quadrisulphuret  of  lime  is  ex- 
pedient. 

Mercury  and  sulphur  combine  in  the  dry 
way  by  trituration  and  by  heat,  forming  a 
black  powder;   but  the  species  of  compounds 


PALLADIUM.  131 

and  quantities  of  the  ingredients  combining 
in  this  mode,  have  not  been  ascertained. 

17.  Sulphur et  of  palladium.  '{ 

Berzelius  exposed  15  grains  of  palladium 
filings  mixed  with  as  much  sulphur  to  a  heat 
sufficient  to  expel  the  uncombined  sulphur. 
The  increase  of  weight  was  28  per  cent,  upon 
the  palladium ;  when  exposed  afresh  with  sul- 
phur to  heat,  no  addition  was  made  to  the 
weight. 

Vauquelin  heated  100  parts  of  the  triple 
salt  of  palladium  with  an  equal  weight  of  sul- 
phur, and  obtained  52  parts  of  a  blueish  white 
sulphuret,  very  hard,  and  when  broken  ex- 
hibiting brilliant  plates  in  its  fracture.  He 
had  previously  found  that  TOO  salt  contained 
40  to  42  of  metal :  hence  100  metal  combin- 
ed with  from  24  to  30  of  sulphur.  This 
agrees  nearly  with  the  above  results  of  Berze-r 
lius.  A  very  high  degree  of  heat  expels  the 
sulphur  and  oxidizes  the  metal ;  but  a  more 
moderate  heat  leaves  the  palladium  of  a  silver 
white  colour  and  nearly  pure.  According  to 
this  the  atom  of  protosulphuret  of  palladium 
must  consist  of  50  palladium,  and  14  sul- 
phur. 


132  SULPHURETS. 

18.  Sulphur et  of  rhodium. 

Vauquelin  found  that  4  parts  of  the  ammo- 
nia-muriate of  rhodium  (containing  28  or  29 
percent,  of  metal)  being*  mixed  with  an  equal 
weight  of  sulphur,  and  heated,  a  blueish 
white  button  was  obtained,  weighing  1.4. 
Hence  100  metal  seem  to  take  25  of  sulphur ; 
and  allowing  this  to  be  the  protosulphuret  of 
rhodium,  the  atom  must  consist  of  one  rhodium 
56,  and  one  sulphur  14,  making  the  whole 
weight  70. 

19.  Sulphuret  of  iridium. 

According  to  Vauquelin,  100  parts  of  the 
ammonia-muriate  of  iridium  heated  with  as 
much  sulphur,  ^ield  60  parts  of  black  powder 
resembling^the  other  metallic  sulphurets ;  but 
100  parts  of  the  salt  were  found  to  yield  from 
42  to  45  of  metal.  Now  supposing  the  last 
number  the  most  correct,  it  should  seem  that 
3  parts  iridium  take  1  sulphur,  or  100  take  33|. 
This  being  supposed  the  protosulphuret,  the 
atom  of  iridium  must  be  42,  and  that  of  the 
sulphuret  56. 

20.  Sulphuret  of  osmium. 

It  is  as  yet  unknown  whether  any  combi- 
nation of  sulphur  and  osmium  exists. 


COPPER.  133 

21.  Sulphur ets  of  copper. 

Copper  readily  unites  with  sulphur  both  in 
the  dry  and  humid  way.  When  3  parts  of 
copper  filings  are  mixed  with  1  part  of  sul- 
phur, and  heat  applied,  a  brilliant  combus- 
tion ensues,  which  indicates  the  union  of  the 
two  bodies.  Copper  leaf  burns  in  the  fumes 
of  sulphur,  as  fierzelius  has  observed,  with 
great  brilliancy. 

The  protosalphuret  of  copper  obtained  by 
these  similar  methods,  when  pulverized,  is 
black  or  dark  coloured;  it  has  been  analyzed 
by  various  authors,  who  nearly  agree  in  their 
results.  Proust  finds  100  copper  unite  with 
28  sulphur;  Wenzel,  100  copper  and  25  sul- 
phur; Vauquelin,  100  copper  and  27  sulphur; 
and  Berzelius  100  copper  and  25  sulphur. 

If  the  atom  of  copper  be  56,  and  that  of 
sulphur  14,  the  atom  of  protosulphuret  of 
copper  will  be  70;  which  gives  just  100  cop- 
per and  25  sulphur. 

The  protosulphuret  may  also  be  formed  in 
the  humid  way,  by  sending  sulphuretted  hy- 
drogen gas  or  a  hydrosulphuret  into  a  solution 
of  protomuriate  of  copper,  or  amongst  the 
recently  precipitated  protoxide  of  copper. 

Deutosulphuret  of  copper.  This  compound 
is  formed  whenever  sulphuretted  hydrogen  gas 


134  SULPHURETS. 

or  a  hydrosulphuret  is  sent  into  a  solution  of 
salt  containing  the  deutoxide,  or  into  the 
deutoxide  just  precipitated  from  any  acid.  It 
is  a  dark  brown  powder  not  differing  much  in 
appearance  from  the  protosulphuret.  It  con- 
sists of  100  copper  and  50  sulphur;  the 
weight  of  the  atom  is  84. 

Quadrisulphuret  of  copper.  This  compound 
is  formed  by  mixing  quadrisulphuret  of  lime 
with  a  salt  of  the  deutoxide  of  copper,  and 
diluting  the  solution.  A  light  brown  precipi- 
tate falls  immediately,  which  is  the  quadri- 
sulphuret of  copper.  It  burns  with*  a  blue 
flame,  and  leaves  the  protosulphuret.  The 
atom  consists  of  56  copper  and  56  sulphur, 
or  weighs  112;  and  hence  the  sulphuret  con- 
sists of  equal  parts  copper  and  sulphur. 

The  blue  hydrate  of  copper  recently  preci- 
pitated from  a  salt  of  copper  and  washed,  acts 
upon  quadrisulphuret  of  lime ;  the  results,  ac- 
cording to  my  experience,  is  quadrisulphuret 
of  copper,  and  the  oxygen  unites  with  the 
sulphur  remaining  in  the  liquor. 

22.  Sulphurets  of  iron. 

Sulphur  may  be  united  to  iron  either  by  the 
dry  or  humid  way,  and  that  in  various  pro- 
portions. 


IRON.  135 

Protosulphuret  of  iron.  This  compound  may 
be  formed  by  passing  a  hydrosulphuret  into  a 
solution  of  the  green  oxide  in  any  acid.  It 
is  a  black  powder.  It  may  also  be  formed  by 
rubbing  a  highly  heated  bar  of  iron  with  a 
roll  of  sulphur;  the  two  unite  in  a  fluid  form 
and  soon  congeal  into  a  brownish  black  mass. 
It  is  too  a  natural  production,  though  not 
very  common;  excellent  analyses  of  it,  as 
well  as  of  the  common  pyrites,  were  some  time 
ago  given  by  Mr.  Hatchett.  (See  Nicholson's 
Journ.  Vol.  10.)  The  protosulphuret  is  mag- 
netic in  a  considerable  degree;  it  is  soluble  in 
acids,  and  yields  sulphuretted  hydrogen.  It 
is  proper  to  notice  that  the  sulphuret  of  iron 
is  not  precipitated  from  solutions  by  sulphu- 
retted hydrogen  simply  or  without  a  base. 
According  to  Mr.  Hatchett  this  sulphuret 
consists  of  100  iron,  and  57  sulphur,  which 
corresponds  with  1  atom  iron  25,  and  1  of  sul- 
phur, 14,  nearly. 

Deutosulphuret  of-  iron.  This  is  a  natural 
production  frequently  met  with,  and  in  vari- 
ous forms;  it  is  called  pyrites,  or  iron  pyrites; 
it  is  a  yellowish  mineral  and  often  appears 
when  broken,  of  a  radiated  texture,  but 
sometimes  it  is  crystallized  in  cubes  or  do- 
decaedrons.  Acids  have  little  effect  upon  it, 
except  the  nitric,  which  when  diluted  attacks 


136  SULPHURETS. 

both  the  sulphur  and  iron ;  much  nitrous  gas 
is  produced,  the  iron  is  dissolved,  and  the 
sulphur  chiefly  converted  into  sulphuric  acid. 
This  sulphuret  consists,  according  to  Proust, 
of  100  iron,  and  90  sulphur,  and  with  this 
Bucholz  recently  agrees  (Nichols.  27 — 356) ; 
but  Hatchett  makes  it  100  iron,  and  112  sul- 
phur. From  an  experiment  of  my  own  on 
the  radiated  pyrites,  I  found  nearly  equal  parts 
of  iron  and  sulphur.  One  atom  of  iron  (25,) 
and  two  of  sulphur  (28,)  would  give  100  to  112; 
but  if  the  atom  of  sulphur  be  only  13,  it  gives 
100  iron  to  104  sulphur.  Mr.  Hatchett  un- 
fortunately calculating  the  proportions  of  the 
ingredients  in  100  sulphuret,  instead  of  on 
100  iron,  did  not  notice  that  the  sulphur  in  the 
common  pyrites  is  just  double  of  that  in  the 
magnetic  pyrites. 

Quinsulphuret  of  iron.  This  combination 
consisting  of  5  atoms  of  sulphur  with  1  of  iron, 
is  formed  by  mixing  a  solution  of  green  sul- 
phate of  iron  with  quadrisulphuret  of  lime  in 
due  proportion.  I  found  50  measures  sulphate 
1.168  saturate  310  of  1.05  sulphuret  diluted 
so  as  to  become  6  oz. ;  this  yielded  14  grs.  dried 
sulphuret  of  iron  —  3.6  iron,  known  to  be  in 
the  sulphate,  and  10.4  sulphur ;  the  liquid  con- 
tained 2+  sulphur  combined  with  the  lime  and 
oxygen  of  the  oxide;  for  it  took  2.3  oxygen 


IRON.  137 

by  means  of  oxymuriate  of  lime  to  convert 
the  sulphur  into  sulphuric  acid  together  with 
1  +   from   the  oxide,  making   3  +  oxygen, 
which  unites  to  2+  sulphur  to  constitute  5+ 
sulphuricacid;  and  this  quantity  of  acid  was 
found  to  exist  by  muriate  of  barytes  together 
with  five  more  brought  in  by  the  sulphate  of 
iron.     This  sulphuret  is  a  yellowish  brown 
powder ;  it  readily  exhales  sulphur  by  heat  and 
is  reduced  to  the  protosulphuret;   but  in  the 
open  air  it  burns  with  a  blue  flame  and  leaves 
the  protosulphuret  partially,  as  I  apprehend, 
oxidized.     The   theory  of  the   formation   of 
quinsulphuret  seems  to  be  this:  3  atoms   of 
quadrisulphuret  of  lime  are  requisite  to  satu- 
rate 2  of  sulphate  of  iron ;   the  2  atoms  of  sul- 
phuric acid  seize  2  of  lime,  three  fourths  of 
the  sulphur  unite  to  the  iron,  and  one  fourth 
to  its  oxygen,  forming  2  atoms  of  oxide  of 
sulphur,    which  attack  the  3d  atom  of  sul- 
phuret and  decompose  it,   giving  its  sulphur 
to  the  iron,  and  neutralizing  the  lime   (for 
the  liquid  is  found  neutral).     In  this  way  10 
atoms   of  sulphur  are   united   to  2   of  iron, 
and  2  of  sulphur  to  2  of  oxygen,  with  one  of 
lime,  which  last  compound  remains  in  solution, 
and   the  oxide   of  sulphur   may  be  conver- 
ted into  sulphuric  acid  immediately  by  the 
application  of  oxymuriate  of  lime. 

VOL.  II.  S 


138  SULPHURETS. 

It  is  remarkable  that  neither  the  green  nor 
the  yellow  oxides  of  iron,  even  when  recently 
precipitated  and  not  dried,  seems  capable  of 
decomposing  quadrisulphuret  of  lime. 

It  is  probable  that  trisulphuret  and  quadri- 
sulphuret of  iron  may  be  formed ;  but  I  have 
not  ascertained  the  truth  of  this  opinion. 

23.  Sulphur  els  of  nickel. 

Prolosuiphuret.  According  to  Proust,  nickel 
unites  to  sulphur  by  heat,  so  that  100  take  46 
or  48;  the  sulphuret  is  of  the  colour  of  com- 
mon pyrites.  (Journ.de  Physique,  63  and 
■80).  According  to  Mr.  Ed.  Davy  100  nickel 
take ,54. sulphur.  By  saturating  a  solution  of 
nitrate  of  nickel  with  hydrosulphuret  of  lime 
I  obtained  40  grains  from  33  protoxide  or  26 
metal.  This  was  evidently  the  protosulphu- 
ret ;  it  was  a  fine  black  powder,  and  consists 
pf   100  metal  and  54  sulphur. 

Quinsulphuret.  This  compound  may  be  ob- 
tained from  nitrate  of  nickel  and  quadrisul- 
phuret of  lime,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  of 
iron.  It  is  a  deep  black  powder,  and  consists 
of  100  nickel,  and  215  sulphur.  By  expo- 
sure to  heat,  the  greatest  part  of  the  sulphur 
burns  off,  and  the  rest  may  be  expelled  by  an 
increase  of  temperature. 

Probably  intermediate  sulphu  rets  -  may  be 


TIN.  139 

formed;    but  I  have  not  pursued  the  investi- 
gation. 

24.  Sulphur  ets  of  tin. 

Sulphur  and  tin  unite  both  in  the  dry  and 
humid  way,  and  in  various  proportions. 

Protosulphuret.   This  may  be  readily  form- 
ed   in    the    dry    way    as    follows;    let    100 
grains    of  tin    be    fused    in  a    small  iron 
ladle  and  heated  to  6  or  8  hundred  degrees 
Fahrenheit;   let  then  small  pieces  of  sulphur 
of  10  or  20  grains  be  successively  dropped 
into  the  fused  metal :    a  copious  blue  flame 
will  instantly  arise  each  time,  and  a  glowing 
heat  will  take  place,  when  the  sulphur  and  tin 
are  in  contact;    as  soon  as  this  ceases,  another 
fragment  of  sulphur  must  be  dropped  in,  and 
this  two  or  three  times  repeated,  heating  it  at 
last  to  a  perfect  red;    the  mass  may  then  be 
taken  out  and  pounded  in  a  mortar ;    a  great 
part  of  it  will  be  a  pulverulent  powdery  but 
some  portions  of  malleable  metal  will  still  be 
mixed  with  it,   which  may  be  separated  by  a 
sieve.     This  must  be  again  heated  and  treated 
with  sulphur  as  before,  and  the  whole  mass 
will  be  converted  to  a  sulphuret.     I  find  that 
100  parts  of  tin  become  in  this  way  127  grains ; 
which  is  the  due  proportion  of  52  tin  and  14 
sulphur,  so  that  no  loss  of  tin  is  sustained  by 


140  SULPHUKETS. 

the  process  when  duly  managed.  According 
to  Wenzel,  100  tin  take  18  sulphur ;  Berg- 
man, 25;  Pelletier,  15  to  20;  Proust,  20; 
but  Dr.  John  Davy  and  Berzelius  find  nearly 
27  as  above  stated,  and  I  have  no  doubt  it  is 
near  the  truth. 

The  protosulphuret  of  tin  is  a  dark  grey 
shining  powder,  with  a  streak  like  molybde- 
na  or  plumbago;  it  is  not  ;much  different  in 
colour  and  appearance  from  native  sulphuret 
of  antimony,  only  less  blue.  It  is  soluble  in 
muriatic  acid  by  heat,  and  yields  sulphuretted 
hydrogen  and  protomuriate  of  tin. 

Deutosulphuret.  This  compound  is  better 
known  than  the  former :  it  may  be  formed  in 
various  ways;  one  is  by  heating  a  mixture  of 
deutoxide  of  tin  and  sulphur  in  a  retort  almost 
to  a  red  heat ;  sulphur  sublimes  and  sulphur- 
ous acid  is  disengaged,  and  there  remains  a 
yellow,  light  shining,  flaky  mass  at  the  bottom 
of  the  retort  which  is  the  sulphuret.  It  was 
formerly  called  aurum  musivum  or  mosaic  gold. 
Pelletier  and  Proust  were  of  opinion  that  this 
product  is  a  sulphuretted  oxide  of  tin;  but 
Dr.  John  Davy  and  Berzelius  have  rendered 
it  more  probable  that  it  is  a  true  deutosulphu- 
ret, consisting  of  100  tin  and  54  sulphur.  It  is 
insoluble  in  muriatic  or  nitric  acid,  but  slowly 
soluble  by  the  compound  of  the  two  acids;  it 


TIN.  141 

is  also  soluble  in  potash  by  heat.  By  expos- 
ing it  to  a  bright  red  heat,  it  burns  with  a  blue 
flame  and  leaves  a  yellowish  powder  which 
does  not  seem  to  differ  much  from  proto- 
sulphuret. 

Berzelius  distilled  a  mixture  of  protosul- 
phuret  and  sulphur  at  a  low  red  heat,  and  ob- 
tained a  mass  of  a  yellow  grey  colour  and 
metallic  lustre,  which  consisted  of  100  tin, 
and  14  sulphur,  which  is  just  the  mean  sul- 
phur between  the  other  two.  This  would 
seem  to  indicate  that  a  compound  of  the  two 
sulphurets,  1  atom  to  1,  is  capable  of  being 
formed. 

Hydrosulphuret  of  tin  minor.  This  com- 
pound is  formed  according  to  Proust,  when 
sulphuretted  hydrogen,  or  an  alkaline  or  ear- 
thy hydrosulphuret  is  passed  into  a  solution  of 
protomuriate  of  tin.  It  is  of  a  brown  or 
dark  coffee  colour  when  precipitated,  and 
black  when  dried.  By  heat  it  yields  water  and 
protosulphuret.  From  some  experiments  I  am 
inclined  to  believe,  that  it  is  formed  of  1  atom 
protosulphuret  and  1  of  water:  or,  which  is 
the  same,  1  atom  protoxide  of  tin  and  1  of 
sulphuretted  hydrogen,  If  this  be  right  it 
may  be  said  to  be  a  compound  of  100  tin,  27 
sulphur  and  15  water. 

Hydrosulphuret  of  tin  major.  This  name  is 


142  SULFHURETS. 

given  by  Proust  to  the  yellow  compound 
thrown  down  by  sulphuretted  hydrogen  or  by 
hydrosulphurets  from  solutions  of  the  deutox- 
ide  of  tin.  When  dried  moderately,  the 
precipitate  is  of  a  dull  yellow  colour,  and  vi- 
treous fracture,  but  I  find  it  is  almost  black, 
dried  in  a  heat  of  150°  or  upwards.  By  mo- 
derate heat  it  yields  water,  sulphurous  acid, 
sulphur,  and  the  residue  is  deutosulphuret  of 
tin  according  to  Proust.  I  heated  4  parts  of 
the  above  previously  dried  so  as  to  become  a 
black  vitreous  powder ;  it  burned  feebly  with 
a  blue  flame,  and  after  being  made  mode- 
rately red,  left  nearly  3  parts  exactly  resem- 
bling the  artificial  protosulphuret.  I  believe 
the  dried  precipitate  will  be  found  to  be  con- 
stituted of  1  atom  tin,  2  sulphur  and  1  water; 
that  is,  100  tin,  54  sulphur  and  15  water 
=  169  by  weight ;  and  that  it  loses  27  sulphur 
and  15  water  by  a  red  heat,  which  reduces  the 
weight  just  one-fourth. 

Quinsulphuret  of  tin.  This  is  obtained  in 
the  humid  way,  by  first  precipitating  the  ox- 
ide, and  then  putting  quadrisulphuret  of  lime 
or  potash  to  the  liquid  containing  the  precipi- 
tate, till  the  liquid  after  agitation  and  subsi- 
dence of  the  precipitate  continues  of  a  yel- 
lowish colour.  I  found  that  31  measures  of 
protomuriate  of  tin  of  1.377  =  7  grains  acid, 


TIN.  143 

7.5  tin  and  1  oxygen,  precipitated  by  10  oz. 
lime  water,  required  450  measures  of  1.40 
sulphuret  of  lime,  containing*  16  sulphur  and 
7.2  lime,  for  their  saturation.  The  residuary 
liquid  was  nearly  colourless,  and  the  precipi- 
tate dried  in  an  oven  of  100*  or  more,  for  10 
hours,  weighed  17  grains  besides  loss  in  the  ope- 
ration. It  was  a  yellow,  vitreous  mass,  and 
when  pulverized  and  heated,  burned  with  a 
blue  flame,  and  lost  40  per  cent,  in  weight; 
the  residue  was  a  yellow  grey  colour,  and 
seemed  to  be  like  the  intermediate  sulphuret 
of  Berzelius ;  it  would  not  give  sulphuretted 
hydrogen  by  hot  muriatic  acid.  Now  if  52 
(1  atom  tin)  :  70  (5  atoms  sulphur)  ; :  7.5 
tin  :  10  +  sulphur;  hence  the  sulphuret  should 
have  weighed  17.5  grains,  which  was  the 
observed  weight,  allowing  §  grain  for  loss. 
According  to  this,  100  tin  combine  with  135 
sulphur,  and  when  burnt,  the  235  are  redu- 
ced to  140,  the  weight  observed  by  Berzelius 
in  the  instance  alluded  to.  The  liquid  requir- 
ed 5  grains  of  oxygen  from  oxy  muriate  of 
lime,  to  convert  the  sulphur  into  sulphuric 
acid,  and  the  weight  of  this  acid,  found  by 
muriate  of  barytes,  was  11  grains,  indicating 
4.4  sulphur.  It  may  be  observed  that  the  4.4 
grains,  and  10  grains,  do  not  make  up  the 
whole  (16)  of  the  sulphuret  of  lime;  but  the 


144  SULPHURETS. 

reason  I  apprehend  was,  that  the  quadrisul- 
phuret  was  old,  and  did  not  contain  the  full 
share  of  sulphur,  it  being-  usual  for  a  small 
part  to  fall  by-time. 

The  deutomuriate  of  tin,  precipitating1  the 
oxide  in  like  manner,  yielded  a  sulphuret  ra- 
ther lighter  yellow  than  the  above;  about  10 
tin  gave  25  grains  of  sulphuret  dried  in  a 
temperature  of  80  to  100°.  This  compound 
still  contained  water,  and  1  suspect  it  will  be 
found  constituted  of  1  atom  tin,  5  sulphur, 
and  2  water. 

25.  Sulphurets  of  lead. 

Lead  combines  with  sulphur  in  various  pro- 
portions, some  of  which  are  natural  produc- 
tions of  great  purity. 

Protosulphuret.  This  is  a  natural  produc- 
tion which  is  called  galena;  it  is  of  lead  grey 
colour  and  metallic  appearance,  and  is  found 
both  in  masses  and  crystallized;  its  sp.  gr.  is 
about  7.5.  It  may  be  formed  artificially  by 
heating  lead  or  its  oxide  with  sulphur;  also  by 
treating  a  solution  of  lead  with  sulphuretted 
hydrogen  or  with  a  hydrosulphuret.  Authors 
are  well  agreed  as  to  the  proportions  of  the 
ingredients;  100  lead  combine  with  from  15 
to  16  sulphur.  That  is,  90  lead  with  14  sul- 
phur; orl  atom  of  lead  withl  of  sulphur. 


LEAD.  145 

Deutosulphuret.  Dr.  Thomson  mentions  a 
natural  production  or  species  of  galena  which 
contains  twice  the  quantity  of  sulphur  of  that 
above.  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  this 
compound  is  easily  formed  in  the  humid  way, 
by  treating  the  precipitated  oxide  with  the 
due  quantity  of  quadrisulphuret  of  lime. 

Trisulphuret     and  quadrisulphuret.    These 
compounds,  I  find,  may  be  formed  by  means  of 
quadrisulphuret  of  lime  or  potash.     When  a 
solution  of  any  salt  of  lead  or  the  recently 
precipitated  and  moist  oxide,  is  treated  with 
the  requisite  quantity  of  quadrisulphuret  of 
lime,  a  combination  consisting  of  1  atom  of 
lead  and  3  of  sulphur  is  formed.     It  is  a  black 
powder  not  differing  much  in  appearance2 from 
the  protosulphuret;   it  is  lighter  and  more 
spongy.     It  consists  of  100  lead  and  46  or 
47  sulphur.     The  due  proportions  of  the  ele- 
ments to  form  the  above  compound  are,  lead 
100  parts  in  solution,  and  sulphur,  62  parts;  \ 
of  the  sulphur  is  retained  by  the  lime,   and 
may  be  converted  into  sulphuric  acid  instantly 
by   the  addition   of  as  much  oxymuriate  of 
lime  as  contains  oxygen  equal  in  weight  to 
the  sulphur,  as  it  has  already  as  much  oxygen 
as  converts  it  into  sulphurous  oxide,  derived 
from  the  oxide  of  lead. 
Quadrisulphuret  of  lead  is  to  be  obtained  la 

VOL.    II.  T 


146  SULPHURETS. 

the  same  way  ;  only  we  must  have  an  excess 
of  the  sulphuret  of  lime,  or  more  than  80  sul- 
phur for  100  lead  in  solution,  as  ^  part  of  the 
sulphur  at  least  is  retained  by  the  lime.  The 
quadrisulphuret  is  a  black  powder  like  the 
others;  it  burns  with  a  blue  flame  and  loses 
nearly  40  per  cent.,  the  residue  being"  still 
black.  It  consists  of  100  lead  and  62  sul- 
phur. 

I  have  not  ascertained  whether  any  higher 
sulphuret  of  lead  is  capable  of  being  formed 
this  way. 

It  has  been  already  noticed  (page  109), 
that  a  beautiful  white,  silvery  sulphuretted 
sulphite  of  lead  is  formed  and  gradually  pre- 
cipitated, when  nitrate  of  lead  is  dropped  into 
a  solution  where  as  much  black  quadrisulphu- 
ret of  lead  has  been  just  thrown  down  as  the 
sulphuret  of  lime  can  form. 

26.  Sulplmrets  of  zinc. 

• 
Zinc  and  sulphur  are  scarcely  to  be  united 

directly  by  heat ;  but  by  heating  the  oxide  of 

zinc  and  sulphur  together,  a  combination  is 

effected;  part  of  the  sulphur  carries  off  the 

oxygen  in  sulphurous  acid,  and  part  combines 

with  the  zinc.     Mineralogists  give  the  name 


zinc.  147 

of  blende  to  a  mineral  which  is  chiefly  the 
protosulphuret  of  zinc :  its  colour  is  yellow- 
ish, brown,  or  black  almost  like  galena:  its 
specific  gravity  is  usually  3.9  or  4. 

Protosulphuret.  The  above  artificial  com- 
pound, or  the  mineral,  may  be  taken  as  ex- 
amples of  the  union  of  1  atom  zinc  and  1 
sulphur.  But  the  most  correct  and  conveni- 
ent way  of  forming  it  for  the  purpose  of  che- 
mical investiagtion  is,  to  drop  a  given  portion 
of  some  salt  of  zinc  into  a  dilute  hydrosul- 
phuret.  A  white  precipitate  falls,  which 
when  dried  becomes  a  dark  cream  colour.  It 
is  found  to  consist  of  2  parts  zinc  and  1  of 
sulphur  nearly;  that  is,  of  29  parts  zinc  and 
14  sulphur. 

Deutosulphuret,  trisulphuret,  &c.  of  zinc. 
These  combinations  may  be  made,  up  to  the 
5th  or  quinsulphuret,  in  the  humid  way  by  qua- 
drisulphuret  of  lime,  &c.  The  oxide  may  be 
first  precipitated  by  lime  water,  or  not,  as  we 
please,  and  then  treated  with  quadrisulphu- 
ret  according  to  the  degree  of  sulphuration 
required.  I  found  100  measures  of  1.29  ni- 
trate of  zinc  with  2500  of  1.026  sulphuret  of 
lime  yield  40  grs.  dry  sulphuret  zinc,  of  a 
yellowish  white  colour;  the  liquid  was  found 
to  retain  13  or  14  grains  of  sulphur,  by  con- 
verting it  into  sulphuric  acid  by  means  of 


148  SULPHURETS. 

oxymuriate  of  lime.  The  nitrate  contained 
llf  zinc  and  2.8  oxygen;  so  that  about  28 
sulphur  had  combined  with  the  zinc,  and 
about  14  remained  in  solution,  or  4.  of  the 
whole,  as  has  been  already  explained.  By 
proportion,  if  11  f :  28  : :  29  :  70;  or  1  atom 
of  zinc  (29)  combines  with  5  atoms  of  sul- 
phur (70).  The  intermediate  combinations 
I  have  not  particularly  examined ;  they  do 
not  differ  much  in  appearance  from  the  one 
just  described;  they  burn  blue  and  are  redu- 
ced by  it  to  the  protosulphuret ;  and  they 
give  sulphuretted  hydrogen  by  muriatic  acid. 

27  and  28.  Sulphur ets  of  potassium 
and  sodium. 

•According  to  Davy  and  Gay  Lussac,  po- 
tassium and  sodium  unite  with  sulphur  by 
heat  with  vivid  combustion.  The  compounds 
appear  to  be  protosulphurets,  that  of  potash 
being  nearly  as  35  potassium  to  14  sulphur, 
and  that  of  sodium  as  21  sodium  to  14  sul- 
phur. When  potassium  and  sodium  are  heat- 
ed along  with  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  an  uni- 
on likewise  takes  place;  two  atoms  of  gas 
unite  to  one  of  the  metals,  except  that  1  atom 
of  hydrogen  is  liberated,  corresponding  of 
course  in  quantity  to  that  liberated  by  treating 


BISMUTH.  149 

them  with  water.  When  the  compound  thus 
formed  is  treated  with  muriatic  or  sulphuric 
acid,  the  same  quantity  of  sulphuretted  hy- 
drogen nearly  is  liberated  that  was  originally 
combined.  So  that  the  compound  may  be 
regarded  as  sulphuretted  hydrogen  united  to 
the  protosulphurets.  The  colour  of  these  sul- 
phurets  varies  from  grey  to  yellowor  reddish. 

29.  Sulphurets  of  bismuth. 

Protosulphuret.  Bismuth  combines  with  sul- 
phur by  heat,  in  the  manner  already  described 
in  the  account  of  tin  sulphurets.  I  found  100 
parts  bismuth  in  this  way  combine  with  22 
sulphur  after  4  operations :  this  is  therefore  the 
protosulphuret  or  1  atom  bismuth  (62)  with 
1  of  sulphur  (14).  It  may  also  be  formed  by 
substituting  the  oxide  of  bismuth  for  the  me- 
tal. It  has  a  dark  brown  or  black  metallic 
appearance,  much  like  that  of  tin.  It  yields 
sulphuretted  hydrogen  in  heated  muriatic 
acid. 

Hydrosulphuret  of  bismuth.  When  a  solu- 
tion of  bismuth  in  nitro-muriatic  acid  i» 
dropped  into  hydrosulphuret  of  lime,  a  black 
powder  precipitates,  which,  when  dried  in  the 
common  temperature,  appears  to  be  hydro- 
sulphuret of  bismuth,   or  one  atom  sulphu- 


150  SULPHURETS. 

retted  hydrogen  and  one  oxide  of  bismuth.  It 
yields  sulphuretted  hydrogen  by  cold  muriatic 
acid.  But  if  the  precipitate  be  dried  in  a 
heat  of  about  200°,  the  atom  of  water  seems 
to  be  expelled,  and  there  remains  only  the 
protosulphuret.  Thus  I  found  69  parts  ox- 
ide of  bismuth  unite  to  15  sulphuretted  hy- 
drogen to  form  84  hydrosulphuret  of  bismuth, 
when  dried  in  the  air;  but  upon  being  heated 
a  little,  it  lost  8  parts  of  water  and  was  redu- 
ced to  the  protosulphuret,  retaining  in  great 
part  the  same  appearance  as  before. 

Deutosulphuret  and  trisulphuret  of  bismuth 
with  oxygen.  When  nitro-muriate  of  bismuth 
is  thrown  into  water  the  oxide  is  precipitated ; 
if  the  acid  water  be  decanted,  quadrisulphu- 
ret  of  lime  be  put  to  the  moist  oxide  and  due 
agitation  be  used,  the  oxide  abstracts  sul- 
phur from  the  lime  so  as  to  obtain  2  or  3 
atoms  for  each  one,  if  the  sulphur  be  suffici- 
ent in  quantity.  To  6  oz.  water  I  put  100 
grain  measures  of  1.286  nitro-muriate,  which 
I  knew  from  its  formation  contained  20  ox- 
ide; after  the  precipitate  had  subsided  I 
poured  off  5  oz.  of  acid  water,  and  to  the  re- 
maining precipitate  diluted  with  water  I  put 
300  of  1 .056  sulphuret  of  lime  and  agitated 
for  10  minutes.  There  were  obtained  33 
grains  of  brownish  black   sulphuret  of  bis- 


ANTIMONY.  151 

niuth  dried  for  some  hours  in  a  temperature  of 
120°.  I  put  the  above  33  grains  into  a  gas  bot- 
tle with  100  muriatic  acid  and  boiled  it ;  there 
were  obtained  only  2  or  3  cubic  inches  of  sul- 
phuretted hydrogen,  the  oxide  was  dissolved 
and  sulphur  liberated;  the  sulphur  collected 
and  dried  weighed  9  grains,  and  the  oxide 
precipitated  again  from  the  muriatic  acid  by 
water  and  dried,  weighed  17  grains,  besides 
loss.  From  this  it  is  evident  the  oxygen  of 
the  oxide  must  have  been  chiefly  retained  in 
the  compound,  and  must  have  united  to  2, 
and  in  great  part  to  3,  atoms  of  sulphur.  For 
20  oxide  would  require  12  sulphur  to  form 
trisulphuretted  oxide;  and  there  was  evidence 
of  its  having  nearly,  if  not  wholly,  that 
quantity. 

30.  Siilphurets  of  antimony. 

Protosulphuret.  This  is  a  natural  produc- 
tion, and  found  in  the  state  of  a  dark  grey 
mineral  of  metallic  appearance,  and  of  the 
sp.  gr.  4.2.  It  may  also  be  formed  artificially 
by  uniting  metallic  antimony  and  sulphur  by 
heat.  Most  authors  nearly  concur  in  assign- 
ing to  it  74  parts  antimony  and  %Q  sulphur, 
per  cent.  That  is,  1  atom  antimony  (40)  and 
and  1  of  sulphur  (14).     It  yields  sulphuretted 


152  SULPHTXRETS. 

hydrogen  by  muriatic  acid  and  heat,  and  a 
solution  of  the  metallic  oxide  is  obtained. 

Hydrosulplmret.  When  antimony  is  preci- 
pitated from  a  solution,  by  sulphuretted  hy- 
drogen or  a  hydrosulphuret,  or  from  an  alka- 
line solution  of  the  sulphuret  by  an  acid,  it  ap- 
pears in  the  form  of  an  orange  yellow  pow- 
der, denominated  golden  sulphuret.  It  is 
constituted  of  1  atom  sulphuretted  hydrogen 
and  1  of  protoxide  of  antimony;  it  readily 
yields  sulphuretted  hydrogen  by  muriatic  acid, 
and  the  oxide  combines  with  this  acid.  Ex- 
posed to  heat,  water  is  expelled  and  protosul- 
phuret  left.  It  is  constituted  of  40  antimony, 
7  oxygen,  14  sulphur  and  1  hydrogen;  or  of 
54  protosulphuret  and  8  water. 

Bisulphuretted,  trisulphuretted  and  quadri- 
sulphuretted  oxide  of  antimony.  When  crystal- 
lized muriate  of  antimony  is  agitated  along 
with  dilute  quadrisulphuret  of  lime,  an  orange 
yellow  compound- is  formed,  consisting  of  the 
oxide  and  sulphur.  To  350  quadrisulphuret  of 
lime>  diluted  with  lime  water,  I  put  22  grains 
moist  crystals  of  muriate,  and  agitated  well 
for  some  time.  Got  26  grains  dry  yellow  sul- 
phuret, which  heated  burned  blue,  and  left 
from  13  to  14  black  grey  sulphuret,  equal  to 
10  antimony  nearly ;  hence  it  must  have  been 
a  quadrisulphuret,  or  rather  sulphuretted  ox- 


TELLURIUM.  153 

ide ;  for,  by  heating  this  compound  in  muri- 
atic acid,  a  solution  is  obtained  and  sulphur 
liberated  without  the  extrication  of  gas.  Less 
of  the  sulphuret  of  lime  would  have  produ- 
ced a  sulphuret  of  the  same  colour,  but  con- 
taining less  of  sulphur;  so  that  it  is  evi- 
dent various  proportions  may  exist  in  combi- 
nation. Instead  of  the  crystallized  muriate, 
the  recently  precipitated  oxide,  nearly  free 
from  acid,  may  be  used  to  produce  these 
compounds. 

31.  Sulphuret  of  tellurium. 

Tellurium  unites  with  nearly  its  weight  of 
sulphur,  by  heat,  according  to  Davy.  It  is 
probable  that  as  usual  in  such  cases,  a  proto- 
sulphuret  is  formed.  This  would  lead  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  atom  of  tellurium  is  only 
equal  in  weight  to  that  of  sulphur;  which 
does  not  accord  with  results  from  the  other 
combinations  of  tellurium,  and  hence  the 
above  fact  may  riot  perhaps  be  sufficiently 
ascertained. 

32.  Sulphurets  of  arsenic. 

Arsenic  may  be  combined  with  sulphur  by 
exposing  a  mixture  of  the  metal  and  sulphur 
or  of  the  white  oxide  and  sulphur,  to  a  heat 

VOL.  II.  U 


154  SULPHURETS. 

approaching  to  redness.  In  the  latter  case 
more  sulphur  is  required,  because  the  oxygen 
is  carried  off  in  the  shape  of  sulphurous  acid. 
Three  parts  of  arsenic  with  two,  three  or 
more  of  sulphur  may  be  used;  the  heat  should 
be  less  if  a  greater  proportion  of  sulphur  is  in- 
tended to  be  united.  As  both  the  elements 
are  volatile  in  a  moderate  heat,  and  that  in 
unequal  degrees,  considerable  difficulty  occurs 
in  ascertaining  by  the  synthetic  mode,  the 
proportions  of  the  elements  combined;  if 
too  little  heat  be  used,  only  a  mechanical 
mixture  is  obtained,  of  any  proportions  we 
please;  if  too  much  heat  be  used,  part  of  the 
arsenic  as  well  as  part  of  the  sulphur  sublimes, 
and  the  sulphuret  itself  sublimes  at  a  heat  not 
much  exceeding  that  required  for  their  union. 
Hence, in  a  great  measure  we  have  the  dis- 
cordant results  of  those  who  have  taken  the 
synthetic  method.  The  analytic  method  is 
to  be  preferred,  and  those  who  have  taken  it 
have  succeeded  the  best;  but  even  this  is  at- 
tended with  greater  difficulties  than  with 
most  of  the  other  sulphurets. 

The  artificial  sulphurets  of  arsenic  consti- 
tute two  varieties  chiefly,  and  these  are  also 
found  native  in  various  parts  of  the  earth. 

1;  Protosulphuret*  Native  sulphuret:  of  ar- 
senic*  called  orpiment,  is  found   in  Turkey 


ARSENIC.  155 

and  elsewhere  in  considerable  masses;  when 
broken  it  exhibits  a  foliated  structure,  some- 
what flexible,  and  of  a  brilliant  golden  yel- 
low  colour.     Its  specific  gravity  is  usually 
about  3.2;  at  least  that  was  the  case  with,  the 
specimen  I  used.     When  heated  so  as  to  be 
near  melting,  its  surface  reddens,  probably 
by  the  loss  of  sulphur.     The  same  sulphuret 
is   procured   artificially   in   the   humid   way 
whenever  a  solution  of  the  oxide  of  arsenic 
in  water,  &c.  is  treated  with  sulphuretted  hy- 
drogen, or  a  hydrosulphuret,  and  afterwards 
with  an  acid;  or  when  this  or  any  other  spe- 
cies of  sulphuret  of  arsenic  is  dissolved  in  an 
alkali  and  the  solution  treated  with  an  acid. 
Kir  wan  in  1796  states,  that  it  is  generally 
thought  to  consist  of  100  arsenic  and  11  sul- 
phur, but  that  Westrumb  says  it  contains  100 
arsenic  and  400  sulphur,  which  Kirwan  thinks 
more  probable;  they  are  both  however  very 
wide  of  the  truth.     Thenard,  in  the  59  Vol. 
of  the  An.  de  Chimie,  1806,  asserts  that  it 
consists  of  100  arsenic  and  15  sulphur;   but 
he  does  not  point  out  the  experiments  on  which 
this  result  rests;  and  it  is  not  very  near  the 
truth.    Laugier  in  the  same  An.  Vol.  85,  for 
1813,  in  a  paper  of  great  merit,  finds  the  native 
orpiment  to  contain  38  per  cent,  of  sulphur; 
his  method  is  to  dissolve  the  orpiment  in  warm 


156  SULPHURETS. 

dilute  nitric  acid ;  to  precipitate  the  sulphu- 
ric acid  by  nitrate  of  barytes,  and  from  the 
sulphate  of  barytes  infer  the  sulphur ;  the  rest 
he  considers  as  arsenic,  not  knowing  how  to 
detach  the  arsenic  acid  from  the  nitric  acid  so 
as  to  determine  the  arsenic  by  experiment.  I 
have  pursued  this  method  with  the  advantage 
of  being  able  to  determine  the  arsenic  as  well 
as  the  sulphur:  Ten  grains  of  orpiment  in 
fine  powder  were  dissolved  in  100  measures 
of  1.346  nitric  acid  diluted  with  as  much  wa- 
ter, by  digesting  in  a  heat  so  as  to  keep  a 
constant  moderate  effervescence  for  about  2 
hours.  The  liquid  obtained,  being  diluted 
yielded  536  measures  of  1.061.  By  carefully 
and  gradually  dropping  in  muriate  of  barytes 
I  found  150  measures  of  1.162  just  sufficient 
to  saturate  the  sulphuric  acid,  and  the  sul- 
phate of  barytes  produced  dry  was  28  grains^ 
the  loss  I  estimated  1  grain :  now  one  third 
part  being  sulphuric  acid,  and  f.  of  the  acid 
being  sulphur,  we  have  44  of  29  =  3.87,  or 
3.9  for  sulphur.  The  residuary  liquid  was 
then  treated  with  lime  water  till  an  excess 
was  manifest)  and  produced  no  farther  pre-r 
cipitate;  the  arseniate  of  lime  was  collected 
and  dried)  and  gave  16  grains.  Now  I  had 
determined  by  experiments  hereafter  to  be  re- 
lated, that  4   of  arseniate  of  lime  are  acid 


ARSENIC.  157 

and  $  of  the  acid  are  arsenic;  hence ;  ^8T  of 
16=  6.1  for  the  arsenic,  which  added  to  3.9 
sulphur,  make  up  the  10  grains  of  orpiment. 

When  this  orpiment  is  treated  with  caus- 
tic alkali,  it  is  completely  dissolved;  it  is 
thrown  down  by  acids  I  find  unaltered.  If 
61  arsenic  combine  with  39  sulphur,  100 
must  take  64  nearly;  which  corresponds  with 
1  atom  of  each,  or  21  arsenic  +  13  or  14  sul- 
phur. '  * 

Subprotosulphuret.  Sulphur  and  arsenic  are 

found  native  in  certain  places,  combined  in 
masses  of  a  brownish  red  or  orange  colour 
and  glassy  fracture :  this  combination  is  called 
realgar,  and  is  also  manufactured  in  large 
quantities  in  Saxony,  chiefly  for  the  use  of 
calico-printers.  Its  constitution  and  specific 
gravity  vary  considerably,  owing  chiefly  I 
imagine  to  the  greater  or  less  heat  to  which 
it  is  exposed,  and  to  the  proportions  of  the 
elements  in  the  first  mixture.  I  have  speci- 
mens of  3.3  and  3.7  sp.  gr. ;  and  it  is  probable 
these  are  not  the  extremes;  the  heaviest  is 
the  darkest  colour.  Of  course  the  heaviest 
contains  the  most  arsenic,  and  I  have  reason 
to  believe  that  the  sp.  gr.  is  nearly  as  good  a 
test  of  the  proportions  of  the  elements  as 
chemical  analysis.  Realgar  when  pulverized 
is  of  an  orange  colour:  it  is  much  sooner dis- 


158  SULPHURETS. 

solved  in  dilute  nitric  acid  and  requires  less, 
than  the  same  weight  of  orpiment.  Caustic 
alkali  dissolves  it  partially,  taking  up  the 
protosulphuret  and  leaving  the  excess  of 
arsenic,  the  quantity  of  which  may  hence  be 
ascertained.  Ten  grains  of  realgar  took  80 
measures  of  1.347  nitric  acid,  diluted  with 
as  much  water ;  digested  in  a  heat  of  about 
150°  it  was  all  dissolved  in  If  hour,  and 
yielded  536  liquid  of  1.05  sp.  gravity.  This 
treated  as  before  gave  24  sulphate  of  barytes 
=  3.2  sulphur,  and  18  arseniate  of  lime  =  6.9 
arsenic.  This  result  agrees  nearly  with  JLau- 
gier's  in  regard  to  the  sulphur  in  native  real- 
gar: but  the  artificial  realgar,  which  he 
made  by  combining  arsenic  and  sulphur, 
yielded  him  40  per  cent,  sulphur  by  my  esti- 
mation and  42  by  his  own :  the  sp.  gravity 
of  his  artificial  realgar  is  not  given.  Wes- 
trumb  estimates  realgar  at  100  arsenic  and 
25  sulphur,  and  Thenard  at  100  arsenic  and 
33  sulphur.  But  from  the  above  it  must  be 
concluded  to  contain  100  arsenic  and  45  to  50 
of  sulphur.  One  hundred  parts  of  the  same 
realgar  heated  in  caustic  potash  were  resolved 
into  78  orpiment  taken  up  by  the  liquid  and 
22  arsenic  precipitated. 

It  appears  to  me  most  probable  that  a  true 
subsulphuret  would  be  most  convenient  for 


ARSENIC.  159 

the  printers'  use,  or  one  containing  100  ar- 
senic and  32  sulphur,  that  is,  2  atoms  arsenic 
and  1  sulphur.  The  object  being1  to  deoxi- 
dize indigo  and  obtain  it  in  solution  in  a 
green  state,  we  may  suppose  that  1  atom 
arsenic  takes  the  oxygen  from  the  indigo  and 
then  forms  arseniate  of  lime  which  precipi- 
tates, whilst  the  other  atom  in  union  with 
the  sulphur,  takes  the  green  indigo  and  unites 
it  to  the  potash,  making  a  quadruple  com- 
pound of  arsenic,  sulphur,  green  indigo  and 
potash  in  solution.  If  this  view  be  right  the 
heaviest  and  darkest  coloured  realgar  of  com- 
merce must  be  the  most  advantageous  for  this 
purpose.  Some  printers  however  prefer  the 
protosulphuret. 

Deutosulphuret.  Proust,  by  heating  100 
arsenic  with  300  sulphur  in  one  instance  got 
222  parts,  and  in  another  234  parts  of  a 
transparent  deep  greenish  yellow  sulphiiret, 
(Jour,  de  Phys.  59— p.  406.  1804).  Now  it 
is  very  remarkable  that  if  we  take  the  atom 
of  sulphur  at  13  and  that  of  arsenic  21,  one 
of  this  and  two  of  the  former  will  be  found 
as  100  to  124,  together  224;  but  if  sulphur 
be  14,  then  the  proportion  will  be  100  to  133, 
together  233.  It  seems  more  than  probable 
that  Proust  had  accidentally  used  that  degree 
of  heat  in  the  combination  which  is  requisite 


160  SULPHTJRETS. 

for  forming  the  deutosulphuret.  It  is  proba- 
ble too  that  Laugier  always  used  a  higher 
heat,  as  he  uniformly  obtained  the  same 
(lower)  sulphuret  whatever  were  the  propor- 
tions, the  excess  of  either  being  sublimed  or 
separated  by  the  heat. 

Trisulphuret,  quadrisulphuret,  &c.  When 
a  solution  of  the  oxide  of  arsenic  is  treated 
with  quadrisulphuret  of  lime,  little  precipi- 
tate appears;  but  if  muriatic  acid  be  dropped 
in,  a  fine  yellow  precipitate  is  formed.  This 
I  have  reason  to  think  is  sometimes  a  trisul- 
phuret, and  at  other  times  a  quadrisulphuret 
or  higher;  but  it  is  difficult  to  investigate 
these  compounds,  and  on  that  account  I  speak 
with  some  uncertainty. 

33.  Sulphuret  of  cobalt. 

Sulphuretted  hydrogen  does  not  precipitate 
cobalt  from  solutions  containing  that  metal ; 
but  hydrosulphurets  precipitate  it. 

Protosulphuret.  This  compound  is  obtained 
whenever  a  neutral  solution  of  cobalt  is  treat- 
ed with  hydrosulphuret  of  lime,  &c.  or  it  may 
be  obtained  from  any  acid  solution  by  first 
precipitating  the  blue  oxide  by  an  alkali,  and 
then  introducing  sulphuretted  hydrogen  into 
the  mixture-     By  this  last  method  I  found  a 


COBALT.  161 

solution  previously  known  to  contain  44  parts 
by  weight  of  protoxide  to  absorb  15  parts  of 
sulphuretted  hydrogen;  when  filtered  and 
dried  in  a  heat  of  100°  it  yielded  51  parts  of 
protosulphuret.  In  appearance  it  resembles 
many  of  the  other  black  sulphurets.  It  con- 
sists of  100  cobalt  and  38  sulphur;  Proust 
finds  40  sulphur,  but  he  considers  it  only  an 
approximation. 

The  same  sulphuret  may  be  formed  by 
heating  the  oxides  of  cobalt  and  sulphur  toge- 
ther to  a  red  heat;  at  least  a  combination  is 
effected  as  Proust  observed,  but  I  have  not  in- 
vestigated the  proportions.  Sulphur  does  not 
seem  to  combine  with  the  metal  in  this  way. 

Deutosulphuret. . . .  dodecasulphuret.  When 
the  recently  precipitated  and  moist  oxide  of 
cobalt,  the  neutral  muriate,  or  acid  muriate 
of  cobalt,  as  well  as  other  salts  of  the  same, 
are  treated  with  dilute  quadrisulphuret  of 
lime,  sulphurets  of  cobalt  are  formed  in  va- 
rious proportions  according  to  the  ingredients, 
from  the  deutosulphuret  to  the  dodecasulphu- 
ret: these  precipitates  are  all  black  and  not 
easily  distinguished  in  appearance ;  but  there 
is  reason  to  believe  they  are  true  chemical 
compounds. 

VOL.  II.  X 


102  SfJLPHURETS. 

34.  Sulphurets  of  manganese. 

Though  sulphur  and  manganese  do  not 
unite  directly,  they  can  be  brought  into  union 
by  intermediate  bodies,  both  in  the  dry  and 
humid  way. 

Protosutyihuret.  This  compound  may  be 
formed  by  heating  to  a  low  red,  a  mixture  of 
the  oxide  of  manganese  and  sulphur,  or  of 
the  white  carbonate  of  manganese  and  sul- 
phur;  or  it  may  be  formed  by  treating  a  so- 
lution of  manganese  by  a  hydrosulphuret, 
(sulphuretted  hydrogen  not  producing  any 
precipitate) ;  this  last  method  seems  to  pro- 
duce a  dry  hydrosulphuret  of  manganese, 
which  being  heated  to  red  nearly,  parts  with 
water  and  a  little  sulphur  and  there  remains 
the  protosulphuret.  The  protosulphuret  is  of 
a  snuff  brown  colour;  but  the  hydrosulphuret^ 
when  recently  precipitated  is  of  a  light  drab 
colour,  which  grows  deeper  when  exposed  to 
the  air,  and  when  dried  becomes  brown  like 
the  protosulphuret ;  when  heated,  the  colour 
is  not  much  changed.  The  hydrosulphuret 
of  manganese  gives  sulphuretted  hydrogen  by 
cold  muriatic  acid,  and  the  protosulphuret 
gives  the  same  by  the  acid  heated. 

The  proportion  of  the  elements  in  the  pro- 


CHROMIUM.  163 

tosulphuret  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that 
the  black  oxide  yields  its  own  weight  of  pro- 
tosulphuret;  that  is,  156  grains,  composed  of 
100  metal  and  56  oxygen  give  156  of  sulphu- 
ret; hence  the  atom  of  metal,  25,  unites  with 
one  of  sulphur,  14.  I  found  32  of  the  prot- 
oxide in  solution  unite  to  15  of  sulphuretted 
hydrogen  to  form  47  hydrosulphuret  dried  in 
100Q.  This  lost  about  8  parts  or  rather  up- 
wards by  heat. 

Deutosulphuret,  trisulphuret  and  quadri- 
salphuret.  These  may  be  formed  by  treating 
neutral  solutions  of  manganese,  or  the  re- 
cently precipitated  oxide,  by  quadrisulphuret 
of  lime.  They  are  formed  somewhat  slowly 
and  by  considerable  agitation  with  a  smaller 
or  greater  proportion  of  the  lime  sulphuret. 
They  are  all  light  drab,  and  are  reduced  to 
the  protosulphuret  by  heat. 

35.  Sulphuret  of  chromium. 

I  have  not  had  an  opportunity  of  ascertain- 
ing whether  chromium  or  its  oxides  combine 
with  sulphur  or  not,  though  several  attempts 
were  made  for  that  purpose. 


164  SULPHURETS. 

36.  Sulphuret  of  uranium 

From  the  experiments  of  Bucholz  it  would 
seem  that  uranium  may  be  combined  with 
sulphur,  but  the  proportions  have  not  been 
ascertained.  (An.  de  Chimie.  56 — 142.) 

37.  Sulphuret  of  molybdenum. 

From  Bucholz  and  Klaproth's  analyses  of 
molybdena  it  would  seem  that  the  native  sul- 
phuret consists  of  60  metal  and  40  sulphur; 
but  it  does  not  appear  whether  this  should  be 
considered  as  the  protosulphuret  or  the  deuto- 
sulphuret.  If  it  is  the  protosulphuret  the 
atom  of  molybdenum  weighs  21,  but  if  the 
deutosulphuret,  the  atom  of  metal  weighs  42 ; 
and  the  atom  of  the  sulphuret  or  molybdena 
must  weigh  either  35  or  70. 

38.  Sulphuret  of  tungsten. 

According  to  Berzelius,  a  sulphuret  of 
tungsten  may  be  obtained,  by  heating  a  mix- 
ture of  tungstic  acid  and  sulphuret  of  mer- 
cury in  the  proportion  of  1  to  4,  in  a  cru- 
cible. The  mixture  in  his  experiment  was 
covered  with  charcoal  and  the  crucible  inclos- 


TITANIUM,   &C.  165 

ed  in  another  containing  charcoal;  the  whole 
was  then  exposed  to  the  heat  of  a  furnace  for 
half  an  hour.  The  sulphuret  obtained  was  a 
greyish  black  powder;  it  was  found  to  con- 
sist of  100  metal  and  33|  sulphur,  or  about 
3  metal  to  1  sulphur.  Hence  this  must  be 
the  deutosulphnret  if  we  consider  the  atom  of 
tungsten  to  be  84;  but  considering  the  high 
degree  of  heat  to  which  it  was  exposed,  it 
would  seem  more  likely  to  be  the  protosul- 
phuret ;  if  so,  the  atom  of  tungsten  must  be 
considered  as  42  only,  or  half  of  the  other 
number. 

39.  Sulphuret  of  titanium. 

No  compound  of  titanium  and  sulphur  has 
been  formed. 

40.  Sulphuret  of  columbium. 
This  combination  is  unknown. 

41.  Sulphuret  of  cerium. 
This  combination  is  also  unknown. 


(   166  ) 


SECTION    15. 


EARTHY,  ALKALINE,  METALLIC 
AND  OTHER  PHOSPHURETS. 


Phosphorus  like  sulphur  is  capable  of  be- 
ing" combined  with  several  of  the  earths  and 
metals  as  well  as  with  other  bodies;  but  the 
combination  is  not  so  easily  effected,  and  the 
products  are  less  interesting"  than  those  of  sul- 
phur :  from  considerations  of  these  circum- 
stances together  with  those  of  the  expence 
and  danger  in  making  experiments  on  phos- 
phorus we  may  account  for,  this  class  of  bo- 
dies being  as  yet  imperfectly  known. 

Margraf  in  1740  attempted  to  combine 
phosphorus  with  many  of  the  metals;  but 
his  experiments  were  mostly  unsuccessful. 

Gensrembre  in  1783  endeavoured  to  unite 
phosphorus  with  the  alkalies;  in  this  he  fail- 
ed of  success,  but  discovered  the  phosphuret 
of  hydrogen,  or  the  spontaneously  inflamma- 
ble gas  now  denominated  phosphuretted  hy- 
drogen. (Journal  de  Physique,  1785.) 

In  1786  Mr.  Kir  wan  published  some  expe- 
riments on  phosphuretted  hydrogen,  (Philos. 


PHOSPHURETS.  167 

Trans.);  he  ascertained  that  water  impreg- 
nated with  this  gas  had  the  property  of  pre- 
cipitating various  metals  from  their  solu- 
tions. 

The  ingenious  and  indefatigable  Pelletier 
has  more  merit  than  any  other  person  in  his 
investigations  of  the  phosphurets.  An  im- 
portant memoir  of  his  on  the  manufacture  of 
phosphorus  in  the  large,  is  given  in  the 
Journal  de  Physique  for  1785;  in  this  he 
states  that  4  or  5  lbs.  sulphuric  acid  are  com- 
monly requisite  for  6  lbs.  calcined  bones;  and 
that  from  18  lbs.  calcined  bones  he  obtained 
by  the  usual  process,  12  oz.  of  phosphorus* 
In  1788  he  read  an  essay  on  the  phosphurets 
of  gold,  platina,  silver,  copper,  iron,  lead  and 
tin.  (An.  de  Chimie,  1—106).  In  1790  he 
published  an  essay  on  the  combinations  of 
phosphorus  with  sulphur.  {Ibid.  4—1).  An 
additional  memoir  was  published  in  1792  on 
the  same  metallic  phosphurets;  and  another 
on  the  phosphurets  of  mercury,  zinc,  bismuth, 
antimony,  cobalt,  nickel,  manganese,  arsenic 
and  the  other  metals. 

M.  Raymond  in  the  Aii.  de  Chimie,  1791, 
recommends,  instead  of  potash,  moist  hydrate 
of  lime  and  phosphorus  in  order  to  obtain 
phosphuretted  hydrogen  with  greater  facility; 
and  in  the  same  Annals  for  1800  he  asserts* 


168  PHOSPHURETS. 

that  water  absorbs  a  considerable  portion  of 
phosphuretted  hydrogen,  and  becomes  capa- 
ble of  precipitating  metals  from  their  solu- 
tions in  acids,  and  of  forming  phosphurets, 
in  this  respect  resembling  sulphuretted  hy- 
drogen. 

Mr.  Tennant  discovered  in  1791  that  car- 
bonic acid  combined  with  theearths  and  alka- 
lies is  capable  of  decomposition  by  phospho- 
rus, in  a  red  heat;  and  Dr.  Pearson,  follow- 
ing up  the  discovery,  found  that  pure  or  caus- 
tic lime  may  be  united  to  phosphorus  by  heat 
so  as  to  form  phosphuret  of  lime;  and  that 
this  dry  compound  when  put  into  water  is  de- 
composed and  gives  out  bubbles  of  phosphu- 
retted hydrogen  gas,  which  as  usual  explode 
spontaneously  on  reaching  the  surface  of  the 
water  and  coming  into  contact  with  the  air. 

In  1810  I  published  the  method  of  analys- 
ing phosphuretted  hydrogen  by  Volta's  eudi- 
ometer ;  having  found  that  this  gas  and  oxy- 
gen may  be  mixed  together  in  a  narrow  tube 
without  explosion  and  afterwards  exploded  as 
other  similar  mixtures  by  an  electric  spark. 

Dr.  Thomson  published  an  essay  on  phos- 
phuretted hydrogen  in  the  Annals  of  Philo- 
sophy for  August,  1816.  He  agrees  with  me 
very  nearly  as  to  the  constitution  and  proper- 
ties of  this  gas,   as  far  as  I  have  gone  \   but 


HYDROGEN. 

he  has  ascertained  several  additional  proper- 
ties of  the  gas,  which  I  shall  advert  to  in  the 
sequel. 

Sir  H.  Davy  and  Gay  Lussac  have  investi- 
gated several  compounds  of  phosphorus,  par- 
ticularly with  muriatic  and  oxymuriatic  acids, 
and  with  the  new  metals  potassium  and  so- 
dium, which  I  shall  have  to  notice  in  their 
proper  places. 

Other  authors  have  written  on  phosphurets 
besides  those  I  have  mentioned,  but  they  do 
not  require  to  be  particularly  distinguished  in 
this  enumeration.  We  shall  therefore  pro- 
ceed to  describe  the  phosphurets  more  par- 
ticularly. 

1.  Phosphuret  of  hydrogen. 

Prom  recent  experiments  which  I  have 
made  on  phosphuretted  hydrogen  gas,  I  find 
the  account  already  given  (Vol,.  1.  page  456) 
is  deficient,  and  in  several  respects  inaccurate ; 
I  shall  therefore  substitute  the  following,  as 
more  perfect  and  correct. 

Phosphuretted  hydrogen  may  be  obtained 
nearly  pure,  by  the  methods  recommended 
by  Dr.  Thomson.  Phosphuret  of  lime  that 
has  been  carefully  secluded  from  the  atmo- 
sphere, may  be  put  into  a  small  phial  filled 

VO]L.  n,  Y 


170  PHOSPHUKETS. 

with  water,  acidulated  by  muriatic  acid ;  into 
this  a  cork  with  a  bent  tube  must  be  immedi- 
ately put  under  water,  so  that  the  phial  and 
tube  are  both  full  of  water;  gas  soon  begins 
to  appear,  which  rising  to  the  top  of  the  phial, 
expels  a  corresponding  portion  of  water,  and 
in  due  time  the  gas  itself  comes  over  and  may 
be  received  as  usual:  if  the  phial  in  which  the 
gas  is  generated  be  warmed  to  140  or  150°, 
the  gas  is  given  out  more  readily.  A  half 
ounce  phial  with  20  grains  of  phosphuret  in 
small  lumps,  will  produce  3  or  4  cubic  inches 
of  gas.  If  the  phosphuret  of  lime  has  been 
previously  exposed  for  a  few  hours  to  the  at^ 
mosphere,  the  gas  is  more  abundant,  but  con- 
sists chiefly  of  hydrogen,  mixed  with  a  little 
phosphuretted  hydrogen. 

Pure  phosphuretted  hydrogen  is  distin- 
guished by  the  following  properties  :  1.  It  ex- 
plodes when  coming  into  the  atmosphere  in 
bubbles,  and  a  white  ring  of  smoke  subse- 
quently ascends:  2.  It  is  unfit  for  respiration, 
and  for  supporting  combustion :  3.  Its  spe- 
cific gravity  is  1.1  nearly,  that  of  atmosphe- 
ric air  being  unity:  4.  Water  absorbs  fully  .J. 
of  its  bulk  of  this  gas,  which  is  expelled 
again  by  ebullition  or  by  agitation  with  other 
gases,  but  not  without  some  loss :  5.  A  small 
portion  being  electrified  for  some  time,  de- 


HYDROGEN.  171 

posits  abundance  of  phosphorus,  and  expands 
from  one  volume  to  ly  nearly,  which  is  found 
to  be  pure  hydrogen:  6.  Liquid  oxymuriate 
of  lime  absorbs  phosphuretted  hydrogen,  con- 
verting  it  into  phosphoric  acid  and  water, 
and  leaves  any  free  hydrogen  that  may  be 
present;  hence  we  are  enabled  to  ascertain 
the  proportion  of  free  hydrogen  in  any  such 
mixture,   an  important  point  as  far  as  regards 
this   gas:  7.  One  volume    of  pure  phosphu- 
retted   hydrogen,    requires   two   volumes    of 
oxygen  for  its  complete   combustion  by  an 
electric  spark,    in  Volta's  eudiometer;  (the 
gases  must  be  previously  mixed  in  a  tube  not 
more  than  XV  °f  an  incn  m  diameter,  to  pre- 
vent an  explosion  in  the  act  of  mixing,  after 
which  they  may  safely  be  transferred  into  any 
other  vessel);    the  result  of  the  combustion 
is  phosphoric  acid  and  water:  8.  One  volume 
of  phosphuretted  hydrogen,  mixed  with  from 
2  to  6  volumes  of  nitrous  gas,  may  be  ex- 
ploded by  electricity  in  Volta's  eudiometer; 
or  it  may  be  exploded  by  sending  up  a  bub- 
ble  of  oxygen,   without  electricity ;  in  like 
manner,  may  the  mixtures  of  phosphuretted 
hydrogen  and  oxygen  be  exploded  by  a  bub- 
ble of  nitrous  gas:  9.  One  volume  of  phos- 
phuretted hydrogen,  mixed   with  4,  less  or 
more,  of  nitrous  oxide,  is  also  explosive  by 


172  PHOSPHURETS. 

electricity,  but  the  mixture  undergoes  no 
change  without  electricity,  at  least  in  a  day  : 
10.  Mixtures  of  phosphuretted  hydrogen  and 
nitrous  gas  have  a  slow  chemical  action,  by 
which  in  from  1  to  12  hours,  the  phosphuretted 
hydrogen  is  burnt  and  the  nitrous  gas  decom- 
posed into  nitrous  oxide  and  azotic  gas:  11. 
According  to  Sir  HL  Davy  and  Dr.  Thomson, 
phosphuretted  hydrogen  gas  being  heated  along 
with  sulphur  in  a  dry  tube,  the  gas  is  decompo- 
sed and  a  new  gas,  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  is 
formed,  and  the  phosphorus  unites  with  the  sul- 
phur. Davy  says  the  gas  is  doubled  in  volume 
by  this  operation ;  but  Thomson  says  it  remains 
the  same;  some  doubt  therefore  exists  res- 
pecting this  fact:  12.  When  phosphuretted 
hydrogen  gas  is  let  up  to  oxymuriatic  acid 
gas,  a  quick  combustion  with  a  yellow  flame 
is  observed, '  and  the  result  varies  according 
to  the  proportions:  when  one  volume  phos- 
phuretted hydrogen  is  put  to  3  or  4  of  acid 
gas,  both  of  the  gases  disappear,  and  muri- 
atic and  phosphoric  acids  are  produced. 

As  these  properties  differ  in  many  respects 
from  those  hitherto  assigned  to  this  gas,  it 
will  be  necessary  to  enlarge  upon  them.  The 
sp.  gr.  of  this  gas  has  already  been  adverted 
to,  (Vol.  1.),  and  its  great  variation  from 
.3  to  .85;  more  recently  Dr.  Thomson  finds 


HYDROGEN.  173 

it  about  .9.  In  all  these  instances  it  was,  I 
have  no  doubt,  contaminated  with  less  or 
more  of  hydrogen ;  at  least  it  was  so  in  my 
own  instance ;  for,  I  have  the  proportion  of 
oxygen  which  it  required  for  its  complete 
combustion,  both  before  and  after  it  was 
weighed.  It  was  what  I  then  thought  pure 
gas:  that  is,  100  volumes  required  nearly  150 
of  oxygen ;  but  I  am  now  convinced  that  gas 
of  this  description  contains  ^-  of  its  volume 
of  free  hydrogen;  hence  the  correction  of  the 
sp.  gravity.  Davy  estimates  the  sp.  gr.  of  the 
gas  which  he  denominates  hydrophosphoric  at 
.87  or  12  times  that  of  hydrogen;  this  gas,  as 
will  appear  from  this  and  other  properties,  is 
in  all  probability  phosphuretted hydrogen  gas, 
nearly  pure. 

The  absorption  of  this  gas  by  water,  has 
been  stated  variously.  In  1799  M.  Raymond 
found  that  water  absorbs  rather  less  than  |  of 
its  volume  of  this  gas :  in  1802,  Dr,  Henry 
rates  its  absorption  at  ~T  only;  in  1810  I 
found  it  ^T;  in  1812,  Davy  found  it  (hydro- 
phosphoric  gas)  to  be  ~;  in  1816,  Dr.  Thom- 
son found  it  to  be  ^T ;  I  now  estimate  it  as 
stated  above  at  £.  These  enormous  differen- 
ces may  be  partly  accounted  for  by  varieties 
in  the  gas;  and  partly  from  the  theory  of  the 
absorption  not  being  understood;   but  these 


174  PHOSPHURETS. 

are  scarcely  sufficient  excuses  in  all  the  cases. 
I  find  that  my  early  experiments  on  the  ab- 
sorption of  phosphuretted  hydrogen  by  water, 
were  made  prior  to  the  discovery  of  the  me- 
thod of  analysing*  the  gas  by  electric  combus- 
tion; consequently  they  were  deficient  in  re- 
gard to  the  quality  of  the  gas,  both  before 
and  after  agitation ;  the  best  gas  that  ever  I 
had,  was  such  as  took  150  oxygen  per  cent, 
for  its  combustion,  exclusive  of  any  common 
air;  and  it  was  often  such  as  to  require  con- 
siderably less.  The  bottle  which  I  used  for  the 
purpose  in  1810  contains  2700  grains  of  wa- 
ter; at  first  I  charged  water  with  hydrogen; 
into  this  120  grain  measures  of  phosphuretted 
hydrogen  were  put,  and  the  whole  well  agi- 
tated:  there  were  left  98  measures; — this 
proved  that  the  gas  was  more  absorbable  than 
hydrogen :  into  the  same  water  were  put  98 
more  phosphuretted  hydrogen  and  agitated  ; 
out,  80;  this  confirmed  the  proof:  Into  the 
same  water  were  put  97  hydrogen  and  agitated 
well;  out  105:  This  shewed  that  the  hydrogen 
had  expelled  a  part  of  the  gas  again,  and  was 
less  absorbable  of  the  two.  As  the  pheno- 
mena were  much  the  same  as  if  oxygen  had 
been  used  instead  of  phosphuretted  hydrogen, 
it  was  concluded  to  have  the  same  absorb- 
ability. 


HYDROGEN.  175 

In  the  present  instance,  however,  I  have 
been  more  circumstantial;  after  repeatedly 
agitating"  water  with  pure  azotic  gas,  so  as  to 
saturate  it  and  expel  the  oxygen,  I  then  put 
in  110  grain  measures  of  phosphuretted  hy- 
drogen composed  of  100  pure  gas,  5  hydro- 
gen, and  5  azotic  gas  or  rather  atmospheric 
air.  After  due  agitation,  all  was  absorbed 
but  35;  this  was  mixed  with  a  known  portion 
of  oxygen  and  exploded ;  the  diminution  was 
19  measures;  the  oxygen  remaining  was  de- 
termined by  hydrogen ;  from  which  it  appear- 
ed that  10  combustible  gas  had  taken  9  oxy- 
gen. Now  10  being  f-  of  35,  we  may  consi- 
der the  water  as  |i  impregnated  with  the 
phosphuretted  hydrogen,  and  |:;  with  azote; 
but  as  there  were  105  combustible  gas  and 
only  10  left,  95  must  have  entered  the  water 
and  caused  it  to  be  ^  charged  with  the  gas; 
whence  we  may  infer  that  332  gas  would 
have  been  a  full  charge  for  2700  water,  which 
is  almost  exactly  ~,  as  stated  above.  Other 
experiments  gave  corresponding  results.  On 
admitting  51  azotic  gas  to  the  water,  and  agi- 
tating it  a  good  deal  for  4  or  5  minutes,  there 
came  out  51  measures  or  the  same  volume: 
this  was  found  in  the  same  way  to  consist  of 
43  azote  and  8  combustible,  which  took  10 
oxygen.     Again  51  azote  was  agitated  in  the 


176  PHOSPHURETS. 

water,  and  there  came  out  51,  of  which  5  + 
were  combustible  and  took  9  oxygen.  After 
this  the  bottle  of  water  was  put  into  a  pan  of 
water  which  was  raised  to  the  boiling"  heat, 
a  bent  tube  filled  with  water  being  adapted  to 
the  water  bottle,  and  having  its  end  immer- 
sed in  water:  by  this  operation  gas  was  ex- 
pelled from  the  water,  and  caught  in  the  neck 
of  the  bottle;  when  it  amounted  to  22  grain 
measures  it  was  transferred  and  was  found 
to  consist  of  17  azote  +5  combustible,  which 
took  10  oxygen.  By  these  experiments  we 
see  that  the  gas  is  expelled  again  from  the 
water,  both  by  ebullition  and  by  other  gases, 
nearly  the  same  in  quality,  but  much  dimi- 
nished in  quantity,  the  reason  of  which  is  not 
very  obvious.  The  liquid  now  required  30 
measures  of  oxymuriate  of  lime,  equivalent  to 
100  measures  of  oxygen,  before  it  was  satura- 
ted ;  that  is,  there  appeared  to  be  50  phos- 
phuretted  hydrogen  remaining  in  the  water. 
Adding  a  little  lime-water  threw  down  a  very 
sensible  quantity  of  phosphate  of  lime. 

The  expansion  of  phosphuretted  hydrogen 
by  electricity  is  a  subject  on  which  there  has 
been  as  much  diversity  as  on  its  absorption. 
In  1797,  Dr.  Henry  found  that  it  expanded 
"  equally  with  carbonated  hydrogen/'  (Philos. 
Trans).     In  1800,  Davy  states  that  phosphu- 


HYDROGEN.  177 

retted  hydrogen  was  not  altered  in  volume 
by  electricity.  (Researches,  page  303.)  In 
1810,  my  experiments  led  me  to  adopt  the 
same  conclusion.  In  1811,  Gay  Lussac  found 
(Recherches,  page  214),  that  potassium  heat- 
ed in  phosphuretted  hydrogen  gas,  expanded 
100  volumes  to  146;  he  infers  that  the  true 
expansion  ought  to  have  been  to  150.  In  1812, 
Davy  observes,  that  when  electric  sparks  are 
passed  through  gases  of  this  kind,  "  usually 
there  is  no  change  of  volume."  (Elements  of 
Chem.  Philos.  p.  294.)  But  he  adds  that 
when  a  gas  (sp.  gr.  6,  hyd.  being  1)  was  heat- 
ed with  zinc  filings  over  mercury,  there  was 
an  expansion  of  volume  of  more  than  -J- 
Also  potassium  heated  in  it,  made  2  parts  be- 
come 3  or  3,  parts  rather  more  than  4,  (1810) ; 
the  residual  gas  in  these  cases  was  pure  hydro- 
gen. Hydrophosphoric  gas  (sp.  gr.  12)  yield- 
ed 2  volumes  of  hydrogen,  by  heating  potas- 
sium in  it.  In  1816,  Dr.  Thomson  found  that 
by  electric  sparks  phosphorus  was  deposited, 
and  hydrogen  remained  "  exactly  equal  to  the 
original  bulk  of  the  phosphuretted  hydrogen/' 
Lastly,  in  1817,  I  found  by  two  experiments, 
that  by  electrifying  30  grain  measures  of 
phosphuretted  hydrogen  in  a  tube  over  water, 
uninterruptedly  for  nearly  2  hours,  I  produ- 
ced an  expansion  of  ^,  or  the  gas  became  36 

VOL.   II.  Z 


178  P.HOSPHUllETS. 

measures;  originally  the  gas  contained  2f 
common  air,  and  the  rest  was  combustible  so 
that  100  measures  took  190  oxygen.  By  ex- 
ploding the  residue  with  oxygen,  I  .found, that 
-}T  or  ^V  of  the  phosphuretted  hydrogen,  still 
remained  undecomposed.  Taking  these  ob- 
servations into  consideration  along  with  the 
fact;,;  that  1  volume  of  the  purest  gas  requires 
2  of  oxygen  for  its  combustion,  I  conclude 
that;,the  true  expansipn  should  bei-,  or  3  vo- 
lumes of  gas  should  become  4,  and  then  it 
will  be  found  that  4-  pfj  the  oxygen  is  joined 
to  the  hydrogen  and?  -|  to  the  phosphorus, 
which  accords  with  what  appears  to  me  the 
only  correct  view  of  the  constitution  of  phos- 
phoric acid,  namely,  %  atoms  of  oxygen  to  1 
of  phosphorus. 

The  action  of  oxy  muriatic  acid,  whether 
free  or  combined,  on  phosphuretted  hydrogen, 
is  curious  and  interesting;  in.  both  cases  it 
effects  a  complete  and  instantaneous  combus- 
tion of  both  phosphorus  and  hydrogen;  when 
the  acid  is  put  to  in  the  state  of  gas,  it  not 
only  burns  the  phosphuretted  hydrogen,  but 
any  free  hydrogen,  that  niay  be  present;  ,  but 
X]^h  jias,  a  limit:  if  the  phosphuretted  hydro* 
gen.  be  largely  diluted  (90  per  cent.)  with  hy- 
d^pg^en,  this  last  is>  jW.Jjplly  left;  the  reason 
^eein^to  be,  jthe.pfyo^phur^tted  hy^rogeu  burns 


HYDROGEN.  179 

at  a  lower  temperature;  and  hence  probably 
it  is,  that  liquid  oxymuriate  of  lime  burns  the 
phosphuretted  hydrogen,  but  not  the  hydro- 
gen gas. 

The  quantity  of  oxygen  necessary  to  satu- 
rate a  given  volume  of  phosphuretted  hydro- 
gen is  easily  found.  Oxygen  gas  containing 
a  known  per  centage  of  azotic  gas,  must  be 
used  in  some  excess,  mixed  with  a  due  por- 
tion of  the  gas.  After  exploding  the  mix- 
ture, the  loss  must  be  observed,  and  then  the 
remaining  oxygen  must  be  found  by  exploding 
it  with  hydrogen.  Hence  the  true  volume  of 
oxygen  spent  by  the  first  explosion,  and  that 
of  the  combustible  gas  are  both  determined. 
The  due  proportion  of  oxygen  is  so  nearly  2 
to  1,  that  I  have  not  been  able  to  determine 
on  which  side  the  truth  lies.  Dr.  Thomson 
says  that  when  phosphuretted  hydrogen  and 
oxygen  are  mixed,  two  volumes  to  one,  a  white 
smoke  takes  place,  the  volume  of  oxygen 
gradually  disappears,  and  there  remains  be- 
hind a  quantity  of  hydrogen  exactly  equal  to 
the  original  volume  of  the  phosphuretted  hy- 
drogen. I  have  observed  nothing  at  all  like 
this.  A  mixture  of  phosphuretted  hydrogen 
and  oxygen  stood  24  hours  without  sensible 
diminution,  and  afterwards  being-  exploded, 
2  volumes  of  oxygen  disappeared  fori  of  phos- 


180  PHOSPHURETS. 

phuretted  hydrogen,  the  same  as  would  have 
done  at  the  moment  of  mixing.  Perhaps  the 
temperature  may  have  some  influence;  mine 
was  about  55°. 

I  have  tried  the  minimum  of  oxygen  that 
will  consume  or  dissipate  phosphuretted  hy- 
drogen gas.  It  may  be  exploded  with  about 
i  of  its  volume  of  oxygen,  with  the  same 
phenomena  as  Davy  observed  of  the  hydro- 
phosphoric  gas.  Phosphorus  is  thrown  down 
and  a  volume  of  combustible  gas  is  left  about 
10  per  cent,  greater  than  the  original  volume 
of  phosphuretted  hydrogen.  This  gas  is  nearly- 
pure  hydrogen.  Hence  the  whole  gas  may 
be  dissipated  at  2  successive  explosions,  by 
rather  less  than  an  equal  volume  of  oxygen. 
If  phosphuretted  hydrogen  be  exploded  with 
an  equal  volume  of  oxygen,  phosphorous 
acid,  water  and  a  little  phosphoric  acid  are 
formed,  and  some  hydrogen  remains. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  properties  of 
phosphuretted  hydrogen,  is  that  announced 
by  Dr.  Thomson,  namely,  its  combustion  with 
nitrous  gas  by  electricity ;  and  the  slow  com- 
bustion by  the  same  gas,  which  1  have  men- 
tioned above  is  a  fact  still  more  difficult  to  ex- 
plain. I  tried  the  combustion  of  phosphu- 
retted hydrogen  by  nitrous  gas  and  electri- 
city in  1810,  but  did  not  succeed.     The  rea- 


HYDROGEN.  181 

son  was,  the  gas  was  not  sufficiently  pure.  No 
phosphuretted  hydrogen  that  is  not  70  or  80 
per  cent,  pure,  can,  I  imagine,  be  exploded  by 
nitrous  gas;  even  the  purest  requires  sometimes 
more  than  one  spark,  when  mixed  in  the  most 
favourable  proportions;  and  I  have  known  in- 
stances in  which  the  mixture  has  exploded  af- 
ter electrification  for  a  few  minutes.  An  excess 
or  defect  of  nitrous  gas,  occasions  oxygen  or 
hydrogen  to  be  found  in  the  residual  gas,  just 
as  when  we  explode  with  oxygen.  One  vo- 
lume of  phosphuretted  hydrogen  requires,  as 
nearly  as  I  can  find,  3|  of  nitrous  gas  for  mu- 
tual saturation .  The  azote  developed  amounts 
to  1|  volumes  or  rather  less,  (due  allowances 
in  all  such  cases  being  made  for  that  already 
existing  in  the  two  gases* ) 

The  mutual  action  of  nitrous  gas  and  phos- 
phuretted hydrogen  without  electricity  exhi- 
bits one  of  the  most  singular  phenomena  we 
have  in  chemistry.  Nitrous  gas  seems  con- 
stantly to  be  decomposed,  one  part  producing 
nitrous  oxide  and  another  part  azote,  even 
though  an  excess  of  nitrous  gas  remain  unde- 
composed  in  the  mixture,  and  both  the  phos- 
phorus and  hydrogen  are  completely  burnt; 
but  if  the  nitrous  gas  be  deficient,  then  nitrous 
oxide,  azote,  and  some  of  the  phosphuretted 
hydrogen  are   found  in  the  residue,  and  the 


182  PHOSPHURETS. 

rest  of  the  phosphuretted  hydrogen  is  com- 
pletely burnt  or  converted  into  phosphoric 
acid  and  water;  hei'e  appears  no  preference 
of  phosphorus  to  hydrogen  in  this  case,  nor 
any  partial  combustion.  From  an  attentive 
consideration  of  the  results  of  several  expe- 
riments, I  am  inclined  to  offer  the  following 
solution  of  this  remarkable  case  :  One  atom 
of  phosphuretted  hydrogen  attacks  5  of  ni- 
trous gas  at  the  same  instant;  the  atom  of 
phosphorus  takes  2  of  oxygen,  and  gives  the 
corresponding  2  of  azote  to  the  two  of  nitrous 
gas,  and  thus  makes  two  atoms  of  nitrous  ox- 
ide, while  the  hydrogen  takes  1  of  oxy- 
gen from  the  fifth  atom  and  liberates  the 
azote;  thus  2  measures  of  nitrous  oxide  are 
formed  along  with  1  of  azote;  and  they  are 
generally  found  in  the  residue  in  that  ratio. 
The  azote  does  not  seem  to  pass  through  the 
intermediate  state  of  nitrous  oxide;  for,  as 
soon  as  the  nitrous  gas  ceases  to  exist,  there 
is  an  end  of  the  combustion. 

It  may  be  proper  to  advert  more  particu- 
larly to  the  hydrophosphoric  gas  of  Davy. 
That  this  gas  is  the  same  as  that  we  have 
been  describing,  can  hardly  admit  of  a  doubt. 
Their  near  agreement  in  sp.  gr.,  in  their  ab- 
sorbability by  water,  in  the  quantity  of  oxy- 
gen requisite  for  their  combustion,  in  their 


HYDROGEN.  183 

moderate  expansion  by  burning"  with  a  mini- 
mum of  oxygen  and  in  their  combustibility  by 
oxy muriatic  acid,  are  circumstances  suffici- 
ent to  warrant  their  identity.  It  is  said  that 
by  heating  potassium  in  this  gas,  one  volume 
yields  two  of  hydrogen ;  but  it  has  not  been 
found  to  yield  two  volumes  by  electricity, 
the  more  accurate  criterion.  Besides,  both 
Davy  and  Gay  Lussac  find  that  potassium 
heated  in  the  more  common  phosphuretted 
hydrogen  expands  it  from  1  to  li-  or  If  volume, 
which  common  electricity  will  not  do;  it  is 
presumed  therefore  that  the  potassium  in  some 
way  conduces  to  the  production  of  a  portion 
of  the  hydrogen.  Spontaneous  Ignition  or 
explosion  is,  I  believe,  no  distinctive  mark 
of  variety  in  phosphuretted  hydrogen;  when 
this  gas  is  produced,  it  is  usually  explosive 
from  the  uncombined  phosphorus  which  it 
elevates;  but  the  best  and  purest  phosphu^ 
retted  hydrogen  loses  the  property  wholly  or 
partially  by  standing  a  while  over  water, 
.though  it  loses  no  sensible  part  of  its  phos- 
phorus. 

.  It  is  commonly  stated  that  phosphuretted 
hydrogen  deposits  phosphorus  by  long  stand- 
ing.. This  seems  to  be  true;  .but  the  deposi- 
tion is  flower  than  I  imagined.  Seven  years 
ago  I  set  jaside  a  bottle  of  impure  phosphu- 


184  PHOSPHURETS. 

retted  hydrogen  whicji  I  then  labeled,  10 
combustible  take  14.6  oxygen;  this  bottle  has 
not  been  preserved  with  special  care  to  se- 
clude the  atmosphere ;  notwithstanding  that, 
it  is  now  such,  that  10  combustible  take  6.7 
oxygen,  and  hence  it  still  contains  some  ge- 
nuine phosphuretted  hydrogen. 

2  and  3.  Phosphurets  ofcarbone  and  sulphur. 

See  Vq:l.  1 .  page  464. 


4.  Phosphuret  of  lime. 


This  compound  may  be  formed  by  sublim- 
ing phosphorus  in  a  glass  tube  containing 
small  fragments  of  recently  calcined  lime, 
heated  to  a  low  red.  The  sublimed  phospho- 
rus coming  into  contact  with  the  hot  lime, 
the  two  unite  with  a  vivid  glow,  and  in  due 
time  mutual  saturation  is  produced.  The  re- 
sult is  a  dry,  hard  compound  of  a  deep  brown 
or  reddish  colour,  which  on  cooling  must  be 
put  into  a  bottle  and  well  corked,  if  not  in- 
tended for  immediate  use,  as  it  soon  changes 
by  the  action  of  atmospheric  air  and  moisture. 
With  this  precaution,  I  have  reason  to  think 
it  may  be  kept  unimpaired  for  years. 


LIME.  185 

As  far  as  I  know,  no  experiments  have 
been  published  relating  to  the  proportion  in 
which  phosphorus  and  lime  unite.  M.  Du- 
long,  in  a  valuable  paper  on  the  combina- 
tions of  phosphorus  and  oxygen,  in  the 
3Iemoires  de  la  Societe  d'Arcueil,  Vol.  3. 
(1817,)  has  given  some  account  of  his  ex- 
periments on  the  earthy  phosphurets;  but 
it  is  to  be  regretted  that  he  has  given  none  on 
the  proportions  of  their  elements. 

In  order  to  ascertain  the  phosphorus,  I  put 
10  grains  of  well  preserved  phosphuret  of  lime, 
into  1000  grains  of  liquid  oxymuriate  of  lime, 
such  that  by  previous  trials  I  knew  would  im- 
part 3.5  grains  of  oxygen;  to  this  mixture  a 
quantity  of  muriatic  acid  was  put,  sufficient 
to  engage  the  lime;  the  phosphuretted  hydro- 
gen disengaged,  was  of  course  made  to  pass 
through  the  liquid  as  it  was  generated,  and  be- 
came oxidized,  so  as  to  lose  its  gaseous  form  ; 
the  surplus  gas  was  prevented  from  escaping 
by  an  inclination  of  the  bottle;  it  was  45 
grain  measures  only,  and  of  this  30  were  found 
to  be  pure  hydrogen,  and  the  rest  atmosphe- 
ric air  detached  from  the  water;  these  30 
measures  were  the  free  hydrogen,  which  would 
have  been  mixed  with  the  phosphuretted  hy- 
drogen, in  the  ordinary  way.  In  due  time, 
the  whole  of  the  phosphuret  of  lime  was  dis- 

vol.  it.  a  a 


186  PHOSPHURETS. 

solved.  The  liquid  was  strongly  acid,  and 
manifested  no  smell  of  oxymuriatic  acid,  a 
proof  that  it  was  all  decomposed.  ,  To  this 
were  added  70  more  of  the  oxy muriate  of 
lime  before'  the  smell  of  it  was  permanently 
developed.  The  liquid  was  next  saturated 
with  lime-water,  and  the  phosphate  of  lime 
carefully  collected  and  dried ;  when  heated  to 
alow  red  it  weighed  12  grains,  and  consisted, 
according  to  my  estimate  of  this  compound, 
of  6 —  grains  of  phosphoric  acid  and  6  + 
grains  of  lime.  The  6— grains  of  acid  con- 
tained 2.4  phosphorus  and  3.5  of  oxygen.  It 
must  he  remembered  that  10  grains  of  phos- 
phuret  yield  about  500  measures  of  phosphu- 
retted  hydrogen,  and  these  contain  650  mea- 
sures of  hydrogen,  which  last  is  also  oxidized 
at  the  expence  of  the  oxymuriatic  acid;,  but 
then  there  is  an  equivalent  of  oxygen  from 
the  water,  so  that  this  does  not  influence  the 
calculation  for  oxygen.  There  appears  then 
to  be  only  an  excess  of  .24  grains  of  oxygen 
unaccounted  for,  (arising  from  the  additional 
70  of  oxymuriate  of  lime),  which  is  as  little 
as  can  be  expected  in  such  an  experiment.  If 
the  phosphorus  amount  to  24  per  cent,  we 
may  reasonably  infer  that  the  remainder  (76) 
is  mostly  lime,  though  I  have  not  been  able 
t@  detect  above  60.     Now  if  an  atom  of  phos- 


LIME.  187 

phorus  weigh  9|  and  one  of  lime  24,  the  due 
proportion  of  the  protophosphuret  of  lime 
would  be  28  phosphorus  and  72  lime;  but 
when  the  article  is  made  for  sale,  it  is  more 
likely  to  find  a  defect  than  an  excess  of  phos- 
phorus. 

According  to  Dulong,  when  the  earthy 
phosphurets  are  decomposed  by  water,  phos- 
phuretted  hydrogen  and  subphosphorous  acid 
are  formed.  I  believe  this  determination  is 
right;  for  T  find  at  most  only  4  of  the  above 
proportion  of  phosphorus  in  the  phosphuret- 
ted  hydrogen  yielded  by  10  grains  of  the 
phosphuret  of  lime  ;  the  remaining  \  seem  to 
rest  in  the  liquid  in  combination  with  the  oxy- 
gen and  lime;  that  is,  1  atom  of  hydrogen 
combines  with  1  of  phosphorus,  and  1  of 
oxygen  with  2  of  phosphorus.  Notwith- 
standing this,  the  phosphoric  acid  produced 
from  the  residue  by  means  of  ox  y  muriate  of 
lime,  does  not  in  general  correspond  to  the 
above  quantity.  Perhaps  this  loss  may  be 
owing  to  the  phosphorus  carried  over  in  me- 
chanical suspension  by  the  gas. 

M.  Dulong  observes,  that  even  the  earthy 
subphosphites  are  very  soluble;  this  did  not 
appear  to  me  to  be  the  case  with  that  of  lime : 
10  grains  of  phosphate  of  lime,  that  had 
been  exposed  for  20  minutes  to  the  air,   were 


188  PHOSPHURETS. 

put  into  a  gas  bottle  filled  with  400  grains  of 
water;  this  was  kept  at  nearly  the  boiling 
heat  for  an  hour,  when  725  grain  measures  of 
gas  were  produced,  and  some  phosphorus  was 
carried  over  with  it  into  the  receiving  bottle  and 
bason  of  water.  The  gas  being  analysed,  was 
found  to  consist  of  62  per  cent,  phosphuret- 
ted  hydrogen,  33  hydrogen  and  5  common 
air.  The  400  grains  of  water  in  Hie  gas  bot- 
tle treated  with  oxy muriate  of  lime,  and  then 
with  lime  water,  scarcely  gave  any  appreci- 
able quantity  of  phosphate  of  lime.  The 
insoluble  residue  when  dried  yielded  9  grains. 
This  dissolved  in  muriatic  acid  left  a  fraction 
of  a  grain  of  dirty  yellow  powder,  which  in- 
dicated some  phosphorus;  and  the  muriate  of 
lime  indicated  about  6  grains  of  lime. 


5.  Phosphuret  of  baryies. 

The  combination  of  phosphorus  and  bary- 
tes  may  be  effected  in  the  same  way  as  the 
foregoing,  and  the  compound  has  the  same 
appearance.  According  to  Dulong,  who  has 
examined  this  phosphuret  with  particular  at- 
tention, it  gives  out  phosphuretted  hydrogen 
when  dropped  into  water,  the  same  as  that 
of  lime.     When  the  gas  ceases  to  be  giren 


BARYTES.    .  189 

out,  a  powder  remains  completely  insoluble 
in  water,  of  a  variable  colour,  yellow,  grey 
or  brown.  It  is  not  altered  by  the  air ;  but 
it  gives  out  a  slight  phosphoric  flame  when 
heated.  Dilute  nitric  or  muriatic  acid,  dis- 
solves nearly  the  whole  with  a  trace  of  phos- 
phuretted  hydrogen,  and  leaves  only  a  few 
atoms  of  greenish  yellow  powder,  soluble  in 
oxymuriatic  acid.  The  part  dissolved  by  the 
acids  being  precipitated  by  ammonia,  gives 
phosphate  of  barytes.  From  these  facts  he 
infers  that  the  residue  insoluble  in  water,  con- 
sists of  a  small  portion  of  phosphuret  of  ba- 
rytes with  excess  of  base,  and  phosphate  of 
barytes.  The  water  in  which  the  phosphu- 
ret was  decomposed,  contains  most  of  the 
barytes;  carbonic  acid  produces  a  slight  pre- 
cipitate, and  then  leaves  a  neutral  liquid 
containing  the  subphosphate  of  barytes,  which 
appears  to  be  a  very  soluble  salt.  Sulphuric 
acid  throws  down  the  barytes  and  leaves  the 
subphosphorous  acid  in  the  liquid. 

Nothing  certain  is  determined  from  experi- 
ment respecting  the  proportion  of  phosphorus 
and  barytes  which  combine;  but  from  analogy 
it  is  probable  that  they  combine  atom  to  atom, 
or  68  parts  barytes  with  9  of  phosphorus;  or 
100  parts  of  the  compound  contain  88  of  ba- 
rytes and  12  of  phosphorus. 


190  PHOSPHURETS. 

6.  Phosphuret  of  strontites, 

Phosphuret  of  strontites  may  be  formed  as 
the  two  preceding-  articles.  It  is  in  all  res- 
pects similar  to  the  phosphuret  of  barytes 
according  to  Dulong,  and  its  properties  there- 
fore need  not  be  particularized. 

From  analogy,  I  should  apprehend,  it  must 
be  constituted  of  46  strontites  and  9  phos- 
phorus, or  one  atom  of  strontites  to  one  of 
phosphorus;  that  is,  100  parts  of  phosphuret 
should  contain  83  strontites  and  17  phos- 
phorus. 


Combinations  of  the  other  earths  and  phos- 
phorus have  not  yet  been  effected.  Neither 
have  the  alkalies  been  combined  with  phos- 
phorus: the  hydrates  of  these  as  well  as  those 
of  the  earths,  yield  phosphuretted  hydrogen 
^vhen  heated  with  phosphorus,  and  probably 
a  phosphate  or  subphosphate  of  the  base. 
Iff.  Sementini  of  Rome  is  said  to  have  suc- 
ceeded in  combining  potash  and  phosphorus 
by  means  of  alcohol.  His  experiments,  how- 
ever, appear  to  me  too  indefinite  to  warrant 
the  conclusion.  (See  An.  of  Philos. — 7.  p. 
280).  The  compounds  of  phosphorus  with 
potassium  and  sodium  are  described  in  the 
sequel,   amongst  the  metallic  phosphurets. 


GOLD.  191 

7.  Phosphuret  of  gold, 

M .  Pelletier  heated  together  in  a  crucible, 
half  an  ounce  of  pure  gold,  one  ounce  of 
phosphoric  glass  and  -§■  of  an  ounce  of  pow- 
dered charcoal,  the  heat  was  raised  suffi- 
ciently to  fuse  the  gold.  Phosphoric  fumes 
arose,  but  the  whole  of  the  phosphorus  was 
not  dissipated.  The  gold  remaining  was 
whiter  than  natural,  and  brittle  under  the 
hammer.  Exposed  to  a  very  high  heat  it  lost 
^  of  its  weight,  and  resumed  the  ordinary 
characters  of  gold. 

The  same  chemist  heated  100  grains  of 
pure  gold  in  filings  to  a  bright  red;  he  then 
projected  small  fragments  of  phosphorus 
amongst  the  gold  successively  till  after  it  had 
entered  into  fusion.  The  gold  preserved  its 
colour,  but  became  brittle  under  the  hammer 
and  granular  in  the  fracture;  it  had  increased 
4  in  weight. 

Mr.  Edmund  Davy,  by  heating  in  a  tube 
deprived  of  air,  finely  divided  gold  and 
phosphorus,  effected  a  combination  of  them. 
It  had  a  grey  colour  and  metallic  lustre.  The 
heat  of  a  spirit  lamp  was  sufficient  to  decom- 
pose it.     It  contained  about  14  per  cent,  of 


192  PHOSPHURETS. 

phosphorus.  (Davy's  Chemistry,  page  448 — 
An.  1812). 

Oberkampf  and  Thomson  have  succes- 
sively observed  the  precipitation  occasioned 
by  water  impregnated  with  phosphuretted 
hydrogen,  in  solutions  of  muriate  of  gold, 
The  former  of  these  has  some  interesting  re- 
marks on  the  phenomena.  When  a  current 
of  this  gas  is  passed  through  a  dilute  solution 
of  muriate  of  gold  for  a  time,  and  then  sud- 
denly discontinued,  the  solution  becomes 
brown  and  passes  soon  to  a  fine  deep  purple. 
A  yellowish  brown  precipitate  is  obtained, 
which  is  metallic  gold,  and  the  liquid,  now 
become  yellow  again,  contains  muriate  of 
gold  and  phosphoric  acid.  The  experiment 
may  be  continued  with  the  like  results.  But 
if  the  liquid  be  saturated  with  gas  before  any 
precipitate  is  suffered  to  subside,  a  black  pow- 
der is  obtained  which  does  not  seem  to  con- 
tain any  metallic  gold,  and  the  liquor  ceases 
to  have  any  colour.  This  black  powder  is  the 
phosphuret  of  gold ;  exposed  to  heat  it  in- 
flames and  leaves  metallic  gold,  but  its  ele- 
ments are  not  separable  by  mechanical  means. 
(An.  de  Chimie,  80—146,  for  1811). 

Water  impregnated  with  the  gas  was  found 
to  have  like  effects  as  the  gas  itself.     Whence 


GOLD.  193 

Oberkampf  concludes  that  as  long  as  an  ex- 
cess of  gold  remains  in  solution,  the  phosphu- 
retted  hydrogen  precipitates  the  metal  only; 
but  when  the  gas  is  in  excess,  the  phospho- 
rus leaves  the  hydrogen  and  unites  with  the 
precipitated  gold. 

I  should  rather  suppose  that  the  precipita- 
tion of  the  gold  may  be,  in  part  at  least,  ow- 
ing to  the  free  hydrogen  which  we  now  know 
accompanies  the  phosphuretted  hydrogen 
largely,  in  the  manner  in  which  this  gas  was 
formerly  procured ;  however  that  may  be,  I 
find  that  water,  impregnated  with  the  purest 
phosphuretted  hydrogen,  has  the  property  of 
precipitating  the  black  phosphuret  of  gold 
from  the  muriate  of  that  metal,  in  such  man- 
ner as  to  effect  complete  mutual  saturation, 
leaving  nothing  in  the  liquid  but  the  muriatic 
acid.  Let  a  solution  containing  a  known 
quantity  of  gold  be  gradually  dropped  into 
water,  containing  a  known  quantity  of  phos- 
phuretted hydrogen,  as  long  as  any  black  pre- 
cipitate is  formed.  The  point  of  saturation 
will  be  found  when  60  parts  by  weight  of  gold 
have  united  to  9  of  phosphorus,  nearly;  or 
when  one  atom  of  gold  has  united  to  one  of 
phosphorus.  Hence  it  may  be  concluded  that 
100  grains  of  the  phosphuret  of  gold  contain 
13  or  14  of  phosphorus,  which  agrees  very 

VOL.  II*  B  b 


194  PHOSPHTJRETS. 

nearly  with  the  results  of  Mr.  Edmund  Davy 
abovementioned. 


8.  Phosphuret  of  platina. 

M.  Pelletier  succeeded  in  combining1  pla- 
tina with  phosphorus  by  the  same  methods  as 
with  gold.  By  projecting*  phosphorus  on 
grains  of  platina  heated  to  a  strong  red,  the 
latter  acquired  an  increase  of  weight  of  18  on 
the  hundred;  but  this  was  probably  an  excess, 
as  some  vitreous  phosphoric  acid  was  found 
mixed  with  the  mass. 

In  the  Philos.  Magazine,  Vox,.  40,  Mr.  E. 
Davy  has  related  some  experiments  made 
with  a  view  to  combine  platina  and  phospho- 
rus ;  he  effected  it  by  heating  platina  and 
phosphorus  together  in  an  exhausted  tube; 
the  union  commenced  below  a  red  heat  and 
was  attended  with  vivid  ignition  and  flame. 
The  compound  was  of  a  blueish  grey  colour 
and  consisted  of  82|  platina  and  17|  phos- 
phorus according  to  his  estimate.  Also  by 
heating  the  ammonia-muriate  of  platina  with 
^  of  its  weight  of  phosphorus  in  a  retort  over 
mercury,  muriatic  gas  was  liberated,  and  mu- 
riate of  ammonia  and  phosphorus  were  sub- 
limed, but  there  remained  at  dull  red  heat  an 


SILVER.  195 

iron  black  or  dark  grey  mass  at  the  bottom,  of 
the  sp.  gr.  5.28.  It  was  estimated  to  consist 
of  70platinaand  30  phosphorus  ;  but  I  doubt 
whether  it  could  consist  of  these  two  ele- 
ments only. 

Phosphuretted  hydrogen  water  scarcely 
has  any  effect  on  muriate  of  platina.  After 
some  time  a  very  light  flocculent  matter  ap- 
pears, as  Dr.  Thomson  has  observed;  but  this 
seems  to  me  to  be  nothing  but  a  slight  preci- 
pitation of  phosphorus  alone ;  I  apprehend  the 
gas  unites  with  the  platina,  but  the  compound 
remains  in  solution  somewhat  in  the  same 
manner  as  platina  and  sulphuretted  hydrogen. 
The  platina  may  be  precipitated  from  the 
clear  liquid  by  muriate  of  tin,  much  the  same 
in  appearance  as  if  no  phosphuretted  hydro- 
gen were  present. 


9.  Phosphuret  of  silver. 

When  pieces  of  phosphorus  are  dropped 
amongst  silver  heated  to  red  in  a  crucible,  the 
two  unite  and  enter  into  fusion,  according  to 
Pelletier;  when  the  metal  is  saturated  with 
phosphorus  the  whole  continues  in  a  state  of 
tranquil  fusion;  but  being  withdrawn  from 
the   fire,  at  the   moment   of  congelation,   a 


196  PHOSPHURETS. 

quantity  of  phosphorus  becomes  suddenly  vo- 
latile and  burns  vividly,  and  the  surface  of 
the  metal  becomes  uneven.  The  metal  on 
being  cooled,  is  found  to  have  gained  from  12 
to  15  per  cent. ;  and  he  apprehends  that  when 
fluid  it  contains  10  per  cent,  more,  making 
in  all  25  phosphorus  to  100  silver. 

The  phosphuret  of  silver  is  white  and  crys- 
talline, brittle  under  the  hammer,  but  capa- 
ble of  being  cut  with  a  knife.  By  a  strong 
heat  the  phosphorus  is  dissipated  and  leaves 
the  silver  pure. 

Both  Raymond  and  Thomson  observe  that 
phosphuretted  hydrogen  water  precipitates 
silver  from  its  solutions  of  a  black  colour.  I 
find  that  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  silver  con- 
taining one  grain  of  the  metal,  requires  wa- 
ter containing  90  grain  measures  of  phosphu- 
retted hydrogen  to  saturate  it;  the  whole  of 
the  silver  falls  readily  and  leaves  nothing  but 
the  acid  in  the  water.  Now  the  weight  of  90 
measures  of  this  gas  is  nearly  i-  of  a  grain ; 
hence  the  proportions  of  metal  and  phospho- 
rus are  as  10  to  1,  which  shows  that  they 
combine  atom  to  atom,  or  90  silver  to  9£ 
phosphorus.  This  is  somewhat  less  of  phos- 
phorus than  is  determined  above  by  Pelletier. 


MERCURY.  197 


10.  Phosphuret  of  mercury. 


M.  Pelletier  made  several  attempts  to  com- 
bine phosphorus  and  mercury.  He  seems  to 
have  succeeded  best,  by  exposing  mercury 
in  an  extreme  state  of  division,  to  phosphorus 
under  water  in  a  moderate  heat.  The  phos- 
phuret is  a  black  compound,  which  is  resolved 
again  into  its  elements  by  distillation. 

When  nitrate  of  mercury  is  treated  with 
phosphuretted  hydrogen  water,  a  copious 
dark  brown  or  black  precipitate  is  instantly 
formed,  as  Raymond  and  Thomson  have  ob- 
served. This  black  precipitate,  Raymond 
adds,  soon  becomes  white  and  crystalline  in 
passing  from  phosphuret  to  phosphate,  by  at- 
tracting oxygen. 

I  have  found  the  black  powder  when  dried 
in  a  moderate  heat  to  abound  in  small  shining 
globules,  which  have  all  the  appearance  of  re- 
vived mercury.  However  this  may  be,  I  find 
that  a  certain  weight  of  mercurial  salt  re- 
quires a  certain  portion  of  gas  to  saturate  it, 
so  as  that  the  whole  mercury  shall  be  preci- 
pitated. One  grain  of  mercury  requires  rather 
more  than  -^  of  its  weight  or  50  grain  mea- 
sures of  the  gas  for  its  saturation.    This  proves 


198  PHOSPHURETS. 

the  combination  to  be  the  most  simple,  or  atom 
to  atom ;  that  is,  167  mercury  take  9|  phos- 
phorus; or  100  mercury  take  5J  phosphorus 
nearly. 

11.  Phosphuret  of  palladium. 

When  nitrate  of  palladium  is  dropped  into 
phosphuretted  hydrogen  water,  a  copious 
black  flocculent  precipitate  is  immediately 
formed,  which  doubtless  consists  of  palla- 
dium and  phosphorus. 

Into  800  grains  of  phosphuretted  hydrogen 
water  containing  20  grain  measures  of  gas, 
were  put  by  degress  22  grain  measures  of 
muriate  of  palladium  (sp.  gr.  1.01)  contain- 
ing .12  acid  and  .14  oxide,  corresponding  to 
.12+  metal;  mutual  saturation  was  produced, 
and  a  finely  distinct  black  powder  precipita- 
ted, leaving  the  water  clear  and  colourless, 
which  was  found  by  lime-water  to  contain  .12 
parts  of  a  grain  of  muriatic  acid.  The  black 
powder  collected  and  dried,  corresponded  as 
nearly  as  could  be  determined  in  weight  to 
the  ingredients.  Now  20  measures  of  gas 
would  weigh  .025  of  a  grain,  of  which  .0025 
would  be  hydrogen  and  .0225  phosphorus; 
whence  we  have  .12-f  metal  joined  to  .0225 


COPPER.  199 

phosphorus  or  50  to  9  nearly,  indicating  one 
atom  of  each.  Hence  100  palladium  would 
take  18  or  19  phosphorus. 

12.  Phosphuret  of  copper. 

M.  Pelletier  combined  copper  and  phos- 
phorus by  the  same  means  as  the  preceding 
compounds.  One  hundred  grains  of  copper 
united  by  heat  with  15  of  phosphorus;  the 
fused  mass  when  cooled  was  white  and  very 
hard.  As  part  of  the  copper  gets  oxidized 
during  the  process  he  thinks  it  probable,  with 
M.  Sage,  that  copper  may  acquire  20  per 
cent,  of  phosphorus. 

In  the  3d  Vol.  of  Memoirs  of  the  Soci- 
ety of  Arcueil,  page  432,  M.  Dulong  con- 
verts fine  copper  wire  into  phosphuret  by 
heating  it  to  a  low  red,  and  passing  the  va- 
pour of  phosphorus  over  it  in  hydrogen  gas. 
In  the  sequel  he  observes  that  10  grammes 
of  phosphuret  of  copper  contained  1.97  of 
phosphorus;  that  is,  the  copper  was  to  the 
phosphorus  as  8.03:1.97,  or  as  100:24.5. 
This  exceeds  much  Pelletier's  result,  and  is, 
I  think,  too  high.  For,  he  found  that  the 
above  phosphuret  converted  into  phosphate  of 
copper  by  nitric  acid  yielded  14.44  grammes. 
Now  supposing  the  atom  of  phosphorus  to 


200  PHOSPHURETS. 

weigh  9|,  that  of  phosphoric  acid  23|,  and 
that  of  the  black  oxide  of  copper  70,  we 
have  an  atom  of  phosphate  of  copper  =  93-^- : 
and  if  93| :  9| ::  14.44  :  1.444,  for  the  phos- 
phorus in  10  grammes;  and  hence  the  copper 
would  be  8.556:  this  would  give  100  copper 
to  17  phosphorus  nearly,  which  would  accord 
well  with  Pelletier's  determination,  and  very 
nearly  agree  with  the  theoretic  result  of  100 
copper  to  16^  phosphorus. 

Both  Raymond  and  Thomson  remark  that 
phosphuretted  hydrogen  water  produces  a 
black  or  dark  brown  precipitate  in  sulphate  of 
copper.  I  have  not  found  any  precipitate 
from  any  of  the  salts  of  copper  by  the  same 
means.  But  if  the  blue  hydrate  be  first  pre- 
cipitated by  lime  water,  and  then  the  phos- 
phuretted hydrogen  water  admitted,  the  hy- 
drate is  immediately  converted  into  a  dark 
olive,  which  in  all  probability  is  a  phosphuret 
of  copper.  From  some  experiments  I  am  in- 
clined to  believe  that  this  compound  is  the 
deutophosphuret,  or  two  atoms  of  phosphorus 
to  one  of  copper;  and  hence  the  copper  is  to 
the  phosphorus  as  100 :  33^. 


IRON — NICKEL.  201 

13.  Phosphitret  of  iron. 

M.  Pelletier  formed  a  phosphuret  of  iron  by 
both  the  methods  above  described  for  gold. 
He  describes  the  phosphuret  as  very  hard^»  of 
a  white  colour,  striated  and  magnetic.  He 
estimates,  with  some  uncertainty,  that  100 
iron  may  combine  with  20  phosphorus. 

Berzelius  produced  a  phosphuret  of  iron  by 
reducing  the  phosphate  of  the  metal  by  char- 
coal and  heat.  (An.  de  Chimie,  July  1816). 
He  describes  it  as  having  the  colour  of  iron, 
brittle  and  slightly  acted  upon  by  the  magnet. 
By  his  analysis  it  was  constituted  of  100  iron 
and  30  phosphorus.  The  true  proportion 
probably  would  be  one  atom  to  one,  or  25  iron 
to  9~  phosphorus ;  that  is,  100  iron  to  37  phos- 
phorus. 

Both  Raymond  and  Thomson  found  that 
sulphate  of  iron  yields  no  precipitate  by  phos- 
phuretted  hydrogen  water;  and  I  may  add, 
that  the  precipitated  oxide  or  hydrate  is  also 
unaffected  by  the  same. 

14.  Phosphuret  of  nickel. 

By  projecting  phosphorus  amongst  red  hot 
nickel,  Pelletier  united  20  parts  of  the  former 
to  100  of  the  latter.     A  part  of  the  combined 

VOL.   II.  C  C 


202  PHOSPHURETS. 

phosphorus,  he  observes,  flies  off  on  cooling, 
so  that  the  above  proportion  may  perhaps  be 
too  low.  Theoretically  one  atom  of  nickel 
should  combine  with  one  of  phosphorus ;  that 
is,#26  with  9^,  or  100  with  36. 

I  find  that  neither  the  nitrate  of  nickel  nor 
the  hydrate  are  affected  by  phosphuretted  hy- 
drogen water. 


15.   Phosphuret  of  tin. 

MargrafF  was  the  first  who  combined  phos- 
phorus and  tin  by  fusing  the  metal  along  with 
fusible  salt  from  urine  (phosphate  of  am- 
monia). Pelletier  succeeded  also  in  this  way, 
as  well  as  by  the  direct  one  of  projecting 
phosphorus  into  melted  tin.  The  compound 
was  of  a  white  colour;  it  gained  12  per  cent, 
of  weight ;  but  as  part  of  the  tin  was  oxidized 
and  adhered  to  the  crucible  in  form  of  glass, 
he  conjectures  that  tin  would  take  from  15  to 
20  per  cent,  of  phosphorus.  The  atom  of  tin 
being  52,  and  that  of  phosphorus  9|,  the  due 
proportion  would  be  100  tin  to  18  phosphorus. 

Phosphuretted  hydrogen  water  does  not 
seem  to  precipitate  tin  from  solutions,  nor  yet 
to  act  upon  the  precipitated  oxide. 


i/eait.  203 


16.  Phosphuret  of  lead. 

Lead  combines  with  phosphorus  by  the 
same  methods  as  tin  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  as- 
certain the  proportions,  according  to  Pelletier, 
from  the  oxidation  and  vitrification  of  part  of 
the  lead.  Muriate  of  lead  distilled  with  fusi- 
ble salt  of  urine,  also  yielded  phosphuret  of 
lead.  He  conjectures  the  increase  by  phos- 
phorus to  be  12  or  15  per  cent. ;  but  by  theory 
it  should  only  be  10  or  11  per  cent. 

Raymond  says  that  the  nitrate  of  lead  is 
decomposed  by  phosphuretted  hydrogen  wa- 
ter, but  with  less  force  than  salts  of  silver  and 
mercury  ;  and  that  a  phosphuret  of  lead  is 
formed,  of  which  he  gives  no  character,  except 
that  it  becomes  in  time  a  phosphate.  Thom- 
son says  a  slight  white  powder  is  formed  by 
the  mixture.  This  was  the  case  with  me; 
but  I  suspected  that  the  white  powder  was 
merely  a  little  sulphate  of  lead,  arising  from 
the  impurity  of  the  (rain)  water ;  and  this  was 
found  to  be  the  fact;  for  the  milkiness  was 
just  the  same  with  likfe  water  unimpregnated 
with  the  gas.  Besides,  after  the  phosphuret- 
ted hydrogen  water  has  been  saturated  with 
nitrate  of  lead  till  no  more  effect  is  produced, 
still  the  water  retains  its  peculiar  smell,  and 


204  PHOSPHURETS. 

a  copious  black  precipitate  is  instantly  produ- 
ced by  nitrate  of  silver  or  mercury.  It  ap- 
pears then  that  phosphuret  of  lead  cannot  be 
formed'  this  way .  N  either  does  phosphuretted 
hydrogen  water  seem  to  have  any  effect  on  the 
recently  precipitated  oxide  of  lead. 

17.  Phosphuret  of  zinc. 

Both  zinc  and  its  oxide  seem  to  combine 
with  phosphorus,  according  to  Pelletier;  but 
the  proportions  were  not  ascertained.  By 
theory,  zinc  should  take  32  per  cent,  of  phos- 
phorus. 


18.  Phosphuret  of  potassium. 

Some  account  was  given  by  Davy,  of  the 
combination  of  potassium  and  phosphorus  in 
essays  from  1807  to  1810 ;  and  by  Gay  Lussac 
and  Thenard  in  others  from  1808  to  .1811. 
According  to  Davy,  when  potassium  and 
phosphorus  are  heated  together,  they  combine 
in  one  uniform  ratio  of  8  to  3  nearly;  and  the 
compound,  when  acted  upon  by  muriatic  acid, 
gives  out  from  .8  to  1  cubic  inch  of  phosphu- 
retted hydrogen  gas,  resulting  from  one  grain 


POTASSIUM.  205 

of  the  former  and  4  of  a  grain  of  the  latter 
substances  combined.  Also  he  observed  that 
half  a  grain  of  potassium  decomposed  nearly 
3  cubic  inches  of  phosphuretted  hydrogen, 
and  set  free  more  than  4  c«t>ic  inches  of  hy- 
drogen; the  phosphuret  seemed  to  be  of  the 
same  kind  as  the  former,  or  that  by  direct 
combination  of  the  two  elements. 

Gay  Lnssac  and  Thenard  combined  the 
elements  by  heat;  the  potassium  is  scarcely 
fused  till  the  phosphuret  is  formed.  The  ex- 
cess of  phosphorus  sublimes,  and  the  phos- 
phuret is  always  of  a  chocolate  colour;  the 
proportions  were  not  ascertained.  By  treat- 
ing this  phosphuret  with  warm  water,  a 
quantity  of  phosphuretted  hydrogen  was  uni- 
formly given  out,  about  40  per  cent,  more 
than  the  hydrogen  which  would  have  been 
yielded  by  the  potassium  alone  in  water. 
But  if  the  phosphuret  was  treated  with  dilute 
acid  instead  of  water,  then  less  gas  was  given 
out  than  otherwise ;  and  the  stronger  the  acid 
the  less  gas,  so  as  sometimes  to  reduce  the 
gas  in  volume  to  that  yielded  by  potassium 
alone.  They  also  found,  as  Davy  had  done, 
that  potassium  heated  in  phosphuretted  hy- 
drogen decomposed  it,  uniting  with  the  phos- 
phorus and  producing  the  same  compound  as 
in  the  direct  way. 


206  PHOSPHURETS. 

The  results  of  Davy  and  the  French  che- 
mists appear  to  be  discordant;  but  I  appre- 
hend they  may  be  reconciled.  It  appears 
probable  from  both,  that  the  phosphuret  of 
potassium  must  be  a  compound  of  one  atom 
of  each,  or  35  potassium  and  9-^  phosphorus ; 
that  is,  100  potassium  and  27  phosphorus 
nearly.  Now  in  Davy's  method  of  treating 
the  compound  with  acid,  it  is  most  probable 
that  the  atom  of  potassium  takes  one  of  oxy- 
gen to  form  potash,  and  the  atom  of  phos- 
phorus takes  one  of  hydrogen  to  form  one  of 
phosphuretted  hydrogen;  but  3  volumes  of 
pure  phosphuretted  hydrogen  contain  4  vo* 
lumesof  hydrogen,  (see  page  178) ;  and  Davy 
obtained  nearly  %  of  the  volume  of  gas  which 
the  potassium  alone  would  have  produced, 
which  therefore  accounts  for  the  fact  as  sta- 
ted by  him. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  French  chemists  by 
treating  the  phosphuret  with  hot  water,  pro- 
bably determined  the  resolution  in  this  way : 
the  potassium  resolved  the  water  into  oxygen 
and  hydrogen,  the  last  of  which  was  libera- 
ted in  a  free  state,  and  of  course  produced 
the  usual  volume ;  the  phosphorus  also  resolv- 
ed the  water  into  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  one 
half  of  it  taking  the  oxygen  to  form  phos- 
phorous acid,  and  the  other  half  taking  the 


SODIUM — BISMUTH .  207 

hydrogen  to  form  phosphuretted  hydrogen, 
which  of  course  would  produce  phosphuret- 
ted hydrogen  amounting  to  4  of  the  volume  of 
free  hydrogen  or  38  per  cent,  nearly,  which 
would  make  up  the  volume  of  gas  to  138,  or 
nearly  140,  as  observed  by  them.  It  is  not 
unlikely  that  2  or  8  per  cent,  of  hydrogen 
might  be  added  by  the  further  decomposition 
of  water  by  the  phosphorous  acid,  in  order 
to  make  it  into  phosphoric  acid. 


19.  Phosphuret  of  sodium. 

No  particular  experiments  having  been  de- 
tailed of  this  compound,  we  must  infer  it  is 
similar  to  the  last  mentioned,  and  consists  of 
one  atom  of  sodium,  21,  and  one  atom  of  phos- 
phorus, 9y ;  that  is,  100  sodium  and  44  phos- 
phorus nearly. 


20.  Phosphuret  of  bismuth. 

If  we  may  judge  from  M.  Pelletier's  expe- 
riments, bismuth  has  but  a  weak  affinity  for 
phosphorus.  By  projecting  portions  of  phos- 
phorus amongst  melted  bismuth,  he  succeed- 
ed in  uniting  some  of  it  to  the  metal ;   he  es- 


208  PHOSPHURETS. 

timates  the  quantity  at  4  per  cent. ;  whereas 
by  theory  it  ought  to  be  15  per  cent,  suppos- 
ing them  to  unite  atom  to  atom. 

I  do  not  find  that  the  salts  or  oxide  of  bis- 
muth are  materially  affected  by  phosphuretted 
hydrogen  water. 

21.  Phosphuret  of  antimony. 
■ 

Phosphorus  may  be  combined  with  anti- 
mony, according  to  Pelletier,  by  the  same 
means  as  with  the  other  metals.  The  phos- 
phuret has  a  white,  metallic  appearance  and 
lamellar  fracture.  The  ratio  of  the  elements 
was  not  determined.  By  theory  supposing 
one  atom  to  unite  with  one,  it  would  be  40 
to  9^,  or  100  antimony  to  23  phosphorus 
nearly. 

Phosphuretted  hydrogen  water  seems  to 
have  no  effect  on  the  salts  or  oxide  of  antimony. 

22.  Phosphuret  of  arsenic. 

From  the  experiments  of  Margraff  and 
Pelletier,  it  seems  probable  that  phosphorus 
unites  both  with  arsenic  and  its  oxide.  By 
distilling  a  mixture  of  equal  parts  of  arsenic 
and  phosphorus  in  a  carefully  regulated  heat, 
Pelletier  obtained  a  residuum  of  a  black  shin- 


COBALT.  209 

ing  substance,  containing  a  good  proportion 
of  phosphorus.  The  same  was  obtained  in 
the  humid  way,  by  keeping  phosphorus  in  fu* 
sion  on  arsenic  under  water  for  some  time* 
The  phosphuretted  oxide  may  be  obtained  by 
distilling  phosphorus  and  the  white  oxide  of 
arsenic  together*  the  phosphuretted  oxide 
sublimes  mixed  with  arsenic  and  phosphorus 
in  a  separate  state.  It  is  of  a  red  colour. 
The  proportions  in  neither  case  were  ascer* 
tained.  It  is  probable  that  the  compounds 
are  of  the  most  simple  kind,  or  one  atom  to 
one;  in  that  case  we  shall  have  21  arsenic 
and  9i-  phosphorus,  or  100  arsenic  and  44 
phosphorus  for  phosphuret  of  arsenic;  and 
28  oxide  and  9^  phosphorus,  or  100  oxide 
and  33  phosphorus  for  phosphuretted  oxide.  ] 
No  precipitation  is  occasioned  by  phosphu* 
retted  hydrogen  water  in  solutions  of  arsenic. 


2S.  Phosphuret  of  cobalt* 

f  ■ 

Cobalt  unites  with  phosphorus  in  the  direct 
way  as  well  as  by  being  heated  with  phospho- 
ric glass.  The  colour  of  the  compound  is  a 
blueish  white;  it  is  brittle  and  crystalline  in 
the  fracture.     The  metal  acquires  7  per  cent. ; 

VOL.   II.  Dd 


210  JPHOSPHURETS. 

this  is  below  the  theoretic  quantity,  which  is 
25  per  cent,  if  the  atom  of  cobalt  be  37. 

Solutions  of  cobalt  give  no  precipitate  by 
phosphuretted  hydrogen  water. 


24.  Phosphuret  of  manganese. 

This  compound  may  be  formed  like  the 
preceding  ones.  It  is  of  a  white  colour, 
brittle  and  of  a  granular  texture.  It  is  not 
liable  to  be  altered  by  the  air  like  the  pure 
metal.  The  proportions  of  the  compound 
Pelletier  did  not  determine.  Reasoning  from 
theory,  it  should  consist  of  25  metal  and  9^- 
phosphorus;  or  100  metal  and  37  phos- 
phorus. 

The  salts  and  oxide  of  manganese  are  not 
sensibly  affected  by  phosphuretted  hydrogen 
water. 

The  combinations  of  the  remaining  metals 
with  phosphorus  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have 
been  investigated. 


CARBURETS.  211 

SECTION   16. 

CARBURETS. 


On  the  supposition  that  metals  combine 
with  charcoal,  the  appropriate  names  for  the 
compounds  would  be  carburets  of  the  respec- 
tive metals.  This  combination,  if  it  exist  at 
all,  seems  very  rare,  that  with  iron  being 
the  only  one  generally  acknowledged.  No 
combinations  of  carbone  with  the  earths  and 
alkalies,  have,  as  far  as  I  know,  been  no- 
ticed ;  and  those  with  the  elements  ox  gen, 
hydrogen,  sulphur  and  phosphorus  have  been 
described  in  the  former  volume.  Since  that 
was  printed  an  ingenious  experimental  essay 
on  the  "  Sulphur et  of  carbon  or  alcohol  of 
sulphur,"  has  been  published  by  Berzelius 
and  Dr.  Marcet.  Some  account  of  this  com- 
pound, under  the  name  carburetted  sulphur, 
has  been  given  (vol,  I.  page  462) ;  but  the 
additional  information  is  of  sufficient  impor- 
tance to  require  notice  here.  The  pure  li- 
quid is  of  sp.  gr.  1.272 ;  and  the  elasticity  of 
its  vapour  at  66°  is  equal  to  10.76  inches* 
It  burns  with  a  blue  flame  and  sulphureous 


212  CARBURETS. 

odour,  without  sensibly  depositing  water  on 
cold  glass  exposed  to  the  fumes.  It  has  an 
acrid,  pungent  taste,  and  a  nauseous  smell, 
differing  from  sulphuretted  hydrogen.  By 
various  experiments  it  was  found  to  consist 
of  sulphur  and  carbone  in  the  ratio  of  85  to 
15  nearly  ;  that  is,  2  atoms  of  sulphur  to  1  of 
carbone.  From  other  experiments  it  did  not 
appear  to  contain  any  hydrogen. 

From  some  experiments  il  made  in  June 
1818,  on  the  combustion  of  the  vapour  of 
carburet  of  sulphur  in  oxygen  gas,  I  was  led 
to  suspect  at  leasts  that  an  atom  of  hydrogen 
attaches  to  the  two  of  sulphur  and  one  of 
carbone  in  its  constitution.  But  not  having 
an  opportunity  to  pursue  the  subject,  I  mere* 
ly  make  the  observation  for  future  experience 
to  determine  upon  the  question. 


1.  Carburets  of  iron. 

There  are  three  distinct  substances  which 
are  now  commonly  believed  to  be  constituted 
of  carbone  and  iron,  known  by  the  names  of 
Plumbago,  or  black  lead,  Cast  Iron  and  SteeU 

Plumbago  is  a  natural  production,  found 
in  greatest  perfection  in  the  Borrowdale 
tnine,  near   Keswick,   Cumberland.      It  is 


CAST    IRON.  213 

chiefly  used  in  making  pencils.- — It  seems  to 
be  constituted  of  carbone  and  iron  by  the 
concurrent  experience  of  all  who  have  exa- 
mined it :  but  the  proportions  are  not  uni- 
form, some  having  found  10  and  others  only 
5  per  cent,  of  iron  in  it.  From  this  circum- 
stance it  would  seem  doubtful  whether  iron 
is  an  essential  element.  As  carbone  is  known 
to  be  exhibited  in  various  forms  of  aggrega- 
tion, it  is  not  improbable  that  plumbago  may 
be  one  of  those  forms ;  it  is  evidently  not  a 
mere  mixture  of  common  charcoal  and  iron, 
or  its  oxide. 

Cast  iron  or  crude  iron  is  the  metal  when 
first  extracted  from  the  ore;  it  usually  con- 
tains carbone,  oxygen,  phosphorus  and  silica, 
in  small  proportions,  with  perhaps  other 
earths  occasionally.  It  cannot  be  considered 
as  having  these  elements  united  in  definite 
proportions;  for  they  vary  much,  and  pro- 
bably give  to  crude  iron  its  several  modifica- 
tions. Cast  iron  contains  about  80  per  cent, 
of  its  weight  of  iron  in  a  state  capable  of 
solution  in  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  and  yield- 
ing a  corresponding  quantity  of  hydrogen 
gas.  The  residue,  in  a  specimen  1  examined, 
was  nearly  as  magnetic  as  iron  itself.  When 
treated  with  boiling  muriatic  acid,  the  inso-< 
luble  part  was  reduced  to  2|  per  cent,  upon 


214  CARBURETS. 

the  original  weight  of  the  iron,  and  some 
hydrogen  gas  given  out.  It  was  then  about 
as  magnetic  as  the  common  black  oxide  of 
iron  ;  when  heated  it  assumed  a  glowing  red 
and  lost  nearly  \  grain  ;  it  was  still  magnetic, 
and  boiling  muriatic  acid  extracted  more 
iron  from  it. 

The  hydrogen  gas  from  dilute  sulphuric 
acid  and  cast  iron  contains  no  carbonic  acid 
in  my  experience ;  neither  does  it  yield  any 
when  exploded  with  pure  oxygen  gas, 

The  small  residuum  after  treating  cast 
iron  with  acids  was  found  by  Bergman  and 
others  to  resemble  plumbago,  being  consti- 
tuted chiefly  of  carbone  and  iron. 

From  the  above  it  would  seem  that  cast 
iron  consists  chiefly  of  pure  iron,  with  the 
addition  of  very  small  proportions  of  oxygen 
and  carbone  ;  the  oxygen  may  be  about  1  per 
cent,  and  the  carbone  about  2.  These  pro- 
portions, though  sufficient  to  modify  the  pro- 
perties of  iron  to  a  certain  extent,  can 
scarcely  be  considered  as  constituting  cast 
iron  a  homogeneous  mass. 

Steel.  This  most  important  modification 
of  iron  has  engaged  the  attention  of  many 
chemists  and  metallurgists.  It  may  be  pro- 
cured, but  not  equally  pure,  by  different  me- 
thods.    One  is  to  keep  the  cast  iron  for  a 


StEEl*  215 

considerable  time  in  fusion  and  in  a  very 
high  degree  of  heat;  whilst  its  surface  is 
covered  with  melted  scoriae,  so  as  to  preclude 
the  contact  of  the  atmosphere  with  the  iron. 
This,  it  is  conceived,  gives  time  for  the  car- 
bone  and  oxygen  to  combine  and  escape  in 
the  form  of  carbonic  acid*  This  steel  is  of 
inferior  purity* 

Steel  of  cementation  is  made  by  stratify- 
ing bars  of  pure  iron  with  charcoal  powder 
in  large  earthen  crucibles,  carefully  closed 
up  with  clay.  These  are  exposed  to  a  high 
degree  of  heat  in  a  furnace  for  8  or  10  days. 
This  is  called  blistered  steel,  from  the  ap- 
pearance of  blisters  on  its  surface. 

Cast  steel  is  made  from  blistered  steel  by 
breaking  the  bars  and  putting  them  into  a 
large  crucible  with  pounded  glass  and  char- 
coal. The  crucible  is  closed  with  a  lid  of  the 
same  ware  and  placed  in  an  air  furnace. 
When  the  fusion  is  complete  the  metal  is 
cast  into  ingots.  This  is  the  most  valuable 
and  probably  the  purest  steel. 

When  steel  is  heated  red  and  plunged  into 
cold  water,  it  is  hardened;  that  is,  it  be- 
comes much  harder  than  iron  or  than  steel 
without  this  operation.  Hardened  steel  is 
brittle,  and  cannot  be  extended  by  the  ham- 
mer or  corroded  by  a  file  till  it  is  again  sof- 


216  CARBURETS, 

tened  by  being  heated  and  then  gradually 
cooled. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  properties  of 
hardened  steel  is  that  of  being  tempered,  as 
it  is  called ;  by  which  it  is  adapted  to  the 
different  purposes  of  the  manufacturing  art- 
ists. -Tempering  consists  in  heating  the  har- 
dened steel  till  it  acquires  a  straw  colour  for 
edge  tools,  a  blue  colour  for  watch  springs, 
and  elastic  articles  in  general ;  &c.  &c. 

Hardened  steel  is  qualified  to  acquire  mag- 
netism, and  to  retain  it  so  as  to  become  a 
permanent  magnet.  This  power  of  retain- 
ing magnetism  distinguishes  steel  from  pure 
iron. 

From  the  above  account  of  steel,  it  is  evi- 
dent there  is  an  essential  difference  between 
it  and  pure  iron.  That  difference  consists, 
according  to  the  common  opinion,  in  steel 
being  a  carburet  of  iron,  or  carbone  and  iron 
united.  The  fact  of  the  union  of  carbone 
and  iron  in  the  formation  of  steel  does  not 
seem  to  me  satisfactory  proved.  Mr,  Collier 
asserts  that  iron  gains  about  ^i-^-th  of  its 
weight  by  being  converted  into  steel,*  But 
Mr.  Mushet  found  that  though  steel  gains 
weight  upon  the  iron  when  copiously  imbed- 

*  Manchester  Memoirs,  Vol.  v,  page  120*    . 


STEEL,  217 

ded  in  charcoal,  yet  it  loses  weight  if  the 
charcoal  is  only  ^  or  T-J-5-  °f  tne  weight  of 
the  iron,*  The  same  ingenious  gentleman 
seems  to  estimate  the  carbone  in  cast  steel, 
from  synthetic  experiments,  to  be  T4-^th  of 
its  weight. 

From  analytic  experiments,  however,  there 
does  not  appear  reason  to  believe  that  steel 
contains  so  much,  if  any  charcoal.  Pure 
steel  dissolved  in  dilute  sulphuric  acid  gives 
hydrogen  gas  containing"  no  carbonic  acid 
nor  oxide,  neither  is  there  any  appreciable 
residuum  of  any  kind  in  general. 

On  considering  all  the  circumstances,  I 
am  inclined  to  believe,  that  the  properties 
which  distinguish  steel  from  iron  are  rather 
owing  to  a  peculiar  crystallization  or  ar- 
rangement of  the  ultimate  particles  of  iron, 
than  to  their  combination  with  carbone  or 
anv  other   substance.      In    all   cases   where 

at 

steel  is  formed,  the  mass  is  brought  into  a 
liquid  form,  or  nearly  approaching  to  it,  a 
circumstance  which  allows  the  particles  to 
be  subject  to  the  law  of  crystallization.  We 
see  that  great  change  is  made  in  steel  by  the 
mere  tempering  of  it,  which  cannot  be  as* 
cribed  to  the  loss  or  gain  of  any  substance, 

*  Philos.  Mag.  Vol.  xiii. 

vol.  ii.  s  e 


218  METALLIC    ALLOYS. 

but  to  some  modification  of  the  internal  ar- 
rangement of  its  particles.  Why  then  may 
not  its  differences  from  iron  be  ascribed  to 
the  same  cause  ?  It  is  allowed  that  steel,  by 
being  repeatedly  heated  and  hammered,  be- 
comes iron :  that  is,  it  should  seem,  the 
change  of  figure  disturbs  the  regular  ar- 
rangement of  the  particles.  And  it  may  be 
further  observed,  in  corroboration  of  the  opi- 
nion that  cast  iron  is  capable  of  being  made 
permanently  magnetic,  from  its  having  been 
in  fusion  more  probably  than  from  its  near 
approximation  to  steel  in  its  component 
parts.  The  most  powerful  artificial  magnets, 
after  being  forged  of  steel,  are  said  to  un- 
dergo the  operation  of  steelifying  again,  be- 
fore they  are  hardened  finally  to  receive  the 
magnetic  virtue. 

SECTION    17. 

METALLIC  ALLOYS. 

When  two  or  more  metals  of  different 
specific  gravities  are  melted  together  and  in- 
timately mixed,  they  frequently  enter  into 
chemical  union  and  form  a  new  compound, 
called  an  alloy  of  the  metals.     These  alloys 


METALLIC   ALLOYS,  219 

often  possess  important  properties  which 
their  constituents  singly  do  not,  and  hence 
become  valuable  acquisitions  to  the  arts. 
The  metals  thus  combined  may  be  fused  to- 
gether in  any  proportion  ;  but  if  one  of  them 
greatly  exceed  the  other  in  specific  gravity, 
their  intimate  union  is  sometimes  rendered 
difficult  and  even  impracticable,  partly  from 
the  weak  affinity  and  partly  from  the  gravi- 
tating principle  causing  the  metal  of  least 
specific  gravity  to  arise  to  the  surface. 

Notwithstanding  this  union  of  metals  in 
seemingly  indefinite  proportions,  there  are 
only  a  few  proportions  in  which  the  alloys 
possess  peculiar  excellences  so  as  to  entitle 
them  to  the  attention  of  artists.  These  pro- 
portions have  in  many  instances  been  disco- 
vered by  experience ;  and  it  only  remains 
for  theory  to  point  out  the  reason  for  such 
proportions,  and  to  suggest  other  propor- 
tions which  may  bid  fair  to  possess  desirable 
qualities,  and  thereby  diminish  the  unsuc- 
cessful attempts  for  improvement  in  these 
combinations. 

That  the  metals  thus  alloyed  constitute 
true  chemical  compounds  and  not  merely 
mechanical  mixtures,  may  be  inferred  from 
the  change  made  in  their  primary  qualities ; 
such  as 


220  METALLIC   ALLOYS. 

1.  Tenacity,  hardness,  &c.  Some  alloys 
are  much  superior  to  their  ingredients  in 
tenacity  and  hardness,  whilst  others  affect  a 
kind  of  medium  between  them.  This  last  is 
often  the  case  too  in  regard  to  ductility  and 
malleability. 

2.  Fusibility \  Several  alloys  fuse  at  tem- 
peratures intermediate  between  the  fusing 
temperatures  of  their  ingredients,  but  mostly 
lower  than  the  mean  ;  there  are  others  which 
fuse  below  the  temperature  of  the  lowest, 
and  few  if  any  require  a  temperature  above 
the  mean  for  their  fusion. 

3.  Colour.  In  many  cases  the  colour  of 
alloys  is  such  as  would  be  produced  by  the 
mixture  of  the  colours  of  the  metals;  but  in 
others,  remarkably  different ;  for  instance, 
the  alloys  of  copper  and  zinc, — forming  the 
various  kinds  of  brass. 

4.  Specific  gravity .  This  is  not  always  what 
might  be  inferred  from  a  mixture  of  the  two 
ingredients.  Sometimes  it  is  greater  and 
other  times  less ;  but  this  is  not  a  decisive 
mark  of  chemical  union,  as  the  same  metal 
varies  in  specific  gravity,  by  hammering, 
rolling,  tempering,  &c.  very  considerably. 
Besides,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the 
differences  said  to  have  been  observed,  have 
in  some  instances  arisen  from  inaccurate  expe- 


METALLIC   ALLOYS.  221 

riments  ;  as  it  is  a  delicate  operation  to  find 
the  specific  gravity  of  small  pieces  of  metal 
with  sufficient  precision  for  comparisons  of 
this  kind. 

Many  of  the  simple  metals,  when  fused 
and  exposed  to  the  air  for  some  time,  with- 
out a  covering  of  charcoal,  or  some  similar 
principle,  acquire  less  or  more  of  oxygen, 
and  retain  it  even  in  a  fluid  state,  as  is  proved 
from  Mr.  Lucas's  interesting  communication 
in  the  3d  VoL  of  the  Manchester  Society's 
Memoirs  (new  series).  Hence  by  frequent 
fusions  of  the  same  metal  its  quality  becomes 
impaired  in  regard  to  tenuity  and  other  pro- 
perties, 

This  is  more  eminently  the  case  with  re- 
gard to  alloys.  Thus,  zinc  at  the  tempera- 
ture in  which  brass  melts  is  combustible ;  and 
hence  a  portion  of  it  escapes  by  combustion. 
Hence  the  proportions  of  brass  are  changed 
less  or  more  at  each  fusion,  unless  fresh  zinc 
be  added.  The  same  observation  applies  to 
alloys  of  copper  and  tin  with  regard  to  the 
tin.  The  mixtures  of  lead,  tin,  bismuth  and 
other  soft  and  easily  fused  metals,  are  still 
more  remarkable  in  this  respect.  They 
should  be  fused  under  a  cover  of  oil  or  tal- 
low in  order  to  keep  them  of  the  same  pro- 
portions ;    otherwise,    some   of  them,  parti- 


222  METALLIC   ALL.OYS. 

cularly  the  tin,  is  liable  to  great  oxidation, 
and  no  two  successive  fusions  will  present 
the  same  alloy.  Hence  in  some  degree  the 
use  of  fluxes  in  metallurgy  which  serve  to 
cover  the  surface  of  the  metals  and  prevent 
oxidation  from  the  atmosphere. 

When  an  alloy  is  made,  it  seldom  happens 
that  the  metal  is  perfect  and  compact  the 
first  fusion  ;  it  is  more  or  less  porous,  espe- 
cially when  the  two  metals  fuse  at  very  dif- 
ferent temperatures.  By  a  second  fusion, 
which  usually  takes  place  at  a  much  lower 
temperature  than  that  requisite  for  the  first, 
the  metal  becomes  compact  and  free  from 
pores.  This  is  particularly  the  case  with 
speculum  metal ;  and  I  have  little  doubt  it  is 
so  with  regard  to  many  other  alloys. 


Alloys*  of  Gold  with  other  Metals. 

Gold  unites  with  many  of  the  metals  by 
heat,  and  forms  various  alloys,  on  which  it 
may  be  proper  to  make  a  few  remarks. 

1,  Gold  with  platina.  Platina  in  a  small 
proportion  changes  the  colour  of  gold  to- 
wards white.  1  part  to  20  gold  makes  it 
much  paler.     1  to  11  gives  it  the  colour  of 


GOLD  WITH  SILVER,  &C.  223 

tarnished  silver.  1  part  with  4  of  gold  has 
much  the  appearance  of  platina.  The  co- 
lour of  gold  does  not  predominate  till  it  be- 
comes -§-  of  the  alloy.  The  alloy  of  1  platina 
and  11  gold  is  very  ductile,  and  elastic  when 
hammered.    Lewis,  Klaproth.  Vauquelin. 

2.  Gold  with  silver.  These  two  metals 
may  be  combined  in  almost  any  proportion 
by  fusion  and  proper  treatment.  Homberg 
found  that  when  equal  parts  of  gold  and 
silver  are  kept  in  fusion  for  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  and  then  cooled,  there  were  two  masses, 
the  uppermost  pure  silver,  the  undermost  an 
alloy  of  5  parts  gold  and  1  silver.  I  part 
silver  to  20  gold  produces  a  sensible  white- 
ness in  the  alloy.  2  parts  gold  and  1  of 
silver  are  stated  to  form  the  alloy  of  greatest 
hardness ;  this  will  consist  of  3  atoms  of  gold 
to  1  of  silver. 

3.  Gold  with  mercury.     See  amalgams. 

4.  Gold  with  copper.  Gold  and  copper 
form  an  alloy  by  fusion  together.  11  parts 
gold  and  1  copper  form  the  alloy  used  for 
gold  coin.  The  copper  heightens  the  colour 
of  the  gold,  and  makes  it  harder  and  less 
liable  to  wear.  The  current  gold  coin,  how- 
ever, usually  contains  both  silver  and  copper, 
but  the  weight  of  both  does  not  much  ex- 
ceed one  twelfth  of  the  whole.     According 


224  METALLIC   ALLOYS. 

to  Muschenbroeck  the  maximum  of  hardness 
is  when  7  parts  of  gold  and  1  part  of  copper 
are  united.  This  corresponds  nearly  to  6 
atoms  of  gold  and  1  of  copper,  the  atom 
of  gold  being  estimated  at  66  and  that  of 
copper  at  56. 

Other  alloys  of  gold  besides  the  above 
standard  is  that  for  watch  cases,  which  must 
contain  at  least  J  pure  gold.  Watch  chains, 
and  trinkets,  are  usually  made  of  inferior  al- 
loy, called  jewellers  gold,  which  is  under  no 
controul.  It  rarely  contains  less  than  30  per 
cent,  of  pure  gold. 

5.  Gold  with  iron.  Gold  and  iron  may  be 
united  by  fusion  in  various  proportions.  11 
parts  gold  and  1  iron  form  a  ductile  alloy 
which  may  be  rolled  and  stamped  into  coin. 
Its  specific  gravity  is  16.885.  The  colour  is 
a  pale  yellowish  gray  approaching  to  white. 
The  alloy  is  harder  than  gold.  When  the 
iron  is  three  or  four  times  the  weight  of  gold, 
the  alloy  has  the  colour  of  silver.  This  last 
compound  is  constituted  of  1  atom  of  gold 
and  8  of  iron  nearly,     Lewis.  Hatchett. 

6.  Gold  with  nickel.  Mr.  Hatchett  fused 
11  parts  gold  and  1  nickel  together,  and  ob- 
tained a  brittle  alloy  of  the  colour  of  fine 
brass. 

7.  Gold  with   tin.      Gold  combines   with 


GOLD  WITH  LEAD,  ZINC,  &C.         225 

tin  and  forms  a  brittle  alloy.  10  parts  gold 
and  1  tin  form  a  pale  alloy  and  less  ductile 
than  gold.  One  fiftieth  of  tin  does  not  ma- 
terially injure  the  ductility.  Heat,  up  to  a 
visible  red,  does  not  impair  the  alloy ;  but 
beyond  that  the  tin  fuses  and  the  alloy  falls 
to  pieces.     Hatcheit. 

8.  Gold  with  lead.  The  effect  of  uniting' 
even  a  very  small  proportion  of  lead  to  gold 
is  remarkable.  When  the  alloy  contains 
-.j-^Vtf  part  of  lead,  it  is  brittle  like  glass. 
The  vapour  of  fused  lead  in  close  vessels  is 
sufficient  to  injure  gold.    ibid. 

9.  Gold  and  zinc.  These  two  metals  com- 
bine in  almost  any  proportion.  When  11 
parts  gold  and  1  zinc  are  alloyed,  the  com- 
pound is  of  a  pale  greenish  yellow  like  brass, 
and  very  brittle.  Equal  parts  of  these  me- 
tals form  a  very  hard,  white  alloy,  suscepti- 
ble of  a  fine  polish,     ibid.  Sc  Hellot. 

10.  Gold  and  bismuth.  Gold  unites  with 
bismuth,  but  the  colour  is  injured  and  the 
ductility  of  the  alloy  destroyed  by  a  very 
small  portion  of  the  latter  metal,  the  same 
as  with  lead.     ibid. 

11.  Gold  and  antimony.  These  metals 
combine  and  produce  a  brittle  alloy,  much 
of  the  same  kind  as  those  with  bismuth  and 
lead.     ibid. 

VOL,  II.  f  f 


226  METALLIC   ALLOYS. 

12.  Gold  and  arsenic.  There  seems  a  con- 
siderable affinity  between  gold  and  arsenic, 
but  the  volatility  of  arsenic  in  the  fusing  tem- 
perature of  gold  renders  it  difficult  to  bring 
them  into  contact.  A  very  small  proportion 
of  arsenic  makes  the  alloy  brittle,  and  this 
property  increases  with  the  arsenic.  Hatchett. 

13.  Gold  with  cobalt.  These  unite  and 
form  a  brittle  alloy,  even  when  the  cobalt 
only  makes  -^  of  the  compound,     ibid. 

14.  Gold  and  manganese.  Gold  and  man- 
ganese may  be  united,  and  the  alloy  is  very 
hard  and  less  fusible  than  gold.  One  alloy 
was  found  to  consist  of  7  or  8  parts  of  gold 
and  1  of  manganese,     ibid. 


Alloys  of  Platina  with  other  Metals* 

1,  Platina  mid  silver.  It  does  not  appear 
very  clear  that  these  two  metals  combine  by 
fusion ;  at  least  if  they  do,  the  difference  in 
their  specific  gravities  is  sufficient  to  over- 
come their  affinity. 

2,  Platina  and  mercury.     See  amalgams. 

3,  Platina  and  copper.  These  two  metals 
unite  with  difficulty  by  a  strong  heat  and 
form  a  malleable  alloy.  This  alloy  has  been 
preferred  for  specula  for  telescopes,  as  it  is 


PLATINA  AND  TIN,  LEAD,  ZINC,  &C.  227 

hard,  polishes  well,  and  is  not  liable  to  tar- 
nish.    Lewis. 

4.  Platina  and  iron.  Platina  and  soft  or 
pure  iron  do  not  seem  to  be  easily  combined 
by  heat,  by  reason  of  the  infusibility  of  iron. 
But  it  combines  with  cast  iron  and  steel  by 
heat.  The  alloy  is  very  hard,  and  in  some 
degree  ductile  when  the  iron  forms  J  of  tbe 
alloy,     ibid. 

5.  Platina  and  tin.  Equal  parts  of  pla- 
tina and  tin  unite  by  fusion,  and  form  a  dark 
coloured  brittle  alloy.  But  when  the  platina 
falls  short  £  of  the  alloy,  the  ductility  and 
whiteness  proportionally  increase,    ibid. 

6.  Platina  and  lead.  These  two  metals 
may  be  combined  in  various  proportions  by 
heat ;  but  the  compounds  are  not  stable,  part 
of  the  platina  falling*  down,  when  the  alloy  is 
subsequently  melted*     ibid. 

7.  Platina  and  zinc.  Platina  may  be  com- 
bined with  zinc,  by  being  exposed  to  the 
fumes  of  the  metal  as  reduced  from  its  ore. 
Three  parts  of  platina  become  four  of  alloy. 
It  is  hard,  brittle,  of  a  blueish  white  colour,, 
and  easily  fusible,     ibid. 

8.  Platina  and  bismuth.  Platina,  and  bis- 
muth combine  readily  in  a  high  temperature 
in  almost  any  proportions.  The  alloys  are 
brittle,     ibid. 


228  METALLIC   ALLOYS. 

9.  Platina  and  antimony.  Platina  easily 
combines  with  antimony  by  heat.  The  alloy 
is  brittle,     ibid. 

10.  Piatrna  and  arsenic.  When  white 
oxide  of  arsenic  is  projected  upon  strongly 
heated  platina,  an  imperfect  union  takes  place 
with  a  partial  fusion  of  the  mass 3  it  is  brittle, 
of  h  greyish  colour  and  a  loose  granulated 
texture.     Lewis, 

Alloys  of  Silver  with  other  Metals, 

1.  Silver  with  mercury.     See  amalgams. 

2.  Silver  with  copper.  Silver  and  copper 
are  easily  alloyed  in  any  proportion  by  fu- 
sion. The  compound  is  harder  than  silver, 
and  retains  its  white  colour  when  the  copper 
is  half  of  the  alloy  or  more.— The  silver  coin 
is  a  compound  of  12-  silver  and  1  copper, 
which  nearly  corresponds  to  8  atoms  of  sil- 
ver and  1  of  copper.  The  hardest  alloy  is 
said  to  be  when  5  silver  unite  to  1  copper ; 
that  is,  8  atoms  of  silver  and  1  of  copper, 

3.  Silver  with  iron.  The  alloys  of  silver 
and  iron  have  not  been  very  minutely  exa- 
mined. The  two  metals  are  said  to  unite  by 
fusion,  but  the  iron  still  retains  its  magnet- 
ism.    The  alloy  is  of  a  white  colour,  hard 


SILVER   AND    ZINC,   BISMUTH,    <ScC.      229 

and  ductile.  When  kept  in  fusion  for  some 
time  the  two  metals  separate,  but  not  entire- 
ly. These  circumstances  shew  the  affinity 
between  silver  and  iron  to  be  weak. 

4.  Silver  with  tin.  Silver  and  tin  form  a 
hard  brittle  alloy,  which  is  of  little  if  any 
use.  The  modifications  arising  from  various 
proportions  have  not  been  particularly  inves- 
tigated. 

5.  Silver  and  lead.  Silver  and  lead  unite 
in  any  proportion  and  form  a  brittle  alloy 
of  a  lead  colour.  The  union  is  not  very  in- 
timate; for  when  urged  by  heat  the  lead 
parts  from  the  silver,  as  in  the  process  of 
cupellation. 

6.  Silver  and  zinc.  These  two  unite  and 
form  a  brittle  alloy  of  a  blueish  white  colour. 
The  proportions  have  not  been  particularly 
noticed. 

7.  Silver  and  bismuth.  Silver  and  bismuth 
readily  unite  by  heat.  The  alloy  is  brittle 
and  its  colour  inclines  to  that  of  bismuth. 

8.  Silver  and  antimony.  These  metals  unite 
by  fusion  and  form  a  brittle  alloy,  which 
does  not  seem  possessed  of  any  remarkable 
properties. 

9.  Silver  and  arsenic.  These  two  metals 
unite  according  to  Bergman,  the  fused  silver 
taking   up  ^  of  its  weight  of  arsenic;  the 


230  METAIATC    ALLOYS. 

alloy  corresponds  nearly  to  3  atoms  silver  and 
1  arsenic.  It  is  brittle  and  of  a  yellowish 
colour. 


Alloys  of  Mercury  arid  other  Metals: 
Amalgams. 

The  alloys  of  Mercury  with  the  various 
metals  have  been  commonly  denominated 
amalgams, 

1.  Mercury  and  gold.  Gold  amalgamates 
pretty  easily  with  mercury  and  forms  an 
alloy  much  used  in  gilding  metals.  For  this 
purpose  six  parts  of  mercury  may  be  heated 
nearly  to  the  ebullition  of  the  liquid,  and  one 
part  of  pure  gold  in  thin  plates  may  be  gra- 
dually added.  In  a  few  minutes  the  whole 
becomes  one  fluid  mass  of  a  yellowish  white 
colour.  It  is  constituted  of  1  atom  of  gold 
and  2  of  mercury.  By  squeezing  it  through 
leather  one  half  of  the  mercury  is  separated 
nearly  pure,  and  the  other  remains  com- 
bined with  the  gold,  and  forms  a  soft  white 
mass,  consisting  of  1  part  gold  and  2f  mer- 
cury nearly,  which  is  the  alloy  of  I  atom  to 
1,  and  may  be  subsequently  used  for  gilding. 
A  ready  way  of  making  this  amalgam  I  find 
is  to   put  3  parts  of  gold,  precipitated  by 


AMALGAMS,  231 

green  sulphate  of  iron,  to  8|  or  9  parts  of  mer- 
cury ;  by  a  few  minutes  trituration  the  whole 
becomes  a  fine  crystalline  amalgam. — When 

this  amalgam  of  gold  is  exposed  to  a  heat 
just  below  red,  the  mercury  sublimes  and 
leaves  the  gold ;  hence  its  use  in  gilding. 

2.  Mercury  and  platina.  These  two  me- 
tals may  be  combined,  but  not  very  easily, 
as  little  affinity  seems  to  exist  betwixt  them. 
This  is  manifest  from  the  circumstance  that 
platina  wire  may  be  long  immersed  in  mer- 
cury without  any  sensible  effect.  An  union 
may  be  produced  by  immersing  thin  platina 
foil  into  boiling  mercury  for  some  time ;  also 
by  triturating  the  animonio-muriate  of  pla- 
tina with  mercury  and  exposing  it  to  a  due 
heat.  The  proportions  have  not  been  deter- 
mined. 

3.  Mercury  and  silver.  Silver  and  mer- 
cury have  a  considerable  affinity  and  are 
easily  combined  by  putting  lamina  of  silver 
into  heated  mercury  and  agitating  the  mix- 
ture. When  1  part  silver  and  2  mercury  are 
mixed  as  above,  a  fluid  mass  is  obtained  which 
being  heated  to  the  temperatwre  of  boiling 
mercury,  a  little  mercury  evaporates  and  the 
remainder  crystallizes  into  a  soft  white  mass, 
which  in  time  grows  hard  and  brittle.     A 


232  METALLIC   ALLOYS. 

higher  heat  than  boiling  mercury  expels  the 
mercury.  Hence  this  amalgam  may  be  used 
for  giving  a  thin  coating  of  silver  to  the  sur- 
face of  metals,  like  that  of  gold.  The  com- 
pound is  evidently  one  atom  of  silver  (90) 
with  one  of  mercury  (167). 
«  4.  Mercury  and  copper.  I  have  made  se- 
veral unsuccessful  attempts  to  combine  mer- 
cury and  copper. 

When  a  plate  of  copper  is  kept  immersed 
in  mercury  for  some  time,  the  mercury  ad- 
heres to  its  surface  in  a  small  degree  and  is 
not  easily  rubbed  off;  the  plate  is  rendered 
brittle  by  it  and  the  fracture  has  a  brilliant 
mercurial  appearance;  but  a  low  red  heat 
expels  the  mercury  and  the  copper  resumes 
its  colour  and  tenacity,  with  scarcely  any 
loss  of  weight,  being  only  about  5§  per  cent* 
in  two  or  three  trials. 

Recently  precipitated  copper  in  powder, 
dried  and  triturated  with  mercury,  produced 
no  union.  Neither  did  Dutch-leaf  (which  is 
copper  with  a  very  little  zinc)  unite  with 
mercury  by  trituration.  Mercury  precipita- 
ted from  deutonitrate  by  a  plate  of  copper 
gave  pure  running  liquid.  The  plate  of 
copper  appeared  as  if  it  had  been  immersed 
in  mercury,  was  brittle  with  a  shining  frac- 


AMALGAMS.  233 

ture,  but  recovered  its  colour  and  texture  by 
heat,  and  lost  scarcely  any  weight. 

The  method  recommended  by  Boyle  was 
tried  :  2f  parts  of  crystallized  verdigris,  2 
parts  of  mercury  and  1  of  common  salt,  were 
triturated  together  till  the  mercury  disap- 
peared, the  powder  was  then  digested  awhile 
with  vinegar  over  a  fire  and  frequently  stir- 
red. The  mass  was  then  put  on  a  filter  and 
dried.  It  contained  a  little  fluid  mercury, 
but  was  chiefly  composed  of  acetate  of  cop- 
per and  oxide  or  muriate  of  mercury.  The 
liquid  contained  acetate  of  copper  and  mu- 
riate of  soda. 

From  the  above  it  is  manifest  that  mercury 
has  some  chemical  action  upon  copper  ;  but 
it  has  not  yet  been  found,  I  apprehend,  that 
the  two  metals  unite  so  as  to  form  a  proper 
amalgam. 

5.  Mercury  and  iron.  These  two  metals 
have  little  if  any  affinity  for  each  other.  I 
do  not  know  that  any  chemical  combination 
of  them  has  ever  been  formed. 

6.  Mercury  and  tin.  These  two  metals 
readily  combine,  especially  if  assisted  by 
heat,  I  heated  52  parts  of  tin  and  167  of 
mercury  together,  that  is,  1  atom  of  each^ 
till  they  united  in  a  fluid  mass.  The  amal- 
gam crystallized  in  about  180°.     By  hard 


234  METALLIC    ALLOYS. 

pressure  in  the  hand  nearly  50  parts  of  fluid 
mercury  were  separated  from  the  amalgam 
when  cool,  containing  in  appearance  very 
little  tin.  After  this  an  amalgam  was  formed 
of  104  parts  of  tin  and  167  mercury  (2  atoms 
tin  to  1  mercury);  this  congealed  about  230°, 
and  remained  a  hard,  dry,  crystalline  sub- 
stance, agreeing  in  appearance  with  that 
which  adheres  to  mirrors.  For  the  purpose  of 
silvering  mirrors  however  much  more  mercury 
is  employed  than  is  indicated  by  the  above  pro- 
portion; but  after  the  glass  is  slid  upon  the 
tinfoil  previously  covered  with  mercury,  a 
great  pressure  is  applied,  which  expels  the 
superfluous  mercury  nearly  in  a  state  of 
purity. 

7.  Mercury  and  lead.     To  90  parts  of  lead 

1  put  167  of  mercury  (I  atom  of  each)  ;  they 
united  in  a  moderate  heat  and  crystallized  in 
about  180°.  In  a  few  days  the  mercury 
partly  separated  from  the  amalgam,  and  56 
parts  were  squeezed  out,  the  whole  was  then 
put  together  with  90  parts  more  of  lead  (now 

2  atoms  lead  to  1  mercury),  and  fused  toge- 
ther; the  amalgam  crystallized  in  about 
200°,  and  remained  in  a  solid  uniform  mass. 

8.  Mercury  and  zinc.  When  29  parts  zinc 
and  167  mercury  (1  atom  to  1)  are  heated 
together,  they  combine  and  form  an  amalgam 


AMALGAMS.  235 

which  crystallizes  about  200° .  A  little  of  the 
mercury  may  be  squeezed  out  when  cold.  By 
putting1  29  parts  more  of  zinc  (2  atoms  to  1) 
we  obtain  an  amalgam  which  fuses  consider- 
ably above  200°,  and  when  cooled  becomes 
a  permanent  hard  crystalline  mass. 

9.  Mercury  and  bismuth.  When  62  parts 
bismuth  are  fused  with  167  mercury  (1  atom 
to  1),  the  compound  remains  fluid  at  com- 
mon temperature,  but  crystallizes  partially  by 
standing;  about  4. of  the  weight  may  be  pour- 
ed off  like  fluid  mercury.  If  we  put  62  bis- 
muth more  to  the  whole  (so  as  to  be  2  atoms 
to  1),  the  fluid  amalgam  crystallizes  about  150 
or  180°  :  the  mass  is  soft  however  and  by  pres- 
sure one  may  squeeze  out  about  20  per  cent, 
of  a  fluid  amalgam.  If  we  put  62  more  bis- 
muth (so  as  to  be  3  atoms  to  1),  then  the  com- 
pound crystallizes  between  200  and  300°  into 
a  darkish  coloured  granular  soft  mass  which 
continues  without  any  change.  Higher  than 
this  of  bismuth  I  have  not  examined, 

10.  Mercury  and  antimony.  Antimony  is 
said  to  form  a  feeble  union  with  mercury, 
which  is  soon  loosened  by  time.  I  made  se- 
veral unsuccessful  trials  to  combine  these  two 
metals,  which  it  seems  unnecessary  to  detail, 
as  the  compound  when  formed  is  no  ways 
interesting. 


236  METALLIC    ALLOYS. 

11.  Mercury  and  arsenic.  On  the  autho- 
rity of  Lewis  an  amalgam  of  mercury  and 
arsenic  may  be  made  by  keeping  them  over 
the  fire  for  some  time  and  constantly  agitat- 
ing the  mixture.  It  is  grey-coloured,  and 
composed  of  5  parts  of  mercury  and  1  of 
arsenic. 

Most  of  the  other  metals  are  incapable, 
as  far  as  is  known,  of  combination  with  mer- 
cury, excepting  potassium  and  sodium  con- 
sidered as  metals,  which  combine  with  mer- 
cury ;  but  these  alloys  are  of  little  interest, 
and  the  proportions  have  not  been  particu- 
larly investigated. 


Triple,  quadruple,  fyc.  Amalgams. 

Besides  those  amalgams  which  are  formed 
of  mercury  and  each  single  metal,  there  are 
others  formed  of  mercury  and  alloys  of  two 
or  more  metals,  which  in  some  instances  pos- 
sess properties  differing  essentially  from  mere 
mixtures. 

1.  Mercury  with  bismuth  and  lead.  When 
the  amalgam  formed  of  2  atoms  bismuth  and 
1  of  mercury  is  mixed  with  that  formed  by 
1   atom  of  lead  and  1  of  mercury,  in  such 


AMALGAMS.  237 

proportion  that  the  mercury  is  the  same  in 
both,  the  two  powders,  though  dry  and  crys- 
talline at  first,  soon  become  a  permanently 
fluid  amalgam  by  trituration.  The  liquid  in 
running  along  drays  a  tail  after  it,  and  is 
disposed  to  separate  into  portions  less  and 
more  fluid,  but  the  most  fluid  part  is  much 
inferior  to  pure  mercury  in  this  respect. 
Specific  gravity  of  the  amalgam,  11. 

2.  Mercury  with  fusible  metal  composed  of 

1  bismuth,  5  lead  and  3  tin.  A  mixture 
of  4  parts  fusible  metal  with  5  parts  mercury 
compose  the  most  fusible  amalgam  with  a 
minimum  of  mercury  that  I  have  found.  It  is 
formed  of  2  atoms  bismuth,  1  lead,  1  tin  and 

2  mercury.     Its  specific  gravity  is  12. 

3.  Mercury*  zinc  and  tin.  This  amalgam  is 
found  the  most  effectual  for  the  excitation  of 
electric  machines.  Mr.  Cuthbertson  recom- 
mends 1  part  zinc,  1  tin  and  2  of  mercury 
for  the  plate  machine  amalgam.  But  for  a 
cylinder  the  best  amalgam  I  have  made  con- 
tains more  than  twice  the  above  portion  of 
mercury.  I  form  an  alloy  of  58  parts  zinc 
and  52  tin,  (2  atoms  to  1).  To  this  alloy  I 
add  250  mercury,  and  fuse  the  mixture; 
the  liquid  mass  crystallizes  about  222°  into  a 
white,  moderately  hard  amalgam.  This  is 
pulverized  in  a  mortar  and  mixed  up  with  T*T 


238  METALLIC   ALLOYS. 

of  its  weight  of  hog's  lard.  A  jsmall  portion 
then  is  spread  upon  a  piece  of  leather  and 
applied  to  the  machine  when  in  action.  It 
is  probable  however  that  a  harder  and  less 
unctuous  amalgam  may  be  better  adapted  to 
the  plate  machine.  This  amalgam  of  mine 
consists  of  4  atoms  of  zinc,  2  of  tin  and  3  of 
mercury. 

I  have  tried  the  amalgams  of  zinc  and  tin 
separately  and  find  that  they  answer  for  elec- 
tric excitation  as  well  as  when  combined. 
They  ought  to  be  formed  of  2  atoms  zinc 
and  1  of  mercury  (58  parts  to  167),  and  of 
2  atoms  tin  and  1  of  mercury  (104  parts  to 
167).  If  we  choose  to  combine  them,  we 
have  only  to  take  2  parts  of  the  zinc 
amalgam  and  1  of  the  tin  amalgam  and  tri- 
turate them  together. 

Bismuth  amalgam  is  not  good  for  electric 
excitation;  lead  amalgam  is  better;  but 
they  are  much  inferior  to  those  of  tin  and 
zinc. 

Alloys  of  Copper  with  other  Metals. 

1.  Copper  and  iron.  These  two  metals  may 
be  united  with  difficulty  by  heat;  but  the 
compound  possesses  no  useful  property. 

2.  Copper   and    nickel.     A   white,    hard, 


COPPER   AND    TIN.  239 

brittle  alloy  is  said  to  be  formed  by  combining 
these  two  metals.  The  alloy  is  scarcely 
known. 

3.  Copper  and  tin.  The  metals  of  cop- 
per and  tin,  may  be  fused  together  and  united 
in  almost  any  proportion  by  skilful  treat- 
ment ;  but  it  is  found  that  only  a  few  of  the 
proportions  constitute  alloys  possessing  pro- 
perties eminently  valuable  to  the  arts, 

The  alloys  of  copper  and  tin  are  commonly 
called  bell-metal;  but  they  receive  more  par- 
ticular names  according  to  the  purposes  for 
for  which  they  are  destined,  as  bronze,  spe- 
culum-metal, gun-metal,  &c.  those  of  them 
which  are  yellow  are  frequently  confounded  in 
common  language  with  brass,  as  brass-guns, 
&c.  Indeed  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Romans 
seem  to  have  been  in  possession  of  these  two 
alloys,  under  one  and  the  same  name.  The 
x*kkos  of  the  Greeks,  being  used  for  cutting- 
instruments,  must  have  signified  bell-metal, 
or  the  alloy  of  copper  and  tin  as  well  as  brass, 
as  indeed  is  proved  by  the  analysis  of  them. 
The  ces  of  the  Romans  seems  also  to  have 
included  the  same  compound.  Ancient  cop- 
per coins  too  are  usually  found  to  contain 
tin. 

Tin  united  to  copper  in  certain  proportions 
gives  a  surprising  degree  of  hardness  and  ten- 


240  METALLIC   ALLOYS. 

acity  to  the  alloy,  much  superior  in  these  res- 
pects to  either  of  the  ingredients.  In  other 
proportions  it  makes  the  compound  highly  so- 
norous, as  in  bell-metal  properly  so  called.  Tin 
also  increases  the  fusibility  of  the  compound 
in  proportion  as  it  abounds,  being  itself 
fusible  at  the  low  temperature  of  440° 
Fahrenheit. 

The  principal  varieties  in  the  alloys  of 
copper  and  tin  are  enumerated  below,  be- 
ginning with  those  in  which  the  copper  is 
most  abundant.  The  atom  of  copper  is  taken 
at  56  and  that  of  tin  at  52  weight,  the  hard- 
ness of  these  metals  is  denoted  by  7.5  and  6 
respectively,  by  Kirwan, 

(a).  Gun-metal.  The  alloy  for  brass  guns 
or  cannon  is  made  of  100  parts  of  copper  and 
11  or  12  of  tin.  A  small  portion  of  iron  is 
found  to  improve  the  metal ;  this  is  best  add- 
ed in  the  state  of  tin-plate,  as  it  more  readily 
fuses  and  unites  with  the  metal.*  This  com- 
pound is  hard  and  extremely  tenacious,  ex- 
ceeding in  this  respect  any  other  alloy  of  the 
two  metals.     The  addition  or  subtraction,  of 


*  See  a  very  excellent  essay  on  the  alloy  of  copper  and 
tin  by  M.  Dussaussoy,  in  the  Anhales  de  Chimie  &  Phy- 
sique. 5—113. 


COPPER   AND    TIN,  241 

1  or  2  parts  of  tin  materially  impairs  the 
tenacity  of  the  alloy.  It  is  constituted  of 
8  atoms  of  copper  and  1  of  tin. 

(b)%  Alloy  for  edge   tools,  printers*    cylin- 
ders, fyc.     The  best  proportion  for  this  com- 
pound seems  to  be  100  parts  copper  and  15 
or  16  tin.     When   hammered  and  tempered 
duly  it  is  fit  for  making*  edge  tools  not  infe- 
rior to  some  kinds  of  steel.     It  is  a  compound 
of     greater    density     than    the     preceding, 
though    containing  more  tin ;    the   grain    is 
fine  and  the  metal  free  from  blisters  and  suited 
for  turning  in  the  lathe.     It  seems  to  he  the 
best  alloy  of  the  kind  for  printers*  cylinders; 
but  an  analysis  which  I  lately  made  of    ome 
turnings  from  one  of  these  cylinders  gave  me 
much    less   tin    than    the    above    proportion. 
The  alloy  (b)  is  constituted  of  6  atoms  of  cop- 
per and  1  of  tin 

(c).  Alloy  for  the  Chinese  gong,  cymbals,  $c. 
An  alloy  formed  of  100  parts  copper  and  23 
tin,  appears  from  Dussaussoy's  experiments 
to  form  the  compound  of  minimum  density. 
It  is  used  for  making  cymbals;  and  nearly 
accords  with  the  composition  of  the  Chinese 
gong.  It  is  formed  of  4  atoms  of  copper 
and  1  of  tin.  The  Chinese  gong  analysed 
by  Klaproth  was  composed  of  100  copper  and 
VOX,.  II.  H  k 


242  METALLIC   ALLOYS. 

28.2  tin  ;  that  by  Dr.  Thomson  of  100  copper 
and  23.4  tin. 

(d).  Common  bell-metal  used/or  casting  bells. 
This  alloy  is  commonly  made  of  3  parts  cop- 
per and  1  of  tin ;  but  to  be  in  due  proportion 
for  3  atoms  of  copper  and  1  of  tin,  it  should 
be  formed  of  100  copper  and  31  tin.  It  is 
hard,  of  a  white  colour,  less  malleable  than 
the  preceding  alloys,  and  more  sonorous* 
A  specimen  I  analysed  consisted  of  100  cop- 
per and  36  tin.  The  exact  proportion  of 
100  copper  and  31  tin  is  not  essential  to 
produce  a  sonorous  alloy. 

(e).  Speculum  metal.  This  compound  has 
been  investigated  with  great  care  by  opti- 
cians. According  to  Mr.  Mudge  the  best 
proportion  is  32  parts  copper  to  14.5  tin,  but 
Mr.  Edwards  finds  15  parts  tin,  1  brass,  1 
silver  and  I  arsenic.  The  slightest  variation 
in  the  proportions  of  copper  and  tin  impairs 
the  metal.  The  alloy  is  white,  hard  and 
close  grained ;  it  takes  a  beautiful  polish. 
The  use  of  the  minute  portions  of  zinc,  sil- 
ver and  arsenic  is  perhaps  to  correct  the  co- 
lour of  the  alloy  ;  though  it  seems  in  several 
alloys  that  very  minute  portions  of  metals 
apparently  foreign  to  the  alloy,  improve  the 
density  and  texture  of  the  metal.  It  is  re- 
k  markable    with    what    precision   this  alloy 


COPPER   AND    TIN.  243 

accords  with  the  atomic  combinations  of  2 
copper  with  1  tin.  By  calculation  32  copper 
would  require  14.8  tin.  Mr.  Mudge  finds 
32  copper  to  14|  tin,  and  observes  that  ;f  f 
a  part  more  of  tin  be  added  the  metal  is  too 
hard.  Mr.  Edwards  indeed  says  32  copper 
and  15  tin ;  but  then  he  adds  1  part  brass, 
which  containing  f  of  a  part  of  copper,  it 
reduces  his  proportion  to  32  copper  and 
14.7  tin,  almost  exactly  that  required  by  the 
theory.  When  32  copper  and  13|  tin  are 
combined,  Mr.  Mudge  asserts  the  metal  is 
too  soft.* 

(f).  Copper  and  tin,  equal  parts.  This 
alloy  is  of  blueish  white  colour,  and  of  no 
particular  use  that  I  am  acquainted  with. 
It  consists  of  the  union  of  1  atom  of  copper 
with  1  of  tin. 

The  other  alloys  of  copper  with  a  higher 
proportion  of  tin  appear  to  be  unintere  ting, 
and  have  not  been  objects  of  much  attention. 


Not  having  an  opportunity  of  forming  these 
alloys  synthetically,  I  contented  myself  with 
the  analysis  of  several  of  them. 

*  This  author  obtained  the  Royal  Society's  gold  medal 
for  his  essay  on  the  composition,  &c.  of  specula  for  tele* 
scopes.     Philos.  Transact  1787. 


244  METAXX.IC    AIXOYS. 

The  mode  of,  anialysis  I  adopted, with  com- 
pounds  of  copper  and  tin,  is  simple  and  easy. 
The  alloy  is  treated  with  nitric  acid,  which 
dissolves  the  copper,  and .  on  being  dilute4 , 

with  water  throws  down  tjie  tin  in  the  state 

,    ■■    .-  » <  • 

of  deutoxide.  This  last  is  collected  on  a  filtre, 
dried,  and  heated  to  a  1owa  red ;  then  44  of 
this  is  allowed  for  the  tin  (the  other  7  parts 
being  oxygen ) ;  and  the  rest  of  the  alloy  may 
be  considered  as  copper.  But  i(  thought 
proper  the  copper  may  ber  thrown  down  by 
immersing1  a  plate  of  lead  in  the  solution, 
which  succeeds  better  than  a  plate  of  iron  in 
nitric  solutions  of  copper. 

4.  Copper  and  lead.  Copper  s  unites  with, 
boiling  lead  and  forms  a  grey  brittle  ,  alloy 
of  granular  texture.  This  alloy  being  heated 
above  the  melting  point  of  lead,  causes  the 
last  metal  to  run  off,  leaving  the  copper 
nearly  pure.  The  alloy  is  scarcely  of  any 
use. 

5.  Copper  and  zinc.  Copper  and  zinc 
combined  form  brass,  one  of  the  most  use- 
ful of  all  alloys.  Though  this  is  a  general 
name  for  such  combinations,  yet  several  of 
the  proportions  form  compounds  to  which 
peculiar  names  are  given,  some  of  which  will 
be  noticed  below. 

It  may  be  proper  to  remark  that  copper  is 


BRASS.  245 

estimated  by  Mr.  Kirwan  at  7|°  in  hardness, 
whilst  zinc  is  6f .  The  former  metal  is  highly 
tenacious  and  malleable;  the  latter  is  brittle 
and  malleable  only  in  a  small  degree.  Ac- 
cording to  Lewis^  a  very  small  proportion  of 
zinc  dilutes  the  colour  of  copper  and  renders 
it  pale  ;  when  the  copper  has  imbibed  TV  $C 
its  weight,  the  colour  inclines  to  yellow.. 
The  yellowness  increases  with  the  zinc  till 
the  weight  of  that  metal  in  the  alloy  equals 
the  copper.  Beyond  this  point  if  the  zinc 
be  increased  the  alloy  becomes  paler  and 
paler  and  at  last  white,  like  zinc. 

The  tenacity  of  brass  is  greater  than  that 
of  either  copper  or  zinc  according  to  Mus- 
chenbroek.  His  experiments  give  brass 
nearly  twice  as  strong  as  copper,  and  18  times 
as  strong  as  zinc.  It  seems  to  me  most  pro- 
bable that  the  tenacity  of  brass  increases 
with  the  increase  of  zinc  in  the  alloy  to  a  cer- 
tain proportion,  when  it  becomes  a  maximum, 
and  thence  diminishes  with  the  further  in- 
crease of  zinc,  but  experiments  are  yet  want- 
ing, I  presume,  to  ascertain  what  proportion 
of  the  two  metals  must  be  taken  to  form  the 
alloy  of  greatest  tenacity.  The  same  obser- 
vation may  be  made  as  to  the  maximum  hard- 
ness ;  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  two  maxi- 
ma may  be  found  in  different  kinds  of  brass. 


246  METALLIC   ALLOYS. 

The  point  of  temperature  at  which  copper 
fuses  is  stated  to  be  27°  of  Wedgwood's 
thermometer,  whilst  that  of  zinc  is  much 
lower,  namely,  680°  of  Fahrenheit.  Com- 
mon brass  is  stated  to  melt  at  21°  of  Wedg- 
wood. It  is  very  probable  that  all  kinds  of 
brass  melt  at  temperatures  intermediate  be- 
tween those  of  copper  and  zinc;  and  that  the 
more  of  zinc  the  lower  will  be  the  fusing 
temperature ;  but  there  have  not  been  direct 
experiments  to  ascertain  the  degrees,  as  far 
as  I  know. 

In  enumerating  the  different  proportions 
of  such  alloys  as  have  come  under  my  notice 
I  shall  begin  with  that  containing  the  maxi- 
mum of  copper,  and  proceed  in  gradation  to 
that  with  the  maximum  of  zinc. 

(a).  Brass  for  the  manufacture  of  plated 
goods.  This  alloy  is  composed,  judging  from 
one  specimen  I  analysed,  of  12  atoms  of  cop- 
per and  1  of  zinc ;  or  of  nearly  23  parts  of 
copper  by  weight  and  1  of  zinc.  The  atom 
of  copper  is  here  estimated  at  56  and  that  of 
zinc  at  29,  or  very  nearly  \  that  of  copper* 
This  alloy  had  much  the  same  qualities  ap- 
parently as  copper  itself,  only  a  little  more 
yellow. 

(b).  Dutch  gold,  gilding  metal.  This  is  the 
alloy   which  may    be   beaten  out  into   thin 


BRASS.  247 

leaves,  after  the  manner  of  gold-leaf.  I  have 
not  been  able  to  find  any  proportions  for  this 
compound  in  books.  It  seems  to  have  been 
kept  as  a  secret  by  the  manufacturers.  By 
analysis  however  I  find  it  composed  of  6  atoms 
of  copper  and  1  of  zinc,  or  nearly  12  parts 
copper  and  1  zinc  by  weight.  This  alloy  is 
probably  the  most  malleable  of  all  the  kinds  of 
brass.  A  leaf  containing  12  square  inches 
weighs  about  ^  of  a  grain.  The  colour,  as 
is  well  known,  makes  a  good  approach  to 
that  of  gold.  It  is  the  composition  used  for 
making  articles  to  be  gilt,  as  buttons,  &c. 

(c).  Dipping  metal  for  stamped  brass  goods. 
This  is  a  well  known  article  of  Birming- 
ham manufacture.  It  is  an  alloy  both  tena- 
cious and  malleable,  as  is  manifest  from  the 
perfection  of  the  articles.  It  possesses  a 
beautiful  gold  colour.  A  specimen  was  com- 
posed, by  my  analysis,  of  4  atoms  of  copper 
to  1  of  zinc;  or  of  8  lbs.  of  copper  and  1 
of  zinc;  or  of  4  lbs.  copper  and  3  of  com- 
mon brass  ;  but  it  is  varied  according  to  the 
colour  wanted. 

(d).  Soft,  fine  coloured  brass.  According 
to  M,  Sage,  a  very  fine  kind  of  brass  may 
be  made  by  mixing  oxide  of  copper,  cala- 
mine, black-flux  and  charcoal  powder  toge- 
gether,  and  fusing  the  mixture  in  a  crucible 


248  METALLIC    ALLOYS. 

till  the  blue  flame  disappears.  The  brass  h 
found  to  weigh  4  more  than  the  copper  result- 
ing from  the  weight  of  oxide.  He  says  when 
the  copper  retains  f  of  zinc  the  colour  is  not 
so  fine;  and  the  excess  of  zinc  will  be  burn- 
ed off  by  heat,  but  the  zinc  cannot  be  reduced 
by  burning  below  ^-;  so  that  this  appears  to 
be  a  natural  limit.  Hence  this  compound, 
being  formed  of  6  parts  copper  atod  1  of  zinc, 
must  be  constituted  of  3  atoms  of  copper  and 
1  of  zinc, 

(e).  Soft  brass  preferred  for  watch  move- 
ments. There  is  a  kind  of  brass  greatly  pre- 
ferred by  watch-makers  On  account  of  its 
working  well  with  steel.  I  have  not  met 
with  a  specimen ;  but  Dr.  Thomson  has  ana- 
lysed one  and  found  it  to  consist  of  2  atoms 
of  copper  and  1  of  zinc;*  or  4  parts  cop- 
per and  I  of  zinc  by  weight  nearly. 

(f).  Common  hard  brass.  This  constitutes 
the  great  bulk  of  brass,  as  manufactured  ift 
the  large  way.  It  is  made  by  exposing  gra- 
nulated copper,  calamine,  that  is,  a  natite  oxide 
of  zinc,  and  powdered  charcoal  itt  mixture  to 
a  red  heat  for  some  hours,  and  then  increasing 
the  heat  so  as  to  melt  the  compound  of  cop- 


*  An.  of  Mos.     Vol  tttt 


BRASS.  249 

per  and  zinc,  the  charcoal  having  carried 
away  the  oxygen  of  the  calamine.  The  me- 
tal is  then  cast  into  ingots  or  plates  as  may 
be  required.  This  is  called  brass  of  ce- 
mentation as  distinguished  from  the  other 
species,  which  are  usually  made  from  this  by 
fusion  with  copper  or  zinc  as  the  case 
requires. 

It  is  found  that  401  bs.  of  copper  with  60lbs. 
of  calamine  yield  60  lbs.  of  brass;  hence 
a  great  part  of  the  zinc  burns  away  during 
the  process.  The  brass  thus  resulting,  con- 
sisting of  2  parts  of  copper  and  1  of  zinc, 
is  of  course  constituted  of  1  atom  of  each 
metal  united  together. 

Common  brass  is  malleable,  when  cold, 
like  the  preceding  species ;  but  probably 
does  not  possess  that  property  in  so  high  a 
degree.  It  seems  better  adapted  for  turning 
in  the  lathe  than  any  other  kind  of  brass. 
The  specific  gravity  of  this  brass  before  it  is 
hammered  or  rolled  is  generally  about  8.1 
or  8.2  by  my  experience.  When  rolled  it 
receives  a  great  increase  of  density,  amounting 
to  ,5  according  to  M.  Pussaussoy*,  so  that 
what  is  8.2  when  cast  will  be  8.7  when  rol- 


*  An.  de  Chim.  &  Physique.  5—233. 
Voii.  II.  I  i 


250  METALLIC   ALLOYS. 

led ;  or  it  is  condensed  nearly  ^  of  its  volume 
by  the  operation  of  rolling.  The  same  an* 
thor  finds  that  brass  is  hardened  very  consi- 
derably by  rolling,  but  rendered  less  tena- 
cious ;  however  by  being1  heated  and  con- 
sequently softened  after  rolling,  it  becomes 
stronger  than  ever,  and  nearly  of  an  interme- 
diate specific  gravity  between  cast  and  rol- 
led brass. 

{g).  Prince's  metal,  pinchbeck,  &c.  This 
compound,  as  far  as  1  can  learn,  is  usually 
formed  by  combining  equal  weights  of  cop- 
per and  zinc,  or  by  fusing  together  3  parts 
of  common  brass  with  1  of  zinc.  According 
to  Lewis  the  yellow  colour  of  brass  is  a  maxi- 
mum in  this  proportion.  The  alloy  is  brit- 
tle, or  at  least  much  less  malleable  than  com- 
mon brass.  I  find  tbe  composition  of  spelter 
solder,  as  it  is  called,  or  that  used  for  solder- 
ing both  brass  and  copper,  to  be  nearly  equal 
parts  of  copper  and  zinc.  Hence  it  appears 
that  1  atom  of  copper  unites  to  2  of  zinc  to 
form  this  alloy. 


The  other  alloys  of  copper  and  zinc  in 
which  the  zinc  gradually  exceeds  the  copper, 
become  gradually  paler  in  colour  and  more 


prince's  metal,  pinchbeck,  &c.  251 

brittle.  They  do  not  promise  to  be  of  much 
utility  in  the  arts,  and  have  not  therefore 
been  very  particularly  investigated  by  me- 
tallurgists. 

Besides  the  binary  combinations  of  cop- 
per and  zinc  and  copper  and  tin,  there  are 
ternary  combinations  of  these  metals,  namely, 
alloys  of  copper,  zinc  and  tin.  For  instance, 
the  metal  of  which  common  white  buttons 
are  made.  I  had  occasion  to  analyse  a  spe- 
cimen of  this  metal  and  found  it  to  be  con- 
stituted of  4  parts  copper,  1  of  zinc  and  1  of 
tin ;  or  4  atoms  of  copper,  2  of  zinc  and  1 
of  tin. 


It  will  be  proper  to  subjoin  the  methods 
of  analysis  which  I  adopted  in  regard  to 
brass.  Twenty  grains,  more  or  less,  of  the 
particular  articles  were  dissolved  in  nitric 
acid,  and  the  metals  were  precipitated  in  the 
state  of  sulphurets  by  hydrosulphnret  of 
lime.  The  copper  is  thrown  down  in  the 
state  of  a  black  powder,  and  the  zinc  in  that 
of  a  white  powder  turning  to  grey.  Great 
care  was  taken  to  add  tlie  precipitating  liquor 
gradually  in  order  that  the  copper  might  be 
obtained  distinctly  from  the  zinc.    The  whole 


252  METAIXIC    ALLOYS, 

of  the  copper  is  thus  thrown  down  before 
any  of  the  zinc  precipita>t&  appears.  The 
precipitates  were  collected  and  dried  in  a 
temperature  not  exceeding  150°,  and  then 
weighed.  In  both  cases  one  third  of  the 
weight  was  allowed  for  sulphur,  and  the  re- 
maining two  thirds  were  estimated  to  be  me- 
tal ;  which  is  agreeable  to  the  known  con- 
stitutions of  these  sulphurets.  Another  me- 
thod I  sometimes  practised,  which  also  answers 
very  well;  namely,  to  throw  down  the  whole 
or  greatest  part  of  the  copper  by  a  plate  of 
]e,ad#  tfyen  to,  thrc-w dqwn  #ie  lead  by  sulphu- 
ric acid  \  after  this  the  liquor  was  tested  by 
hydrosulphuret  of  lime  to  precipitate  the 
copper  remaining,  if  any ;  and  lastly  to  throw 
down  the  zinc  by  hydrosulphuret  of  lime. 

.  $.  Copper  and  bisyiuth.    TJie  alloy,  is  J^rit- 
vjtle.  and  of  a  pqle  colour,.  It  is  not, much 

known. 

j  j  7,.     Copper   with   antimony.     Copper  and 

antimony  unite  by  fusion  and  forni  a  violet 
.coloured,  brittle  alloy. 
......  8.  .Copper,  and  arsenic.     These  m^e^al s  unite 

Jby  fusion  in  a  clpse  crucible,  the  surface  of 

the  mixture  being  covered  with  common  salt 

to   prevent   the   oxidizement  of  the.  arsenic. 

The  alloy  is  white, .and  bri^e,  and  is  known 

'  i-  It      -J    '.  ,t  ■     •       .         r    ■  I        'I.I    ;.:     !   I*    '  \$i 


IRON   WITH   TIN.  253 

by  the    names   of  white  copper,  and    white 
tombac.  <        , 

9.  Copper  and  manganese.     These  may  be 
united  by  fusion,  and  form  a  red  coloured 
malleable  alloy,  according  to  Bergman. 

1 0.  Copper  and  molybdenum .  These  metals 
may  be  alloyed  in  various  proportions,  but  the 
compounds  exhibit  nothing  peculiarly  re- 
markable* 


Alloys  of  Iron  with  other  Metals. 

1.  Iron  with  tin.  These  two  metals  are 
alloyed  with  some  difficulty  by  fusion  in  a 
close  crucible.  The  difficulty  seems  to  arise 
frQm  the  very  unequal  temperatures  at  which 
the  metals  individually  fuse.  Bergman  al- 
ways found  two  alloys  when  the  metals  were 
fused  together ;  the  one  composed  of  21  parts 
tin  and  I  qf  iron,  that  is>  10  atoms  of  tin  to 
1  of  iron ;  and  the  other  of  2  parts  iron,  and 
1  of  tin  1  that  is,  4  atoms  of  iron  and  1  of 
tin.  The  first  was  very  malleable,  harder 
than  tin  and  not  so  brilliant ;  the  second  but 
moderately  malleable  and  too  hard  to  yield 
to  the  knife.  * 

The  formation  of   common  tin-plate,  is  a 


254  METALLIC    ALLOYS. 

proof  of  the  affinity  of  tin  and  iron.  Thin 
plates  of  iron,  thoroughly  cleaned,  are  dip- 
ped into  melted  tin,  when  the  tin  adheres  to 
the  surface  of  the  iron,  forming  with  that  me- 
tal a  true  chemical  union. 

2.  Iron  and  lead,  &c.  Iron  combines  by 
fusion  more  or  less  perfectly  with  lead,  zinc, 
bismuth,  antimony,  arsenic,  cobalt,  manga- 
nese, &c.  but  the  proportions  have  in  few 
instances  been  ascertained,  and  the  com- 
pounds are  generally  of  little  importance. 


Alloys  of  Nickel  and  other  Metals, 

Nickel  and  arsenic.  As  nickel  and  arsenic 
are  naturally  found  in  combination,  though 
mostly  along  with  small  quantities  of  other 
bodies,  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  an* affinity 
subsists  between  them ;  but  I  do  not  know 
that  the  proportions  have  been  ascertained 
inr  which  they  unite,  or  the  nature  of  the 
alloys. 

Alloys  of  Tin  with  other  Metals. 

I.  Tin  with  lead.  Tin  and  lead  unite  by 
fusion  in  any  proportion.  This  alloy,  accord- 
ing to  Muschenbroek,  is  harder  and  much 


PEWTER. 


255 


more  tenacious  than  either  tin  or  lead,  espe- 
cially when  3  parts  tin  and  1  lead  are  its  con- 
stituents, 

I  fused  various  proportions  of  tin  and  lead 
together,  as  per  the  following  table,  in  order 
to  find  some  of  the  more  prominent  charac- 
teristics of  the  several  alloys.  The  specific 
gravity  of  the  tin  was  7.2,  that  of  the  lead 
was  11.23;  and  the  portions  taken  were  such 
as  to  combine,  1,2,  or  more  atoms  of  tin  with 
1  of  lead.  The  several  metals  were  melted 
and  the  compounds  formed  under  a  few  drops 
of  tallow,  otherwise  the  oxidation  is  so  rapid 
that  the  proportions  are  disturbed  and  the 
quantity  of  pure  alloy  is  not  equal  to  the 
weight  of  the  ingredients.  Without  this 
precaution  it  is  no  uncommon  occurrence  in 
small  experiments  to  obtain  only  3  parts  of 
fusible  alloy  from  4  of  metal. 


Atoms. 
Tin.    Lead. 

i  +  i 

2  + 

3  + 

4  + 

5  + 

6  + 


Weights 

Sp.  Gr.  by 

Sp  Grby 

calculation. 

experim. 

Tin.    Lead. 

.584-1 

9.32 

9.17 

1.16+1 

8.64 

8.79 

1.73+1 

8.25 

8.49 

2.  3+1 

8.00 

8.10 

2.  9+1 

7.93 

8.00 

3.47+1 

7.81 

7.90 

Fusing 
Point. 

430* 

350 

340 

345 

350 

360 


From  the  above  table  it  appears  that  when 
1  atom  of  tin  is  united  to  1  of  lead  there  is 
an  expansion  of  volume ;  but  when  more  than 


256  METALLIC    ALLOYS. 

1  of  tin  are  combined  to  1  of  lead  there  is  a 
contraction  of  volume,  or  the  density  is  above 
that  by  calculation.  This  increase  of  den- 
sity is  greatest  when  3  atoms  of  tin  are  com- 
bined with  1  of  lead  ;  and  it  is  not  improbable 
the  tenacity  may  then  be  a  maximum ;  though 
Muschenbroek  finds  it  more  tenacious  when 
3  parts  tin  are  united  to  1  of  lead,  which  an- 
swers more  nearly  to  4  atoms  tin  and  1  of 
lead ;  this  opinion  is  countenanced  by  the  fact 
that  tin  is  much  the  most  tenacious  of  the  two 
metals  taken  singly. 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  fusing  point  of 
these  alloys  is  below  those  of  either  tin  or  lead. 
The  lowest  of  all  (340°)  is  when  3  atoms  of 
tin  are  alloyed  with  1  of  lead. 

Common  pewter,  1  find,  is  &n  allby  of  4 
atoms  of  tin  and  1  of  lead  nearly,  and  fuses 
about  345  or  350°.  This  is  perhaps  the  best 
proportion;  it  is  hard,  tenacious  and  of  a  good 
colour.  More  of  lead  would  impair  the 
colour,  and  more  of  tin  would  impair  the 
tenacity  and  increase  the  expence,  though  it 
might  improve  the  colour. 

Certain  articles  for  family  use,  such  as  tea- 
pots, spoons,  &c.  are  made  of  white  metal, 
which  commonly,  though  I  apprehend  im- 
properly, goes  by  the  name  of  tutenag.  This 
metal  in  colour  approaches  more  to  silver  than 


TIN  AND  ANTIMONY.  257 

pewter  does.     A   spoon  of   this  description 
I  found  to  be  pure  tin, 

2.  Tin  and  zinc.  This  alloy  is  easily  made 
by  fusion.  The  metals  seem  to  unite  in  any 
proportion.  I  melted  together  29  parts  zinc 
and  52  tin  (1  atom  of  each),  and  obtained  a 
white  hard  alloy  of  about  6.8  specific  gravity. 
When  2  atoms  tin  and  1  zinc  are  united  the 
specific  gravity  is  6.77,  which  is  below  the 
mean.  The  alloy  appears  to  be  very  hard 
and  tenacious;  and  probably  might  be  put  to 
some  use. 

3.  Tin  and  bismuth.  These  metals  readily 
combine  by  fusion  in  any  proportion.  When 
52  parts  tin  and  62  bismuth  are  fused  toge- 
ther (1  atom  to  1),  a  fine,  smooth,  bard  but 
brittle  alloy  is  obtained  of  the  specific  gravity 
8.42.  It  fuses  at  260°.  Two  atoms  tin  and 
1  bismuth  give  an  alloy  of  8  specific  gravity, 
which  fuses  about  320°.  The  alloy  of  1 
atom  tin  and  2  of  bismuth  is  of  8.67  specific 
gravity,  and  fuses  about  260°.  The  alloy  of 
3  atoms  tin  and  1  bismuth  is  of  7.73  specific 
gravity,  and  fuses  at  350°.  The  alloy  of  1 
atom  tin  and  3  bismuth  is  of  specific  gravity 
9,14,  and  fuses  at  330° 

4.  Tin  with  antimony.  This  compound  is 
said  to  be  white  and  brittle  when  formed  of 

VOL.  II.  k  k 


258  METALLIC    ALLOYS. 

equal  parts.     I  did  not  succeed  in  uniting  the 
two  metals  by  fusion  on  a  small  scale. 

5.  Tin  with  arsenic*  When  15  parts  of 
tin  and  1  of  arsenic  are  fused  together  the 
alloy  crystallizes  in  large  plates  like  bismuth, 
according  to  Bayen.  It  is  brittle  and  less 
fusible  than  tin.  This  alloy  must  be  com- 
posed of  5  atoms  of  tin  and  1  of  arsenic,  that 
is,  312  tin  and  21  arsenic. 


Alloys  of  Lead  with  other  Metals. 

1.  Lead  and  zinc.  These  two  metals  seem 
to  have  a  weak  affinity.  They  are  easily 
united,  or  rather  mixed,  in  any  proportion 
by  fusion  under  a  little  tallow.  But  however 
they  may  be  mixed  there  is  a  strong  tendency 
to  separate  again,  which  no  doubt  is  occa- 
sioned in  part  by  their  great  difference  in 
specific  gravity. 

I  have  fused  lead  and  zinc  together  in  va- 
rious proportions,  from  6  parts  ledd  to  1  of 
zinc,  to  1  part  lead  to  2  of  zinc.  The  com- 
pound usually  gives  a  specific  gravity  rather 
greater  than  the  mean ;  but  upon  being  bro- 
ken the  fracture  is  often  like  that  of  zinc  in 
one  part  and  not  so  in  another ;  and  the  ana- 


UEAD   AND   BISMUTH.  25& 

lysis  of  fragments  proves  that  a  great  differ- 
ence exists  in  their  composition.  Subsequent 
fusion  sometimes  improves  the  combination 
and  at  other  times  the  contrary.  Six  parts 
lead  and  1  of  tin  gave  a  compound  as  nearly 
uniform  as  any.  It  was  1 1  specific  gravity, 
harder  and  whiter  than  lead  and  had  much 
the  appearance  of  pewter,  that  is,  the  alloy 
of  tin  and  lead. 

2.  Lead  and  bismuth.  These  metals  alloy 
well.  Three  parts  lead  and  2  of  bismuth 
unite  by  fusion  and  form  a  tenacious  alloy 
which  fuses  about  340°.  Muschenbroek 
found  it  ten  times  stronger  than  lead.  It 
grows  dark  coloured  soon  by  keeping.  Its 
specific  gravity  by  my  observation  is  10.85, 
which  is  rather  greater  than  the  mean.  It  is 
constituted  of  1  atom  of  each  metal,  or  62 
bismuth  to  90  lead. 

Three  parts  lead  and  4  bismuth  (1  atom 
lead  to  2  bismuth)  fuses  at  250°.  This  is 
the  lowest  temperature  at  which  any  alloy 
of  two  metals  fuses.  With  a  little  tin  it 
makes  the  triple  alloy  which  fuses  lower  than 
any  other  metallic  compound,  without  mer- 
cury, as  will  be  shown  in  the  sequel.  The 
specific  gravity  of  this  alloy  of  lead  and  bis- 
muth is  10.7,  which  is  greater  than  the  mean. 

The  alloy  of  1  part  lead  and  2  bismuth 


260  METALLIC    ALLOYS. 

(1  atom  of  lead  and  3  bismuth),  fuses  at 
2^0°,  and  is  of  jO.1  specific  gravity,  or  ra- 
ther less  than  the  mean. 

The  alloy  of  three  parts  lead  and  1  bis- 
muth (2  atoms  of  lead  and  1  of  bismuth) 
fuses  at  450°.  The  specific  gravity  is  11,  or 
rather  greater  than  the  mean. 

3.  Lead  and  antimony.  These  two  metals 
combine  by  fusion  in  any  proportion.  The 
alloy  is  of  a  fine  grain  and  is  brittle  or  flexi- 
ble as  the  antimony  or  lead  prevails.  The 
principal  use  of  this  alloy,  I  believe,  is  in 
the  formation  of  printers'  types.  The  small 
types  require  a  harder  alloy  or  one  with  more 
antimony  ;  the  large  types  have  a  greater 
share  of  lead  as  being  less  expensive.  On 
examination  of  the  different  types  I  find  3 
proportions  of  the  alloy  principally  in  use. 
The  smallest  types  are  cast  from  a  mixture 
which  very  nearly  corresponds  with  40  parts 
of  antimony  to  90  of  lead  (or  1  atom  to  1). 
It  is  hard,  has  a  fracture  like  steel  and  is  of 
the  specific  gravity  9.4  or  9.5  nearly,  and 
fuses  about  480  or  500°.  The  proportions 
were  determined  both  by  analysis  and  by 
inference  from  the  specific  gravity  of  the 
metal  % 

The  middle  sized  types  are  made  of  metal 
composed  of  1    atom  of  antimony  and  2  of 


LEAD   AND   ANTIMONY.  261 

lead,  or  40  parts  antimony  and  180  of  lead. 
This  alloy  fuses  about  450°  or  460°  and  has 
the  specific  gravity  of  10  nearly. 

The  largest  types  or  letters  of  2  or  3  inches 
diameter  are  made  of  metal  composed  of  1 
atom  antimony  and  3  of  lead,  or  40  parts  to 
270.  This  alloy  also  fuses  about  450  or  460°, 
which  is  a  very  remarkable  fact.  Its  specific 
gravity  is  usually  10.22.  After  several  trials 
I  could  not  determine  whether  the  fusing 
point  of  this  or  the  preceding  alloy  was  lower; 
and  equal  parts  of  the  two  alloys  fused  toge- 
ther were  liquified  at  the  same  temperature  of 
450  or  460°. 

All  the  intermediate  sizes  of  types  appear 
to  be  made  of  one  or  other  of  the  three  pre- 
ceding proportions  or  of  mixtures  of  them, 
the  smaller  the  type  the  more  of  antimony 
being  required  to  give  the  requisite  hardness. 
The  largest  types  might,  I  conceive,  be  made 
with  a  much  greater  proportion  of  lead. 

When  40  antimony  and  360  lead  (1  atom 
to  4)  are  fused  together,  the  melting  point 
is  about  470°  The  specific  gravity  was 
found  10.4,  but  probably  too  low  from  blis- 
ters or  air  bubbles.  The  alloy  was  more  flex- 
ible than  the  preceding,  but  brittle  with  a 
fine  grained  fracture. 

Forty   parts  antimony    with  450  lead   (1 


262  METALLIC   ALLOYS. 

atom  to  5)  fused  at  490°,  and  gave  11  specific 
gravity.  This  alloy  bends  and  breaks  with  a 
fine  grained  fracture. 

Forty  parts  antimony  with  540  lead  (1 
atom  to  6)  fused  at  510°,  and  gave  10.8  spe- 
cific gravity,  which  in  all  probability  was 
owing  to  air  bubbles.  Now  the  alloy  soft 
and  malleable. 

4.  Lead  and  arsenic.     When  lead  is  fused 
in  contact  with  the  white  oxide  of  arsenic 
under  a  film  of  tallow  and  stirred  frequently, 
an  union  of  the  two  metals  takes  place  and 
the  excess  of  white  oxide  is  partially  convert- 
ed  into   arsenic  and  partly  driven  off,  seem- 
ingly taking  with  it  a  portion  of  the  lead. 
A  considerable  portion  of  the  mass  assumes 
the  form  of  a  black  spongy  compound  infusi- 
ble at  the  temperature.     It  contains  a  portion 
of  the  lead  and  is  probably  a  compound  of 
the  metals  with  oxygen.     The  fusible  alloy 
has  the  appearance  of  lead,    but  is  brittle, 
breaks  without  bending  and  exhibits  a  frac- 
ture like  that  of  antimony  and  lead.     The 
specific  gravity  of  the  alloy  is  10.6,  or  more 
if  not  saturated  with  lead.     By  treating  it 
with  an  excess  of  nitric  acid  it  is  dissolved, 
and  the  lead  may  be  thrown  down  by  sul- 
phuric acid,  and  the  arsenic  acid  or  oxide  by 
lime.     In  this  way  I  find  the  alloy  is  com- 


TRIPLE    ALLOYS,  263 

posed  of  about  9  parts  of  lead  with  2  of  ar- 
senic, or  1  atom  of  each  of  the  metals.  The 
spongy  mass  treated  with  nitric  acid  yields  a 
similar  solution,  accompanied  with  a  precipi- 
tation of  oxide  of  arsenic, 

5.  Lead  and  cobalt.  The  alloy  of  these 
two  metals  is  not  easily  obtained,  probably 
from  the  great  difference  of  the  temperature 
at  which  they  fuse.  Gmelin  fused  1  part 
cobalt  with  I,  2,  4,  6  and  8  parts  of  lead 
respectively.  Alloys  were  obtained  of  the 
specific  gravities  8.12,  12.28  (query  8.28  ?), 
— ,  9.65  and  9,78  respectively.  From 
these  specific  gravities  it  is  plain  the  lead 
had  been  in  great  part  dissipated  by  the  heat. 
For  the  last  or  greatest  specific  gravity  cor- 
responds nearly  to  2  parts  lead  and  1  of  co- 
balt.    (An.  de  Chimie,  19—357.) 


Triple  Alloys,  Solders ;  Fusible  Metal,  fyc. 

Though  it  may  seem  premature  to  treat 
of  triple  compounds  in  the  present  chapter, 
which  professedly  is  limited  to  compounds  of 
two  elements,  yet  as  the  triple  alloys  are  few 
and  so  immediately  connected  with  the  pre- 
ceding, it  will  scarcely  require  an  apology 
for  introducing  them  here. 


264  METALLIC    ALLOYS. 

Soft  solders.  Solders  for  plumbers  and 
tin- workers,  are  required  to  melt  easily,  and 
yet  not  too  low,  as  they  should  withstand  a 
heat  greater  than  boiling  water.  The  fusing 
point  of  the  soft  solders  is  usually  between  3 
400°.  Plumbers'  solder  I  believe  is  commonly 
formed  by  mixing  equal  parts  of  tin  and  lead. 
I  procured  a  specimen  of  8.9  specific  gravity, 
and  its  fusing  point  was  380?  Probably  a 
more  perfect  compound  would  be  formed  by 
mixing  104  parts  tin  with  90  lead  (2  atoms 
to  1),  which  would  give  a  specific  gravity 
of  8.8  and  the  fusing  point  350°. 

Tin  workers'  solder  is  made  rather  more 
fusible  than  that  of  the  plumbers.  A  speci- 
men I  got  from  the  Workmen  was  8.87  spe- 
cific gravity  and  fused  at  345*.  A  mixture 
of  3  parts  tin  and  2  of  lead  would  have 
formed  an  alloy  of  the  same  fusibility,  but  the 
specific  gravity  would  have  been  8.6  or  8,7 
only.  Probably  a  rather  less  proportion  of 
tin  with  a  little  bismuth  entered  into  the 
composition. 

Fusible  Metal*  Tin,  bismuth  and  lead  are 
metals  which  melt  at  comparatively  low  tem- 
peratures; and  it  has  been  shewn  that  the 
alloys  of  any  two  of  them  usually  melt  at 
lower  temperatures  than  the  mean,  or  even 
than  the  lower  extreme,    By  analogy  it  might 


FUSIBLE    METAL  265 

be  inferred  that  an  alloy  of  tin  and  lead  fused 
with  one  of  tin  and  bismuth,  would  melt 
below  either  of  the  two  ingredients.  It  has 
been  shewn  that  proportions  of  bismuth  and 
lead  of  easiest  fusion  are  2  atoms  bismuth 
with  one  of  lead ;  this  alloy  melts  at  250*. 
An  alloy  of  2  atoms  of  bismuth  and  1  of  tin 
melts  at  260°;  and  so  does  that  of  I  atom 
bismuth  and  1  tin.  These  alloys  being-  much 
more  easily  fused  than  any  other  proportions 
of  these  metals,  it  is  from  their  combinations 
we  are  to  expect  a  still  further  reduction  of 
the  fusing*  point.  In  fact,  a  combination  of 
either  of  the  tin  and  bismuth  alloys,  with  the 
lead  and  bismuth  alloy,  produces  almost 
exactly  the  same  reduction  of  the  fusing 
temperature. 

Thus  if  4  atoms  of  bismuth,  1  of  tin  and 
1  of  lead  be  fused  together,  the  compound 
melts  in  boiling  water  or  below  212°.  It  is 
equally  the  case  if  3  atoms  bismuth,  1  of  tin 
and  1  of  lead,  are  fused  together. 

The  double  alloy  next  to  those  above  men- 
tioned in  regard  to  easy  fusion  is  that  of  2 
atoms  tin,  and  1  bismuth.  It  fuses  at  320°. 
This  alloy,  united  to  the  one  of  2  atoms  bis- 
muth and  1  lead,  gives  a  compound  of  3  atoms 

bismuth  2  tin  and  1  lead,  which  fuses  very 
LI 


266  METALLIC    ALLOYS. 

nearly  at  the  same  temperature  as  the  above 
triple  alloys. 

In  reference  to  weights,  the  above  pro- 
portions for  the  most  fusible  metals  will 
nearly  be, 

Bismuth  14  parts  —  Lead  5  — tin  3 

10 5  3 

5 2| 3 

Most  of  the  elementary  books  have  given 
the  proportions  of  8  bismuth,  5  lead  and  3 
tin;  or  5  bismuth  2  lead  and  3  tin,  which 
nearly  agree  with  some  of  the  above,  and 
give  an  alloy  fusing  below  212°. 

Wishing  to  investigate  this  subject  more 
fully,  and  it  being  obvious  from  the  prece- 
ding facts  that  there  are  only  two  proportions 
of  tin  and  lead  to  be  united  with  bismuth,  to 
produce  the  desired  effect,  namely,  either  1 
atom  of  tin  with  1  of  lead,  or  2  atoms  of  tin 
with  1  of  lead,  I  proceeded  as  follows: 

1  atom  tin  (52)  +  l  atom  lead  (90)  +  l  atom 
bismuth  (62),  were  fused  together;  the 
fusing'  point  was  270°.  The  alloy  was  flex- 
ible to  a  certain  degree ;  and  the  fracture 
very  small  grained.  To  this  alloy  31  grains 
of  bismuth  were  added  successively  till  it 
was  evident  the  alloy  was  growing  less  fusi- 
ble ;  the  results  were  as  follows  : 


FUSIBLE    METAL.  267 

atom  tin  -f-  1  lead  +  1  bismuth ;  fuses  at  270Q 

1-  i j-  1| 235« 

— . (_  i |.  2 205° 

f.  1 j-  2£  - 200° 

j_   i 1_3  _.  197° 

200° 
220e 

205°  semi  fluid. 
240*  semifluid. 
but  it  retains  a  little  fluidity  down  to  nearly  200° 

From  this  it  appears  that  3  parts  by  weight 
of  tin,  5  of  lead,  and  any  proportion  of  bismuth 
from  7  to  14  will  produce  an  alloy  fusing 
below  212°;  but  of  these  the  best  is  10  or 
11  parts. 

Again,  2  atoms  of  tin  were  combined  with 

1  of  lead  and  3  of  bismuth,  by  gradually 
adding  one  half  of  the  tin.  The  several  alloys 
fused  without  any  material  difference  at  or 
below  200«\  A  further  addition  of  tin  im- 
paired the  property  as  in  the  above  case  with 
bismuth.    I  did  not  think  it  important  to  mix 

2  atoms  of  tin  and  1  of  lead  with  any  other 
proportion  than  3  atoms  of  bismuth. 


APPENDIX. 

Since  the  publication  of  the  second  part 
of  the  first  volume,  (1810)  some  important 
essays  on  the  subject  of  heat  have  appeared, 
which  have  a  direct  bearing  upon  some  points 
of  the  doctrine  on  that  subject  inculcated  in 
the  said  volume.     It  may  be  proper  to  state 
the  results,  with  such  remarks  and  reflections 
as  have  occurred  in  the  consideration  of  them. 
In  the  Anuales  de  Chimie  for  January  1813, 
also  in  the  Annals  of  Philosophy,  vol.   2,  we 
find  a  Memoir  on  the  specific  heat  of  different 
gases,  by   M.  M.  De  la  Roche  and  Berard. 
This  exhibits  a  most  laborious  and  refined 
series  of  experiments  on   this   most  difficult 
subject.      Great  merit  seems  to   be  due  to 
them,  both  for  invention  and  execution. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  describe  the  particulars 
of  the  apparatus  and  the  mode  of  conducting 
the  experiments,  as  a  description  may  be 
found  as  above  referred.  It  is  sufficient  to 
observe  that  the  calorimeter  used  was  a  copper 
cylinder  of  3  inches  diameter  and  6  in  length, 
filled  with  water,  and  having  a  serpentine  tube 
5feet  in  length,  running  through  the  interior 
and  opening  at  both  ends  on  the  outside  of 
the  vessels.  By  means  of  this  tube  a  regular 
current  of  any  gas  of  a   given  temperature 


SPECIFIC   HEAT   OF    GASES. 


269 


(212°)  might  be  passed  through  the  vessel 
so  as  to  part  with  its  excess  of  temperature 
to  the  water.  The  quantity  of  water  and  the 
capacity  of  the  ve  sel  for*  heat  were  previously 
determined;  and  the  quantity  of  heated  gas 
passed  through  the  calorimeter  was  determin- 
able at  any  time,  as  well  as  the  temperature 
of  the  water,  from  the  judicious  arrangements. 
It  is  easy  to  see  that  when  an  apparatus  of 
this  kind  is  at  work,  the  gas  will  impart  heat, 
more  or  less  according  to  its  capacity,  to  the 
water;  and  that  the  temperature  of  the  ca- 
lorimeter will  gradually  ascend  till  it  arrives 
at  a  maximum  ;  that  is,  till  the  refrigerating 
effect  of  the  surrounding  atmosphere  upon 
the  calorimeter  is  equal  to  the  heating  effect 
of  the  current  of  iras. 


The  following  Table  exhibits  the  results  of  their 
experiments. 


Air 

Hydrogen 

Carbonic  Acid  ... 

Oxygen. 

Azote    

Nitrous  Oxide  ... 

Olefiant  Gas 

Carbonic  Oxide... 
Aqueous    Vapour 


Of  the  same  bulk. 


Specific  Heat 


1.0000 
0.9033 
1.2583 
0.9765 
1.0000 
1.3503 
1.5530 
1.0340 
1.9600 


Of  the  same  weight, 


1.0000 
12.3401 

0.8280 
0.8848 
1  0318 
0.8878 
1.57.63 
1.0805 
3.1360f 


f  The  result  for  this  last  article  must  be  considered  more 
uncertain  than  any  of  the  previous  ones,  the  experiment 
being  more  complicated. 


270  APPENDIX. 

They  found  the  specific  heats  of  equal  vo- 
lumes of  air  of  the  pressures  29.2  and  41.7 
inches  of  mercury  to  be  nearly  as  1  :  1.2396, 
differing  from  the  ratio  of  the  pressures  or 
densities,  which  is  1  :  1.358. 

The  above  table  of  the  specific  heat  of  the 
permanent  gases  (excluding  aqueous  vapour) 
was  corroborated  by  the  results  of  another 
series  of  experiments  in  which  the  principle 
was  varied  a  little  :  namely,  to  find  how  many 
cubic  inches  of  each  gas  at  a  given  temper- 
ature were  required  to  raise  the  temperature 
of  the  calorimeter  a  given  number  of  degrees, 
and  inferring  the  capacities  for  heat  to  be 
inversely  as  the  quantities  of  gas  employed. 
The  differences  in  the  results  were  from  1  to 
10  per  cent,  which  may  be  considered  small, 
in  experiments  of  such  delicacy. 

The  ratios  of  the  specific  heats  of  several 
gases  being  found,  it  was  highly  expedient  to 
find  the  ratio  of  the  specific  heat  of  water, 
and  that  of  some  one  gas,  as  common  air. 
This  was  effected  by  passing  a  small  current 
of  hot  water  through  the  calorimeter,  and 
comparing  the  effect  of  this  current  with  that 
of  the  larger  one  of  air,  the  requisite  care 
being  taken  to  ascertain  the  quantity  of  water 
passing  in  a  given  time  and  its  temperature 
at  the  ingress.  The  result  of  this  experiment 
was  that  the  specific  heat  of  water  is  to  that 


SPECIFIC   HEAT    OF    GASES.  271 

of  common  air  as  1  :  .25  nearly.  By  two 
other  experiments,  varied  from  the  above, 
results  not  much  differing  were  obtained,  so 
that  the  average  of  the  three  gave,  water  to 
air,  as  1  :  .2669. 

Reducing  the  specific  heats  of  the  gases  to 
the  standard  of  water  as  unity,  we  have  the 
following  Table  of  the  specific  heats  of  equal 
weights  of  the  respective  bodies: 

Water 1.0000 

Air 0.2669 

Hydrogen   3.2936 

Carbonic  Acid 0.2210 

Oxygen  0.2361 

Azote  0.2754 

Nitrous  Oxide 0.2369 

OlefiantGas  ......0.4207 

Carbonic  Oxide.. .0.2884 
Aqueous  Vapour    0.8474 

Before  we  animadvert  upon  these  results, 
it  will  be  expedient  to  give  an  abstract  of  the 
not  less  interesting  experiments  of  Messrs. 
Dulong  and  Petit,  on  heat,  as  given  in  the 
Annales  de  Chimie  and  de  Physique,  vol.  7 
and  10. 

These  gentlemen  begin  by  an  investigation 
of  the  expansion  of  air  by  heat.  The  abso- 
lute expansion  of  air  from  freezing  of  water 
to  boiling  had  been  previonsly  determined  by 


272 


APPENDIX. 


Gay  Lussac  and  myself  to-be  from  8  to  11 
nearly:  they  however  extended  the  enquiry 
above  and  below  these  points  of  temperature, 
namely  to  those  of  freezing'  and  boiling-  mer- 
cury. From  the  temperature  of  freezing-  mer- 
cury or  thereabouts,  to  that  of  boiling  water, 
they  find  the  expansion  of  air  to  keep  pace 
with  that  of  mercury,  as  indicated  by  the 
common  thermometer ;  but  from  the  boiling- 
point  of  water  to  that  of  mercury,  the  latter 
expands  somewhat  more  in  a  proportion  gra- 
dually increasing  :  as  by  the  following  Table. 

TABLE  I. 


Temperature  byan 

air  Thermometer, 

Temperature  by  Mercurial 

Corresponding  vo- 

corrected   for  ex- 

Thermometer. 

lume  of  a  given 
mass  of  air. 

pansion  of  glass. 

Fahrenheit. 

Centigrade. 

Centigrade. 

-33° 

-36° 

0.8650 

-36« 

32 

0 

1.0000 

0 

212 

100 

1.3750 

100 

302 

150 

1.5576 

148.70 

392 

200 

1.7389 

197.05 

482 

250 

1.9189 

245.05 

572 

300 

2.0976 

292ft) 

680 

M.  boil  360 

23125 

350.00 

The  absolute  dilatation  of  mercury  claims 
their  attention.  They  quote  nine  authorities 
for  the  expansion  from  freezing  to  boiling 
water  temperatures;  the  extremes  of  these 
nine  are,  Casbois  ^T  of  original  volume,  and 
mine  TV  of  the  same.     They  determine  it  to 


ON   EXPANSION   BY   HEAT. 


273 


be  T|vr.  By  doubling  and  tripling  the  ele- 
vation of  the  temperature,  they  made  obser- 
vations from  which  are  deduced  the  results  of 
the  following  Table.  The  dilatations  are  for 
each  degree  of  the  thermometer  centigrade, 
to  which  I  have  added  the  corresponding 
ones  for  Fahrenheit's. 

TABLE  II. 


Temperature  by  an  air 
Thermometer. 

Mean  absolute  dilata- 
tions of  mercury. 

Temperatures  indicated 
by  dilatation  of  mercu- 
ry, supposed  uniform.* 

Fahr.           Cent. 
32°             0° 

212           100 

392           200 
572          300 

Fehr. 
0 

I 

Cent. 
0 

TTTS 

i 

Fahr.            Cent. 
32*           0° 

212         100 

• 

400.3     204.61 
597.5     314.15 

S"9  0'6' 

I 

9945 

By  a  series  of  observations  on  the  apparent 
dilatation  of  mercury  in  glass  vessels,  com- 
pared with  the  results  in  the  above  tables, 
they  deduce  the  absolute  dilatation  of  glass 
for  each  degree  of  the  thermometer,  and  the 
temperature  that  would  be  indicated  by  sup- 
posing the  uniform  expansion  of  a  glass  rod 


*  That  is,  the  temperature  that  would  be  denoted  by- 
mercury  inclosed  in  a  vessel  having  no  expansion  by  heat; 
or  else  in  one  that  expanded  in  the  same  rate  as  mercury. 

M  m 


274 


APPENDIX. 


adopted   as   the   measure  of  temperature  as 
under : 

TABLE  III. 


Temperature  by 
an  airThermon;. 


Fahr.       Cent. 
212°     100° 


392 

572 


200 
300 


Mean  apparent 
dilatation  of  mer- 
cury in  glass. 

Fahr.      Cent. 

TTFFT    6 TFo 

TI4T3-    6?T? 
1 


Absolute  dilata- 
tion of  glass  in 
volume. 


Cent. 


Fahr 

i  i 

"5"sT4o    T5To~o 


ii  i 


Temperature  by 
a  Thermometer 
made  of  glass. 


Fah,  I 
212 

415.8 

667.2 


I  Cent. 
100 

213.2 

352.9 


The  absolute  dilatations  of  iron,  copper, 
and  platina  were  investigated  with  great  ad- 
dress, from  0Q  to  100°  and  from  0°  to  300° 
centigrade ;  and  were  found  as  per  Table 
below,  for  each  degree  of  the  centigrade 
thermometer. 

.  TABLE  IY. 


Temp.by 
the  air 
Therm. 


Cent. 
100s 

300 


Meandil-I 

atation  of  Temp.by 
iron,  in  iron  rod 
volume.  I  therm. 


i£&  \   100° 
&P&    372.6 


Mean  dil- 
atation of 
copper  in 
volume. 

Temp.by 
copper 
rod  ther- 
mometer 

Mean  dil- 
atation of 
platina  in 
volume. 

Temp.by 
platina 
rod  ther- 
mometer 

i 

100° 

328.8 

T7T-5T5- 

100° 
311.6 

19400 
TTTcro 

Connected  with  this  subject  was  another 
important  enquiry,  whether  the  capacities  of 
bodies  for  heat  remain  constant  at  different 
temperatures,  or  whether  they  diminish  or 
increase  as  the  temperature  advances.  In 
other  words,  does  a  body  that  requires  a  cer- 


CAPACITIES   FOR   HEAT. 


275 


rain  quantity  of  heat  to  raise  it  from  0*  to 
100°  centigrade,  require  the  same  quantity 
to  raise  it  from  100°  to  200°,  and  from  200 
to  300°,  &c;  or  does  it  require  less  or  more 
as  we  ascend  ?  This  enquiry  involves  that  of 
the  measure  of  temperature.  They  adopt  the 
uniform  expansion  of  air,  or  the  air  thermo- 
meter, as  the  proper  measure,  and  find  the 
capacity  of  iron, 

From  0*  to  100°  =k  .1098 

0    to  200    =r.ll50 

0    to  300    =  .1218 

0    to  350    =.1255 
the  capacity  of  an   equal   weight  of  water 
being  1. 

The  following  Table  exhibits  the  capa- 
cities of  seven  other  bodies  according  to  their 
results. 

TABLE  V. 


Mean  capacity 
between  0°   and 

Mean  capacity 
between   0°  and 

Mercury 

100° 

300c 

.0330 

.0350 

Zinc    ......... 

.0927 
.0507 

.1015 
.0549 

Antimony  ... 

Silver 

.0557 
.0949 

.0611 
.1013 

Copper     

Platiua   

.0335 

.0355 

Glass 

.1770 

.1900 

276  APPENDIX. 

According  to  this  table  the  capacities  of 
bodies  increase  with  the  temperature  in  a 
small  degree:  and  the  increase,  though  it 
would  still  exist,  would  be  less,  if  the  com- 
mon mercurial  thermometer  were  the  measure 
of  temperature. 

Also  supposing  that  thermometers  made  of 
these  bodies  and  graduated  by  immersion  in 
freezing  and  boiling  water  into  100°  ;  if  these 
were  all  immersed  in  a  fluid  in  which  an  air 
thermometer  stood  at  300°.  Then  the  rela- 
tive temperatures  of  the  several  thermometers 
would  be  as  under,  if  measured  by  the  abso- 
lute quantity  of  heat  acquired,  namely, 

Iron 322?  2 

Silver   ...    329.  3 

Zinc 328.  5 

Antimony    324.  8 

Glass 322.  1 

Copper  ...  320.  0 
Mercury      318.  2 
Platina...    317.  9 
From  these  observations  they  infer  that  the 
law  which  has  been  promulgated  for  the   re- 
frigeration of  bodies,  cannot  be  strictly  true: 
namely,  that  bodies  part  with  heat  in  propor- 
tion as  their  temperature  exceeds  that  of  the 
surrounding  medium. 

Some  animadversions  on  the  general  laws 
relative  to  the  phenomena  of  heat,  announced 
in  my  elements  of  Chemical  Philosophy  (page 
13)  then  follow,  together  with  a  table  drawn 


LAWS   OF   REFRIGERATION.  277 

up  to  show  the  discordance  between  the  air 
thermometer  and  the  mercurial  thermometer, 
both  being  graduated  in  the  manner  I  pro- 
posed in  the  said  elements.  On  these  points 
I  may  have  to  remark  in  the  sequel. 

The  first  part  of  the  Essay  concludes  with 
some  remarks  to  shew  why  a  preference  should 
be  given  to  the  air  thermometer,  or  more 
strictly,  the  thermometer  whether  of  mercury 
or  any  other  body,  supposed  to  be  graduated 
so  as  to  correspond  with  an  air  thermometer 
of  equal  degrees. 

The  Second  Part  of  the  Essay  is  on 
The  Laws  of  Refrigeration. 

Adopting  the  air  thermometer  as  the  most 
eligible  measure  of  temperature,  Messrs. 
Dulong  and  Petit  proceed  to  investigate  the 
laws  of  the  refrigeration  of  bodies,  under  a 
great  variety  of  circumstances,  in  vacuo  and 
in  air  or  gases  of  different  kinds  and  densities. 
The  inquiry  abounds  with  experiments  and 
observations  evincing  great  skill  and  acute- 
ness ;  but  which  it  will  not  suit  our  purpose 
to  detail.  It  may  suffice  for  us  to  give  a  ge- 
neral summary  of  the  Laws  deduced  by  them 
from  their  experiments,  at  the  same  time  re- 
commending all  those  who  feel  sufficient  in- 
terest in  the  subject  to  peruse  the  essay  at 
large,  which  exhibits  a  profound  philosophical 
train   of  experiments,  the   results   of  which 


278  APPENDIX. 

are   illustrated  by  the  aid   of  mathematical 
generalization. 

"  Law  1.  If  one  could  observe  the  cooling 
of  a  body  placed  in  a  vacuum,  and  sur- 
rounded by  a  vessel  absolutely  destitute  of 
heat,  or  otherwise  deprived  of  the  power  of 
radiating  heat,  the  velocities  of  cooling 
would  decrease  in  geometrical  progression 
when  the  temperatures  diminished  in  arith- 
metical progression." 

"  Law  2.  The  temperature  of  a  vessel  con- 
taining a  vacuum  being  constant,  and  a  body 
being  placed  in  it  to  cool,  the  velocities  of 
cooling  for  excesses  of  temperature  in  arith- 
metical progression,  decrease  as  the  terms  of  a 
geometrical  progression  diminished  by  a  con- 
stant number.  The  ratio  of  this  progression 
is  the  same  for  the  cooling  of  all  kinds  of  bo- 
dies, and  is  equal  to  1.0077." 

"  Law  3.  The  velocity  of  cooling  in  a 
vacuum  for  the  same  excess  of  temperature, 
increases  in  geometrical  progression,  the  tem- 
perature of  the  vessel  circumscribing  the  va- 
cuum increasing  in  an  arithmetical  progres- 
sion. The  ratio  of  the  progression  is  the 
same  as  above,  namely  1.0077  for  all  kinds  of 

bodies." 

"  Law  4.     The  velocity  of  cooling  due  to 

the  sole  contact  of  a  gas  is  entirely  independent 

of  the  nature  of  the  surface  of  the  cooling 

bodies." 


LAWS  OF  REFRIGERATION  279 

"  Law  5.  The  velocity  of  cooling*  clue  to 
the  sole  contact  of  a  gaseous  fluid  varies  in 
a  geometrical  progression,  while  the  excess 
of  temperature  itself  varies  in  a  geometrical 
progression.  If  the  ratio  of  this  second  pro- 
gression be  2,  that  of  the  first  is  2,35,  what- 
ever be  the  nature  of  the  gas  and  its  elastic 
force. 

"This  Law  may  be  likewise  announced  by 
saying  that  the  quantity  of  heat  carried  off 
by  a  gas  is  in  all  cases  proportional  to  the  ex- 
cess of  the  temperature  of  the  heated  body 
raised  to  the  power  whose  index  is  1.233." 

"  Law  6.  The  cooling  power  of  a  gaseous 
fluid  diminishesin  a  geometrical  progression, 
when  its  tension  itself  diminishes  in  a  geome- 
trical progression.  If  the  ratio  of  this  second 
progression  is  2,  the  rate  of  the  first  is  1.366  for 
atmospheric  air;  1.301  for  hydrogen  ;  1.431 
for  carbonic  acid  ;  and  1.415  for  olefiant  gas." 

"This  law  may  also  be  presented  as  follows: 
The  cooling  power  of  a  gas,  all  other  things 
being  alike,  is  proportional  to  a  certain  pow- 
er of  the  pressure.  The  exponent  of  this 
power  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  gas,  and 
is  for  air  0.45;  for  hydrogen  0.315;  for  car- 
bonic acid  0.517;  and  for  olefiant  gas  0.501." 

"Law  7.  The  cooling  power  of  a  gas  va- 
ries with  its  temperature  in  such  a  manner 
that  if  the  gas  can  dilate  so  as  to  preserve 
the  same  uniform  tension,  the  cooling'  power 
will  be  as  much  diminished  bv  the  rarefaction 


280 


APPENDIX. 


of  the  gas,  as  it  is  increased  by  its  augmen- 
tation of  temperature;  so  that  definitively  it 
depends  only  on  its  tension." 


Another  ingenious  Essay  was  published  by 
Messrs.  Dulong  and  Petit,  in  the  Annal.  de 
chimie  et  de  physique,  vol.  10,  namely, 
"  Researches  on  some  important  points  of  the 
theory  of  heat.'7 — One  object  is  to  ascertain 
the  specific  heats  of  bodies  with  superior  pre- 
cision. A  table  of  the  specific  heats  of  cer- 
tain metals,  found  by  their  method,  is  given, 
together  with  the  weights  of  the  atoms  of 
those  metals,  and  the  products  of  the  specific 
heats  and  weights  of  the  atoms,  as  under: 


Specific  heats, 
that    of    water 
being  1 

Weights  of  the 
atoms,  that  o! 
oxygen  being  1 

Pioductof  the 
weight  of  each 
atom     by    the 

corresponding 
capacity. 

Bismuth..... 

0.0288 

13.300 

0.3830 

Lead 

0.0293 
0.0298 
0.0314 

12.950 
12.430 
11.160 

0.3794 
0.3704 
0.3740 

Gold 

Platinum  ... 

Tin  

0.0514 
0.0557 

7.350 
6.750 

0.3779 
0.3759 

Silver   

Zinc 

0.0927 
0.0912 

4.030 
4.030 

0.3736 
0.3675 

Tellurium... 

Copper 

0.0949 

3.957 

0,3755 

Nickel  

0.1035 

3.690 

0.3819 

Iron 

0.1100 

0.1498 

3.392 
2.460 

0.3731 
0.3685 

Cobalt  

Sulphur  .... 

0.1880 

2.011 

0.3780 

SPECIFIC    HEATS.  281 

The  inference  intended  from  this  Table  is 
pretty   obvious,    namely,   that  the    atoms  or 
ultima! e  particles  of  the  above  bodies  contain 
or  attach  to  themselves  the  same  quantity   of 
heat,  or  have  the  same  capacity.     This  prin- 
ciple the  authors  think  will  apply  to  the  sim- 
ple atoms  of  all  bodies,  whether  solid,  liquid, 
or  elastic;   but  they  hold  it-does  not  apply  to 
compound  atoms.     It  differs  therefore  essen- 
tially froma  suggestion  of  mine,  made  eighteen 
years  ago,  (see   Vol,   I.  page  70,)  that  the 
quantity  of  heat  belonging  to  the  ultimate  par- 
ticles of  all  elastic  fluids,    must    be  the  same 
under   the    same  pressure    and    temperature. 
They  seem  to  apprehend,  from  experience, 
that  a  very   simple  ratio  exists  between  the 
capacities  of  compound  atoms  and  that  of  the 
elementary   atoms.     They  draw  another  in- 
ference from  their  researches,  that  the  heat 
developed  at  the  instant  of  the   combination 
of  bodies,  has  no  relation   to  the  capacity  of 
the  elements;  this  loss  of  heat,  they  argue, 
is  often  not  followed   by  any  diminution  in 
the  capacity  of  the  compounds.     They  seem 
to  think  that  electricity  developes  heat  in  the 
act  of  combination;   but   they    do  not  deny 
that  a  change    of  capacity    may  sometimes 
ensue,  and  heat  be  developed  from  this  cause. 
N  n 


'282  APPENDIX. 


Remarks  on  the  above  Essays. 

Results  nearly  agreeing1  with  those  of  De 
la  Roche  and  Berard,  on  the  capacity  of 
certain  elastic  fluids  for  heat,  were  about  the 
same  time  obtained  by  M.  M.  Clement  and 
Desormes.  (See  Jonrnal  de  Physique,  Vol. 
89 — 1819.)  Such  results,  impugning  some 
of  the  most  plausible  doctrines  of  heat,  could 
not  be  admitted  but  upon  very  good  authority. 
I  remained  doubtful,  in  some  degree,  till  sa- 
tisfied by  my  own  experience.  I  procured  a 
calorimeter  of  the  construction  of  De  la 
Roche's,  and  to  simplify  the  experiment, 
instead  of  forcing  a  given  volume  of  hot  air 
through  the  calorimeter  to  impart  heat  to  the 
water,  I  drew,  by  means  of  an  air-pump,  a 
certain  volume  of  atmospheric  (or  other  air) 
of  the  common  temperature,  through  the  ca- 
lorimeter filled  with  hot  water,  in  order  to 
find  how  much  this  process  would  accelerate 
the  cooling.  From  several  experiments  of 
this  kind,  I  am  convinced  that  the  capacity 
of  common  air  for  heat  is  very  nearly  such  as 
the  above  ingenious  French  chemists  have 
determined.  That  is,  it  is  about  *  part  only 
of  what  Dr.  Crawford  deduced  from  his  ex- 


SPECIFIC    HEATS.  283 

periments,  and  nearly  the  same  part  of  what 
I  inferred  from  my  theoretic  view  of  the  spe- 
cific heats  of  elastic  fluids.  (See  Vol.  I. 
pages  62  and  74.) 

Indeed  M.  M.  De  la  Roche  and  Berard 
appear  to  have  been  puzzled  with  the  admis- 
sion of  their  own  results.  The  combined 
heats  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  gases  give 
only  ,6335  for  the  specific  heat  of  water; 
whereas  by  experiment  the  heat  of  water  is 
found  to  be  1,  notwithstanding  an  immensity 
of  heat  is  evolved  during  the  combination  of 
these  gases,  f 

"  It  is  necessary  therefore,"  they  observe, 
"  to  abandon  the  hypothesis  which  ascribes 
the  evolution  of  heat  in  cases  of  combination 
to  a  diminution  of  specific  heat  in  the  bodies 
combined,  and  admit  with  Black,  Lavoisier, 
and  Laplace,  and  many  other  philosophers, 
the  existence  of  caloric  in  a  state  of  combi- 
nation in  bodies."  I  am  not  aware  of  any 
writer  that  denies  the  existence  of  caloric  in 
a  state  of  combination  of  bodies.  Dr.  Craw- 
ford, who  would  be  thought  the  most  likely 
to  err  in  this  respect,  maintains,  "that  ele^ 

f  By  recent  experiments  I  find  the  heat  evolved  in 
the  union  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  would  raise  the  tern-, 
perature  of  the  same  weight  of  water  65001 


284  APPENDIX. 

mentary  fire  is  retained  in  bodies  partly  by 
its  attraction  to  those  bodies  and  partly  by  the 
action  of  the  surrounding'  heat,"  and  that 
"its  union  with  bodies  will  resemble  that 
particular  species  of  chemical  union  wherein 
the  elements  are  combined  by  the  joint  forces 
of  pressure  and  of  attraction."  (On  animal 
heat,  2d  edition,  page  436.)  He  is  perhaps 
somewhat  unfortunate  in  his  instance  in  the 
combination  of  carbonic  acid  and  water; 
muriatic  acid  or  ammonia  and  water  would 
have  been  more  in  point. 

The  truth  is,  these  important  experiments 
shew  that  in  elastic  fluids  the  increments  of 
temperature  are  not  proportional  to  the  whole 
heat,  compared  with  the  like  increments  of 
temperature  and  whole  heat  in  those  bodies 
when  in  the  liquid  and  solid  states. 

The  specific  heats  of  bodies,  it  is  well 
known,  are  determined  by  means  of  the  re- 
lative quantities  of  heat  necessary  to  raise  the 
temperature  of  those  bodies  a  certain  number 
of  degrees.  They  are  expressed  by  the  ratios 
of  those  quantities.  If  the  capacities  of  the 
same  bodies  for  heat  were  permanent  at  all 
temperatures,  then  these  ratios  would  also 
express  those  of  the  whole  quantities  of  heat 
in   bodies.     In  fact,   most  authors  represent 


SPECIFIC    HEATS.  285 

the  specific  heats  as  expressing  both  the  ratio 
of  the  total  quantities  of  heat  in  bodies,  and 
of  the  relative  quantities  to  raise  their  tem- 
perature a  given  number  of  degrees;  but  it 
is  the  latter  only  which  they  accurately  re- 
present, and  the  former  only  hypothetically. 
In  regard  to  bodies  in  the  solid  and  liquid 
forms,  all  experience  shews  that  their  capa- 
cities for  heat  are  nearly  if  not  accurately 
constant  within  the  common  range  of  tem- 
perature ;  it  seems  therefore  not  unreasonable 
to  infer  that  the  whole  quantity  of  heat  in 
each  is  proportional  to  their  increments. 
When,  however,  a  solid  body  by  an  increase 
of  temperature  assumes  a  fluid  form,  and  ab- 
sorbs heat  without  any  increase  of  its  tem- 
perature, its  total  quantity  of  heat  is  thus  in- 
creased; and  it  is  contended  by  the  writers 
on  capacity,  that  the  increments  of  heat  after- 
wards are  increased  in  the  same  proportion 
as  the  total  quantities.  This  is  probable 
enough  ;  but  it  ought  to  be  proved  in  several 
instances  by  direct  experiment  before  it  can 
safely  be  admitted  as  a  general  principle; 
more  especially  now  since  the  analogy  in  the 
case  of  a  liquid  becoming  an  elastic  fluid  is 
found  to  fail  in  this  particular.     As  an  in- 


286  APPENDIX. 

stance  of  uncertainty,  the  capacity  of  ice  to 
water  has  been  found  as  9  to  10  by  one  per- 
son, and  as  7.2  to  10  by  others;  such  wide 
difference  in  the  results  shows  there  must  be 
a  difficulty  in  determining'  the  specific  heat 
of  ice,  and  that  it  may  even  be  doubted 
whether  the  specific  heat  of  ice  or  water  is 
greatest. 

From  the  foregoing  detail  of  experiments 
on  elastic  fluids,  it  appears  evident  that  such 
fluids  exhibit  matter  under  a  form  in  which 
it  has  the  greatest  possible  capacity  for  heat, 
when  capacity  is  understood  to  denote  the 
total  quantity  of  heat  connected  with  the 
fluid;  but  if  the  capacity  or  specific  heat  is 
meant  to  denote  the  quantity  of  heat  neces- 
sary to  raise  the  body  a  given  number  of  de- 
grees of  temperature,  then  the  elastic  fluid 
form  of  matter  is  that  which  has  the  least 
capacity  for  heat  of  any  known  form  of  the 
same  matter.  When  therefore  we  use  the 
terms  specific  heat  as  applied  to  elastic  fluids 
we  should  henceforward  carefully  distinguish 
in  what  sense  they  are  used ;  but  the  terms 
may  still  be  indifferently  used  in  the  one  or 
the  other  sense  as  applied  to  liquids  and  solids, 
till  some  more  decisive  experiments  shew  that 
a  distinction  is  required.     Probably  the  ano- 


SPECIFIC    HEATS.  287 

malies  that  have  occurred  in  investigations  of 
the  zero  of  cold,  or  point  of  total  privation 
of  heat,  are  in  part  due  to  the  want  of  ac- 
cordance between  the  ratio  of  the  total  quan- 
tities of  heat  in  bodies,  and  the  ratio  of  the 
quantities  producing  equal  increments  of 
temperature. 

The  greatest  possible  quantity  of  heat 
which  a  given  weight  of  elastic  fluid  can 
contain  is  when  the  dilatation  of  the  fluid  is 
extreme.  For,  condensation,  whether  arising 
from  mechanical  pressure  or  from  increased 
attraction  of  the  atoms  of  matter  for  each 
other,  tends  to  dissipate  the  heat,  by  increas- 
ing its  elasticity.  Hence  increase  of  tem- 
perature, at  the  same  time  that  on  one  ac- 
count it  increases  the  absolute  quantity  of 
heat  in  an  elastic  fluid,  diminishes  the 
quantity  on  another  account  by  an  increase 
of  pressure,  if  the  fluid  be  not  suffered  to 
dilate.  This  is  well  known  from  the  fact 
that  condensation  produces  increase  of  tem- 
perature in  elastic  fluids. 

When  it  is  considered  that  all  elastic  fluids 
expand  the  same  quantity  by  the  same  in- 
crease of  temperature,  it  might  be  imagined 
that  all  of  them  would  have  the  same  capa- 
city, or  require  the  same  quantity  of  heat  to 


288  APPENDIX. 

produce  that  expansion.  The  results  of  De 
la  Roche  and  Berard  do  not  seem 'to  admit 
of  this  supposition,  though  the  differences  of 
the  capacities  of  elastic  fluids  of  equal  vo- 
lumes are  not  very  great.  There  is  a  re- 
markable difference  too  between  their  results 
and  those  of  Clement  and  Desormes,  in  re- 
gard to  hydrogen  gas  :  namely,  .9033  and 
.6640;  also  in  carbonic  acid  gas,  1.2583 
and  1.5.  The  subject  deserves  further  in- 
vestigation. 

In  reference  to  the  experiments  of  Dulong 
and  Petit,  on  the  relative  expansions  of  air 
and  mercury  by  heat,  I  have  no  doubt  their 
results  are  good  approximations  to  the  truth. 
My  former  experiments  were  chiefly  made 
in  temperatures  between  32°  and  2] 2°,  and  I 
found,  as  General  Roi  had  done,  the  expan- 
sion of  air  to  be  somewhat  greater  in  the 
lower  half  than  in  the  upper  half  of  that  in-* 
terval,  compared  with  mercury.  On  a  re- 
petition of  the  experiments,  1  think  the  dif- 
ference is  less  than  I  concluded  it  to  be,  and 
I  find  that  the  like  coincidence  of  the  air 
scale  and  mercurial,  continues  down  to  near 
freezing  mercury;  at  least  the  difference  will 
not  be  so  great  as  my  new  table  of  temper- 
ature makes   it  at   page    14.     I   have    made 


SPECIFIC    HEATS.  297 

with  another  has  less  affinity  for  it  left.*  It 
is  plain  then  that  oxygen  gas  or  any  other 
elastic  fluid,  may  have  a  small  specific  heat 
in  the  sense  above  defined,  and  yet  have  an 
almost  unlimited  quantity  of  heat.  I  am  not 
aware  of  any  one  established  fact  that  does 
not  admit  of  an  explanation  upon  the  hypo- 
thesis that  heat  exists  in  definite  quantities  in 
all  bodies,  and  is  incapable  of  any  change, 
except  perhaps  into  one  of  the  other  equally 
imponderable  bodies,  light  or  electricity. 


*  See    Dr.    Henry's    note,    Manch.  Memoirs,    vol.  5, 
page  679. 


o  o 


2£S 


APPENDIX. 


NEW     TABLE 


Forces  of    Vapours  in  contact  with   the  generating 
Liquids  at  different  Temperatures. 


(.--. 


-,     »— i  Oi  O  >C  N  00                                             H";  S  2 

fe.|.  J                     '  ~  O  CO  ^  OD  CO                             ►  "S  -2    i 

*|   |                        ~cogoo*                   s -S  5  5 

*  l  .s  i 


— «  CO 


-    # 

C     <» 

3 

s 

o.t^.t; 

U-, 

CO  © 

=> 

OiCDHNOO 

O   u 

a; 

f*  »o  O  ©  O  i>  O* 

-=  £ 

-C 

■  ~  tj5  ~i  oi  o" 

O          o 

w      5 

C 

-«(N00 

3      cu 

1—1 

5§ 

o 

CO  O  CO  CO 

3   c« 

—;  ON  c*  c* 

co  co  oi  Tt?  od 

;§Jgg 

<-<    O*    Tj< 

Sfl 

<N 

^     **• 

? 

<a  a  S 

o 

*o 

"•is  2 

09 

i>  iq 

to  S® 

-? 

«N»OOCOO 

5       o 

c 

"-  CO  CO  Cl  -* 

«  a 

fM 

—  <N 

02 

5,  s 

es    a 


c 


'  -h*  Tf  — *  d  .s  s  *  •■§ 


rs    o 

s   «  c  ; 

OS       cj       <D  «►» 

>     «    +»  o 

1 1 


5  1    -   3 


to 


°     t,      cy    ** 

a)   t9   -a    9 
3    c   H   <* 


S    8  S  5 
-3     E    3    © 
cr1    O 


3     O 

<D        I-, 


T3 


^       fi       S       "- 

£  g  o  * 

a  te  «  £ 

■S  ^  g  "3 

c  <u  S  g 

s»  .2    £    2   -S 

Hi    *    +  Sifs 

SgS  COCOOiCOl^Olt^^  III 


AIR   AND    VAPOUR. 


290 


TABLE, 

Shewing  the  expansion  of  air,  and  the  elastw 
force  of  aqueous  and  ethereal  vapour,  at  different 
temperatures. 


Temperat. 

-28° 
-20 
-10 
0 

10 

20 

30 

32° 
33 
34 
35 

36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 


Vol.  of  air. 

420 

428 
438 

448 
458 
468 
478 

480 

481 
482 
483 
484 
485 
486 
487 
488 
489 
490 
491 
492 
493 
494 
495 
496 
497 
498 
499 
500 
501 
502 
503 


Utmost  force  of 

Weight  of  100 

Aqueous  vapour. 

Ethereal  vapour. 

cubic  inches 
of  aqueous 

Inches  of  Merc. 

Inches  of  Merc. 

vapour. 
Grains. 

.08 

.12 

.17 

.24 

.26 

7.00 

.178 

.27 

7.18 

.184 

.28 

7.36 

.191 

.29 

7.54 

.197 

.30 

7.73 

.203 

.31 

7.92 

.209 

.32 

8.11 

.216 

.33 

8.30 

,222 

.34 

8.50 

.229- 

.35 

8.70 

.235 

.37 

8.90 

.245 

.38 

9.10 

.255 

.40 

9.31 

.267 

.41 

9.52 

.275 

.43 

9.74 

.284 

.44 

9.96 

.293 

.46 

10.18 

.303 

.47 

10.41 

.313 

.49 

1064 

.323 

.50 

10.87 

.329 

.52 

11.10 

.341 

.54 

11.34 

.354 

.56 

11.59 

.366 

,58 

11.85 

.378 

300 


Temperature     Vol.  of  air 


56' 

57 

58 

59 

60 

61 

62 

63 

64 

65 

66 

61 

68 

69 

70 

71 

72 

73 

74 

75 

76 

77 

78 

79 

80 


504 
505 
506 
507 
508 
509 
510 
511 
512 
513 
514 
515 
516 
517 
518 
519 
520 
521 
522 
523 
524 
525 
526 
527 
528 


APPENDIX. 

Utmost  force  of 

Weight  of  100 

Aqueous  vapour. 

Ethereal  vapour. 

cubic  inches  of 
aqueous  vap. 

Inches  of  M. 

Inches  of  M. 

Grains. 

.59 

12.12 

.384 

.61 

12.39 

.396 

.62 

12.66 

.402 

.64 

12.94 

.414 

.65 

13.22 

.420 

.67 

13.51 

,432 

.69 

1380 

.444 

.71 

14.10 

.456 

.73 

14.41 

.468 

.75 

14.72 

.480 

.77 

15.04 

.492 

.80 

15.36 

.509 

.82 

15.68 

.521 

.85 

15.90 

.539 

.87 

16.23 

.551 

.90 

16.56 

.569 

.92 

17.00 

.580 

.95 

17.35 

.598 

.97 

17.71 

.610 

1.00 

18.08 

.627 

1.03 

18.45 

.645 

1.06 

18.83 

.662 

1.09 

19.21 

.680 

1.12 

19.60 

.700 

1.16 

20.00 

.721 

Applications  of  the  above  Table. 

These  tables  will  be  found  of  great  use  in 
reducing"  volumes  of  air  from  one  tempera- 
ture or  pressure  to  any  other  given  one :  also 
in  determining  the  specific  gravities  of  dry 
gases  from  experiments  on  those  saturated 
with  or  containing  given  quantities  of  aque- 
ous or  other  vapours. 

As  several  writers,  and  some  of  consider- 
able eminence,  have  given  erroneous  or  im- 
perfect formulas  on  these  subjects,  more  par- 


USES   OF    THE    TABLE.  301 

ticularly  with  regard  to  the  effect  of  aqueous 
vapour  in  modifying  the  weights  and  volumes 
of  gases,  it  has  been  thought  proper  to  sub- 
join the  following  precepts  and  examples  for 
the  use  of  those  who  are  not  sufficiently  con- 
versant in  such  calculations. 

The  5th  column  of  the  above  table,  or 
weight  of  aqueous  vapour,  is  new,  and  may 
therefore  require  explanation.  Gay  Lussac 
is  considered  the  best  authority  in  regard  to 
the  specific  gravity  of  steam ;  but  it  would 
be  well  if  his  results  were  confirmed  or  cor- 
rected, as  they  are  of  importance.  Accord- 
ing to  his  experience,  the  specific  gravities 
of  common  air  and  of  pure  aqueous  vapour, 
of  the  same  temperature  and  pressure,  are  as 
8  to  5,  or  as  1  to  ,625.  Now  I  assume  that 
100  cubic  inches  of  common  air,  free  from 
moisture,  of  the  temperature  60°  and  the 
pressure  of  30  inches  of  mercury,  weigh  31 
grains  nearly.  It  is  an  extraordinary  fact 
that  philosophers  are  not  agreed  upon  the 
absolute  weight  of  a  given  volume  of  common 
air.  Most  authors  now  assume  the  weight  of 
i 00  inches—  30.5  grains,  whilst  according 
to  my  experience  it  is  more  than  31  grains. 
If  common  air  be  assumed  31  grains,  steam 
would  be  19|  grains  for  100  cubic  inches,  at 
the  same  temperature  and  pressure,  could  it 
subsist;  but  as  it  cannot  sustain  that  pressure 


302  APPENDIX. 

at  the  temperature  of  60°  we  must  tlednct 
according*  to  the  diminished  pressure,  the  ut- 
most force  of  steam  at  60° being*  .65  parts  of 
an  inch  of  mercury,  we  have  30  inches  :  19^ 
grains  :  :  .65  :  .420  grains  =  the  weight  of 
100  cubic  inches  of  aqueous  vapour  at  60° 
and  pressure  ,65  parts  of  an  inch;  which  is 
the  number  given  above  in  the  table.  The 
like  calculation  is  required  for  any  other 
pressure  :  but  in  addition  to  this,  there  is  to 
be  an  allowance  for  the  temperature  from  the 
2d  column:  Thus,  let  the  weight  of  100  cu- 
bic inches  of  steam  at  32°  be  required.  We 
have  30  inch.  :  19|  grs.  :  :  .26  inch.  :  .1679 
grs.;  the  weight  of  100  inches  of  steam  at 
60°;  then  if  480  :  508  :  :  .1679  :  .178  grs- 
=  weight  of  100  cubic  inches  of  steam  at 
32°  and  pressure  .26  parts  of  an  inch,  the 
tabular  number  required. 

Examples, 

1.  How  many  cubic  inches  of  air  at  60° 
are  equivalent  in  weight  to  100  cubic  inches 
at  45°  ? 

By  the  column  headed  volume  of  air  we 
have  this  proportion,  if  493  :  508  :  :  100 
inch.  :   103.04  inches,  the  volume  required. 

2.  How  many  cubic  inches  of  air  with  the 
barometer  at  30  inches  height,  are  equal  in 
weight  to  100  cubic  inches  when  the  baro- 
meter stands  at  28.9  inches? 


USES    OF    THE    TABLE.  303 

Ride,  The  volume  of  air  being  inversely 
as  the  pressure,  we  have,  30  :  28.9  :  :  100 
inches  :    96^-  inches  the  answer. 

3.  How  many  cubic  inches  of  dry  air  are 
there  in  100  inches  saturated  with  aqueous 
vapour,  at  the  temperature  of  50°,  and  pres- 
sure 30  inches  of  mercury  ? 

Here  the  formula   p~f  applies,  where  p 
P 
denotes  the  atmospheric  pressure  at  the  time, 

andy  denotes  the  utmost  force  of  vapour  in 

contact    with     water    at     the    temperature. 

Hence  p  =  30,  f  =    .49  per  table,  and  we 

p  30  30  y5T^ 

98ft  Per  cent  dry  air. 
&   14-g.  vapour. 
TOO 
If  the  vapour  of  ether  is  assumed,  theny*  = 

10.64,  and  we  have  Izl  =  30-10.64  _  ¥^>  _ 
p  30  30 

•645,  or  64f  per  cent  dry  air.* 

35j-  per  cent  ethereal  vapour. 
100 

4.  Suppose  we  find  by  trial  the  weight  of 
100  cubic  inches  of  common  air  saturated 
with  vaponr  at  60°,  the  barometer  standing 
at  30  inches  to  be  30.5  grains,  and  the  weight 

*  The  aqueous  vapour  in  this  case  maybe  considered  as  insignificant. 


304  APPENDIX. 

of  hydrogen  gas  in  like  circumstances  to  be 
2,118  grains;  query  the  weights  of  100  cubic 
inches  of  each  gas  free  from  vapour,  and 
their  specific  gravities,  the  temperature  and 
pressure  being  as  above  ? 

If  30.5  :  2.118  :    :  1   :   ,0894  =  sp.   gr.   of 
vapourized  hydrogen,  that  of  vapourized  air 
being   1.     Subtracting  .42  grs.   (weight  of 
vapour  per  table)  from  30.5  grs.,  leaves  30.08 
grains;  and  subtracting  .65  parts  of  an  inch 
from  30  inches,  leaves  29.35  inches.     Hence 
100  cubic  inches  of  dry  air  at  the  pressure  of 
29.35  inches,    weigh  30.08  grains;  and  we 
have  29.35  :  30  :  :  30.08  :  30.746  grains,  the 
weight   of    100  inches  of  dry   air.     Again, 
subtracting  .42  grs.  from  2.118,  leaves  1.698 
grains  =  weight  of  100  cubic  inches  of  hy- 
drogen of  60°  and  sustaining  the  pressure  of 
29.35  inches ;  whence   if  29.35  :  30  :  :  1.698 
:  1.736  grains,  weight  of  100  inches  of  dry 
hydrogen  ;  and  30.746  :  1.736  ;  :  1  :  .05645 
==  sp.  gr.  of  dry  hydrogen,  that    of  dry  air 
being  unity.   Or  the  results  may  be  exhibited 
as  under: 

Weight  of  100  cubic  inches.  Sp.  Gravities. 

Vap.  air 30.5     grains   1...  14.4 

Vap.  hydrogen    2,118 .0694  ....  1 

Dry  air 30.746  grains  1 17.7 

Dry  hydrogen      L.736    —  .05645  ....1 


MIXED    GASES.  305 

FORMULA    TOR    DETERMINING  THE    PROPORTIONS    OP    COM- 
BUSTIBLE   GASES    IN    MIXTURES. 

It  frequently  happens,  especially  in  the 
decomposition  of  vegetable  substances  by 
heat,  that  the  product  consists  of  several 
combustible  gases  in  mixture,  and  it  is  de- 
sirable to  determine  the  proportions  of  each 
of  those  which  collectively  constitute  the 
mixture.  The  following  forms  will  be  found 
useful  for  this  purpose. 

1.  Carbonic  oxide  and  hydrogen.    , 

Let  x  =  the  volume  of  carbonic  oxide,  y 
—  that  of  hydrogen,  w  =  that  of  mixture,  and 
a  =  that  of  carbonic  acid,  produced  by; 
exploding  the  mixed  gases  with  oxygen  over 
mercury. 

Then  the  carbonic  oxide,  or. a?  =  a, 
and  the  hydrogen,  oy  y  =  w  —  a. 

2.  Sulphuretted  hydrogen  and  hydrogen. 
Let  x  ==  the    volume  of  sulphuretted  hy- 
drogen, y  =  that  of  hydrogen,  w  =  that  of 
the  mixture,  and  g  =  the  oxygen  spent  in  the 
combustion  of  w. 

Then  because x  +y  —■  w,and  \lx  +  \  y=y; 
we  have  x  =  g  —  iw,  and  y=  If  w  —  y. 

pP 


306  APPENDIX. 

3.  Phosphuretted  hydrogen  and  hydrogen; 
also  carburetted  hydrogen  and  hydrogen,  and  car- 
buretted  hydrogen  and  carbonic  oxide. 

The  notation  being  as  above,  we  have  x  4-  y 
=  rv,  and  2x  +  J  y  =a  g  (see  page  171 )  :  and, 
2g-^w  ,         Aw  -  2(/ 

4.  Olefiant  gas  and  carburetted  hydrogen. 
The  notation  being  as  above,  we  have,r  +  y 

=  rv,  and  3#  -f  2y  =  </ ;  whence  x  =  g  —  2rv 
and  y  ±?  8rv-g. 

5.  Carburetted  hydrogen,  carbonic  oxide  and 
hydrogen. 

Let  #  =  carburetted  hydrogen,  y  ==  carbo- 
nic oxide,  z  =  the  hydrogen,  g  =  the  oxygen 
spent  in  the  combustion  of  rv  volumes  of 
mixed  gas,  and  a  =  the  carbonic  acid  pro- 
duced. 

Then  x  +  y  +  z   =  rv, 

x  4-  \y  +■  \z  =  g, 
and  2x  +  y  =  a. 

whencewehaveo*  =  -~^,  y  =  — — ^ and 

z  =  rv  —  a. 

6.  Olefiant  gas,    carburetted  hydrogen  and 
carbonic  oxide. 

Let  a  ==  the  olefiant  gas,  3/  =  the  carbu- 
retted hydrogen,  and  z  —  equal  the  carbonic 
oxide,  g  =  the  oxygen   entering   into    com- 


MIXED    GASES.  307 

bination,  and  a  =  the  carbonic  acid  produced; 
also  w  =  the  whole  volume  as  before. 

Then  we  have  x  4-  y  +  z  ==  rvf 

and  2x  -f  y  +   z    =  a* 
whence  x  =    a  —  w, 

4w  —  5a  +  2</, 
#  = 3 

and  z  ==  |>  (w  +  a- g). 

7.  Superolefiant  gas^  carburetted  hydrogen^ 
and  carbonic  oxide. 

Let  a;  =  volume  of  superolefiant, y  =  volume 
of  carburetted  hydrogen,  z  =  volume  of  car- 
bonic oxide,  g  =  the  oxygen  combining,  a  m 
carbonic  acid  produced,  and  w  ==  volume  of 
mixed  gas. 

Then  x  +  y  -\-  z  =  m, 

±hx  +  2y  +  iz  =  g, 
and  3x  +  y    +   z  =  a. 

Whence  x  =  a~^9 

m 

_  3tt?-4fl+2g. 

3  "  3 

and  z  =  3t0-4^— 
o        • 

*  A  gas  found  in  oil  and  coal  gas.    See  Manchester 
Memoirs,  toI.  4  (new  series),  page  73. 


308  APPENDIX. 

8.  Super (defiant  gas,    carburetted  hydrogen, 
carbonic  owide,  and  hydrogen. 

This  is  the  mixture  of  gases  obtained  by  a 
red  heat  from  coal  and  oil,  after  being  freed 
from  carbonic  acid,  &c,  by  the  usual  means. 
This  mixture  requires  a  very   complicated 
formula,  in  consequence  of  the  specific  gra- 
vities of  the  gases  entering  into  the  calculus. 
The  importance  of  the  subject  however  may 
be  an  apology  for  the  labour. 
Let  x  =  vol.  of  superolefiant,    S    its  sp.  gr. 
y  =  vol.  of  carb.  hydrogen,  f   its  sp.  gr. 
z  =  vol.  of  carbonic  oxide,    c    its  sp.  gr. 
&  u  =  vol.  of  hydrogen,  s    its  sp.  gr. 

C  =  specific  gravity  of  the  mixture,  g  == 
oxygen,  a  =  carbonic  acid,  and  w  =  whole 
volume  of  mixture  as  before. 

Then  wehave  x  +  y  +  z  +  u  =  w 

A\  x  -f  %  -h  \z  '+  iu  =  9 
3  x  +  y  +  & :  =  « 
And  Sx  +  fy  +  cz  +  su  =  Cm. 

Whence  u  — 
(3S  +  5c-8f)a  -(4c-4/)  #-(33  +  6C-6/  -3c)  w. 
"         "  8/  +  c  -  3  S  -  6s 

The  value  of  the  hydrogen  being  obtained, 
it  may  be  subtracted  from  w,  and  the  remain- 
der will  be  best  divided  into  three  portions, 
by  the  preceding  formula. 


MIXED    GASE&.  309 

HEAT  PRODUCED  BY  THE  COMBUSTION  OF  GASES. 

Subsequent  experience  to  that  detailed  at 
page  77,  Vol,  1.  has  furnished  the  following" 
more  correct  results  of  the  heat  produced  by 
the  combustion  of  pure  gases. 

Hydrogen,  combustion  of  it  raises  an  equal  volume 

of  water  69 

Carbonic  Oxide 4| 

Carburetted  Hydrogen,  or  Pond  Gas    18 

01e6antGas    27 

Coal  Gas  (varies  with  the  gas  from  10p  to) 16 

Oil  Gas  (varies  also  with  the  gas  from  12°  to)    ...  20 

Generally  the  combustible  gases  give  out 
heat  nearly  in  proportion  to  the  oxygen  they 
consume.  See  note  at  the  end  of  Vol.  4, 
new  series  of  the  Manchester  memoirs. 

ABSORPTION   OF   GASES    BY   WATER,    &C. 

This  curious  subject  has  attracted  much 
less  attention  than  it  deserves.  Very  little 
has  been  published  relating  to  it  since  the 
time  of  Dr.  Henry's  essays  and  my  own,  now 
more  than  twenty  years  ago.  The  only 
author  I  remember  is  M.  Saussure  of  Geneva, 
who  published  a  similar  essay  about  twelve 
vears  afterwards.  See  Thomson's  Annals  of 
Philosophy,    Vol.  6.      He  investigates   the 


310  APPENDIX. 

quantities  of  gases  absorbed  by  various  solid 
bodies,  in  a  manner  which  I  do  not  fully 
comprehend  ;  he  then  treats  of  the  absorption 
of  gases  by  liquids,  adverting  at  the  same  time 
to  Dr.  Henry's  experiments  and  mine.  My 
enquiries  were  principally  confined  to  one 
liquid,  water;  but  I  made  a  few  trials  with 
others,  such  as  weak  aqueous  solutions  of  sails, 
alcohol,  &c,  and  observing  no  remarkable 
differences,  I  concluded  somewhat  too  hastily 
that  "  most  liquids  free  from  viscidity,  such 
as  acids,  alcohol,  &c,  absorb  the  same  quan- 
tity of  gases  as  pure  water."  Manchester 
memoirs,  new  series,  Vol.  I.  M.  Saussure 
however  asserts  that  there  are  considerable 
differences  in  liquids  in  this  respect.  He 
finds  sulphuretted  hydrogen  to  be  more  ab- 
sorbable by  water  than  Dr.  Henry  and  I  did; 
in  this  I  find  he  is  right.  Water  takes  about 
2|  its  bulk  of  this  gas  when  pure  \  and  it 
seldom  had  been  obtained  unmixed  with  hy- 
drogen when  Dr.  Henry  and  I  made  our 
experiments  upon  its  absorption.  In  regard 
to  carbonic  acid,  nitrous  oxide,  and  defiant 
gas,  M.  Satissure  nearly  agrees  with  us ;  but 
his  results  with  oxygen  gas,  carbonic  oxide, 
carburetted  hydrogen,  hydrogen  and  azote, 
would  prove  that  water  absorbs  twice  the 


DEUTOXIDE    OF    HYDROGEN.  311 

quantities  of  each  that  we  have  assigned.  I 
have  no  doubt  he  is  wrong  in  the  less  absorb- 
able gases.  In  the  case  of  absorption  of 
mixed  gases,  Saussure  has  given  four  exam- 
ples, in  which  he  finds  the  results  to  militate 
against  my  theoretic  view,  as  stated  at  page 
201,  Yol.  1. ;  namely,  that  water  takes  the 
same  quantity  of  each  in  a  mixed  state  as  it 
would  do  if  they  were  separate,  and  in  other 
respects  in  like  circumstances.  But  I  have 
shewn  in  the  Annals  of  Philos.  Vol.  7,  1816> 
that  his  results  coincide  as  near  as  any  one 
can  expect  with  the  views  which  I  have  all 
along  taken  of  this  subject. 

It  will  be  seen,  page  173,  that  another  gas 
has  been  found  to  coincide  with  olefiant  gas 
in  absorbability;  namely,  phosphuretted  hy- 
drogen. 

FLUORIC   ACID. — DEUTOXIDE   OF    HYDROGEN. 

In  treating"  of  Fluoric  acid,  (Vol.  1,  page 
277)  we  came  to  the  conclusion  that  this  acid 
was  probably  constituted  of  two  atoms  of 
oxygen,  and  one  of  hydrogen,  and  have 
figured  it  accordingly  (Plate  5,  fig.  38). 
Subsequent  experience  however  has  shewn 
that  deutoxide  of  hydrogen,  though  it  can 
be  formed  synthetically,  is  not  the  same  thing 


812  APPENDIX. 

as  fluoric  acid.  We  are  indebted  to  M. 
Thenard  for  the  discovery  of  this  curious 
compound,  the  deutoxide  of  hydrogen  or 
oxygenated  water.  An  ingenious  memoir  on 
the  subject  was  published  by  him  in  1818,  in 
which  the  formation  and  the  properties  of  this 
compound  are  fully  detailed.  I  had  no  small 
satisfaction  in  1822,  when  at  Paris,  in  being 
obligingly  favoured  by  M.  Thenard  with  a 
view  of  the  process  of  the  formation,  and  of 
the  more  distinguishing  properties  of  this 
singular  liquid. 

The  nature  of  fluoric  acid  is  still  enveloped 
in  obscurity.  My  experience  led  me  to  adopt 
the  composition  of  fluate  of  lime  to  be  40 
acid  and  60  lime  per  cent.  I  had  not  then 
seen  Scheele's  admirable  essay  on  the  subject. 
From  the  5th  section  of  his  2d.  essay  on 
fluor  mineral,  1771,  it  may  be  deduced  that 
fluate  of  lime  is  composed  of  72.5  lime  and 
27.5  acid  per  cent.  In  1809  Klaproth,  and 
near  the  same  time,  Dr.  Thomson  found 
about  67|  lime  and  32J  acid  per  cent,  in 
fluor  spar.  They  both  erred,  no  doubt,  as 
I  did,  by  not  repeating  the  treatment  of  the 
mineral  with  sulphuric  acid  often  enough. 
Since  then  most  authors,  as  Davy,  Berzelius, 
Thomson,    Stc,  agree   with  Scheele  nearly, 


MURIATIC    AND    OXYMURIATIC    ACID.     313 

in  assigning  27.5  acid,  and  72.5  lime,  in  100 
parts  of  filiate  of  lime.  My  experience  in 
1820  gave  me  1  per  cent  less  of  lime  ;  and 
Dr.  Thomson  now  finds  about  1  per  cent 
more  of  lime  than    Scheele's  analysis  gives. 

If  we  estimate  the  atom  of  lime  at  24,  that 
of  fluoric  acid  must  be  about  9,  according 
with  the  above  proportion  ;  this  is  much  be- 
low 15,  the  weight  of  an  atom  of  deutoxide 
of  hydrogen. 

Should  Sir  H.  Davy's  view  of  fluate  of 
lime  be  found  correct,  its  atomic  constitution 
would  be  one  atom  of  calcium,  the  metallic 
substance  of  which  lime  is  the  protoxide, 
and  one  atom  of  fluorine,  the  name  he  has 
assigned  to  the  other  element,  which  with 
hydrogen  is  supposed  to  constitute  the  fluoric 
acid.  The  atom  of  fluor  spar  would  then  be 
1  atom  of  calcium,  17,  united  to  one  atom 
of  fluorine  16. 


MURIATIC   ACID. — OXYMURIATIC   ACID,   &C. 

From  the  articles  muriatic  acid  and  oxymu- 
riatic  acid  in  the  former  volume,  published 
now  16  years  ago,  as  well  as  from  the  ap- 
pendix to  said  volume,  in  which  sundry  an- 
imadversions  are   found  on  the   fluctuating 

opinions  entertained  in  regard  to  these  acids, 
Qq 


314  APPENDIX. 

the  reader  will  not  be  surprised  to  find  some 
further  addition. 

Three  notions  have  been  submitted  to  the 
public  in  the  last  twenty  years  in   regard  to 
the  nature  of  muriatic  acid.     First,  the  gas 
detached  from  common  salt  by  sulphuric  acid 
has  been  thought  to  be  the  acid  in  a  state  of 
purity,  and  constituted  of  a  certain   base  or 
radical  united  to  oxygen;  this  was  the  notion 
inculcated  in  the  articles  alluded  to  above. 
Second, — it  is  stated  as  a  fact  that  when  ox- 
ymuriatic  acid  and  hydrogen  in  equal  volumes 
are  united  by  the  electric  spark,  a  volume  of 
muriatic  acid  gas  is  the  result  equal  to  the 
sum  of  both  the  other  volumes,  and  that  this 
gas  perfectly  agrees  with  the  gas  obtained 
from   common  salt  by  sulphuric  acid  ;  this 
suggested  the  idea  that  muriatic  acid  gas   is 
a  compound  of  what  has  been  called  real  or 
dry  muriatic  acid  one  atom,  and  water  one 
atom.     And,  third,  it  is  argued,  that  the  ele- 
ment we  have  called  oxymuriatic  acid  gas,  is, 
for  aught  that  appears,  a  simple  body,  and 
consequently,  that  muriatic  acid  gas  is  the 
real  acid,  and  is  constituted  as  above,  of  one 
atom  of  hydrogen,  and  one  atom  of  oxymu- 
riatic acid  (now  called  chlorine,)     It  is  not 
intended  here  to  enter  into  a  discussion  of  the 
arguments  and  facts  adduced  in  support  of 


NITRIC    ACID.  31.5 

the  different  conclusions.  More  experience 
must  be  had  before  all  the  doubts  and  difficul- 
ties are  removed  from  the  subject.  But  it 
will  be  proper  to  illustrate  these  different  po- 
sitions by  an  example.  For  instance,  com- 
mon salt,  muriate  of  soda  or  chloride  of  so- 
dium. By  the  first  notion  50  parts  of  dry 
common  salt  will  consist  of  one  atom  of  mu- 
riatic acid  gas,  22,  and  one  atom  of  caustic 
soda,  28.  By  the  second  notion  the  same  salt 
will  be  formed  of  30  parts  of  muriatic  acid 
gas,  and  28  of  caustic  soda  ;  but  8  parts  of 
water  evaporate  when  the  salt  is  dried.  By  the 
third  view  common  salt  consists  of  oxymuri- 
atie  acid,  or  chlorine  and  sodium,  or  the 
metal  of  which  caustic  soda  is  the  protoxide; 
and  50  parts  of  salt  will  consist  of  29  chlorine 
and  21  sodium,  or  one  atom  of  each. 

NITRIC    ACID — COMPOUNDS   OF    AZOTE    AND 
OXYGEN. 

Since  the  account  of  nitric  acid  (Vol.  I, 
page  343)  was  printed,  a  change  has  uni- 
versally taken  place  in  estimating  the  weight 
of  the  nitric  acid  atom,  and  of  the  proportion 
of  azote  and  oxygen  in  the  same.  This  has 
been  effected  chiefly  by  a  more  correct  ana- 
lysis of  nitre  than  existed  at  that  time.  Nitre 
is  now  found  to  consist  nearly  of  52  part* 


316  APPENDIX. 

acid  and  48  parts  potash  per  cent.  Hence  if 
the  atom  of  potash  be  42,  that  of  nitric  acid 
must  be  45;  for,  48  :  52  :  :  42  :  45,  nearly. 
That  is,  the  nitric  acid  atom  consists  of  10 
azote  +  35  oxygen  by  weight ;  or  of  2  atoms 
of  azote  (according  to  my  estimate)  and  5 
of  oxygen.  There  appear  to  be  two  nitrous 
acids)  namely,  the  one  which  I  have  des- 
ignated by  that  name,  which  may  now  be 
called  sub-nitrous,  or  as  Gay  Lussac  terms  it 
pernilrous  ;  and  the  other  what  I  considered 
as  nitric  acid  in  the  former  volume,  composed 
of  1  atom  azote,  and  %  of  oxygen. 

Ileal  nitric  acid  then  is  that  combination 
which  is  effected  by  uniting  oxygen  with  a 
minimum  of  nitrous  ga&;  or  1  measure  of  ox- 
ygen with  1.8  nitrous  gas,  (See  'Vol.  1,  page 
328).  The  oxynitric  acid,  which  I  was  led 
to  infer  from  the  last  mentioned  combination, 
(1  azote  with  3  oxygen)  does  not  appear  to 
exist.  The  Table  of  nitric  acid  (Vol,  1, 
page  355)  will  require  some  correction.  An 
increase  of  about  4  per  cent,  should  be  made, 
I  apprehend,  on  the  quantities  of  acid  cor- 
responding to  the  several  specific  gravities. 

Since  my  former  volume  of  Chemistry  was 
printed,  several  essays  on  the  compounds  of 
azote  and  oxygen  have  been  published,  with 
some  new  and  some  adtU^onal  experiments, 


AZOTE    AND    OXYGEN.  317 

the  chief  of  which  may  be  seen  in  Sir  H. 
Davy's  Elements  of  Chemical  Philosophy, 
the  Annales  de  chimie  et  de  physique,  Vol.  1  ; 
Annals  of  philosophy,  Vol.  9  and  10;  and 
the  Manchester  Society's  Memoirs,  Vol.  4, 
second  series;  also  Dr.  Thomson's  first  prin- 
ciples of  Chemistry.  Notwithstanding  all 
that  has  been  written  on  the  subject,  there 
still  appears  uncertainty  as  to  the  number  of 
combinations  formed  by  these  two  elements, 
their  relative  weights,  and  the  number  of 
atoms  in  the  several  compounds. 

The  results  of  an  experiment  I  lately  made 
on  the  decomposition  of  nitrate  of  potash  by 
heat  seem  to  be  worthy  of  record,  as  I  am 
not  acquainted  with  those  of  any  other  person 
who  has  pursued  the  experiment  to  the  same 
extent. — 1  took  an  iron  retort  of  6  cubic  in- 
ches capacity,  and  cleaned  it  as  well  as  I 
could  from  carbonaceous  matter  which  it  had 
previously  contained,  first  by  heating  nitre 
to  redness  for  an  hour  or  more  in  it,  and  then 
Washing  it  repeatedly  with  water  till  the  li- 
quid came  out  tasteless,  and  ority  mixed  with 
a  little  red  rust ;  I  then  put  in  480  grains  of 
purified  nitre,  and  having  secured  a  copper 
tube  to  the  retort  so  as  to  be  air  tight,  the 
retort  was  put  into  a  fire  and  gradually  raised 
to  a  red  heat,  and  the  fire   was  occasionally 


318  APPENDIX. 

urged  with  a  pair  of  bellows,  in  order  to 
keep  up  a  glowing  red  on  the  retort  for  nearly 
two  hours ;  the  air  was  received  over  water  in 
jars ;  the  first  4  or  5  inches  were  thrown 
away,  and  the  rest  was  preserved  and  trans- 
ferred to  a  graduated  jar  ;  the  products  were 
examined  in  successive  portions  as  under, 
namely, 

Inches. 

1  produce,  85  cubic  inches,  83  per  cent  pure  =  70.5 

2  5 77    =    3.85 

3  25 50    e=  12.5 

4  6 30   =    1.8 


Total  121  Oxygen  88.65 

Oxygen     88.65  =  30  grains. 


Residue     32.35  ===  10  grains. 

About  1  per  cent  on  the  whole  gas  was  car- 
bonic acid,  the  rest  oxygen  and  azote,  the 
weights  of  which  would  be  nearly  as  above. 

Towards  the  last  the  gas  came  very  slowly, 
and  being  of  inferior  quality,  the  operation 
was  discontinued. 

The  remaining  contends  of  the  retort  were 
diluted  with  water,  and  well  washed  till  the 
water  ceased  t$  shew  alkali ;  the  liquid  was 
then  concentrated  and  gave  1600  water  grain 
measures  of  the  sp.  gr.  1.153.  There  were 
obtained  also  64  grains  of  red  oxide  of  iron 
from  the  washing  of  the  retort,  containing 
19  grains  of  oxygen. 


AZOTE    AND    OXYGEN.  319 

The  liquid  was  divided  into  portions  and 
examined ;  the  original  nitre  consisted  of 
250  grains  of  nitric  acid  united  to  230  of 
potash  =  480  grains.  After  the  process  there 
appeared  to  be, 

10  grains  of  carbonic  acid  united  to    21  grains  potash, 

62  grains  of  subnitrous  acid  to     -      84    

134  grains  nitric  acid  to         ~         -     125  


230 


The  quantity  of  carbonic  acid  was  deter- 
mined by  lime-water :  the  quantity  of  potash 
uncombined  with  nitric  acid  was  found  by 
precipitating  it  by  tartaric  acid,  and  mani- 
fested 105  grains  of  potash  in  the  bitartrate 
=  that  combined  with  the  carbonic  and  sub- 
nitrous  acids;  from  which  subtracting  21,  it 
was  inferred  the  remainder  84  must  have 
been  in  union  with  subnitrous  acid,  or  else 
with  nitrous  acid  ;  the  rest  of  the  potash,  not 
being  acted  upon  by  tartaric  acid,  was  under- 
stood to  be  combined  with  nitric  acid. 

The  quantity  of  subnitrous  acid  given 
above,  appeared  somewhat  hypothetical,  till 
it  was  confirmed  by  treating  a  portion  of  the 
liquid  with  oxymuriate  of  lime  solution  of 
known  strength  ;  it  was  found  that  32  grains 
of  oxygen  were  required  to  be  combined  with 
the  subnitrous  acid,  in  order  to  restore  it  to 
the  state  of  nitric  acid ;  that  is,  when  oxy- 


320  APPENDIX. 

muriate  of  lime,  containing  that  quantity  of 
oxygen,  was  added  to  the  liquid,  and  this 
was  afterwards  rendered  acidulous  by  the  ad- 
dition of  sulphuric  acid,  neither  nitrous  va- 
pour nor  oxymuriatic  gas  was  perceptible ; 
but  a  greater  or  less  quantity  of  the  oxy mu- 
riate being  applied,  and  the  liquid  made 
acidulous,  the  fumes  of  the  one  or  the  other 
were  abundantly  manifest. 

It  remains  to  account  for  the  oxygen. 
There  were  250  grains  of  nitric  acid  at  first 
in  the  nitre;  of  which  200 grains  were  oxy- 
gen and  50  azote,  nearly.  One-fifth  part  of 
the  oxygen  =  40  grains,  corresponds  to  1 
atom  of  oxygen.  Now  the  whole  of  the 
oxygen  derived  from  the  nitre  in  the  course 
of  the  experiment,  seems  to  be  30  grains  in 
gas,  7  grains  in  the  carbonic  acid,  and  ID 
grains  in  the  iron  oxide,  together  equal  to 
56  grains.  Now  the  azote  and  oxygen  in  the 
gas  collected,  were  very  nearly  in  the  pro- 
portion of  those  elements  in  nitric  acid ;  so 
that  a  portion  of  the  acid  (about  ^)  might 
be  considered  as  completely  decomposed, 
whilst  the  rest  was  only  losing  a  small  part 
of  its  oxygen  :  this  is  remarkable,  and  I  think 
indicates  that  the  carbonic  acid  (formed  from 
the  carbon  of  the  retort,  or  from  the  adhering 
carbon)  unites  to  the  potash,  expelling  the  wi- 


AZOTE    AND    OXYGEN.  321 

trous  acid,  which  is  immediately  decomposed 
into  its  elements  azote  and  oxygen.  This  would 
not  however  account  for  the  whole  of  the 
azote:  for,  40 grains  of  nitric  acid  would  he 
united  to  37  potash  ;  whereas  we  find  only 
21  potash  with  carbonic  acid  y  and  I  cannot 
believe  that  an  error  in  the  estimate  of  car- 
bonate of  potash  could  exist  to  that  amount. 
The  fact,  however,  was,  that  the  elements  of 
40  grains  of  nitric  acid  were  found  in  the 
evolved  gas,  and  hence  we  have  to  account 
for  the  remainder  210  grains.  From  this 
there  appears  to  have  been  expelled  26  grainy 
of  oxygen,  nearly  19  and  7  as  related  above; 
of  which  the  19  grains  cannot  be  correctly 
estimated  by  reason  of  the  uncertainty  as  to 
the  real  quantity  of  oxide  formed  during  the 
operation :  there  might  be  some  left  adhering 
to  the  retort,  or  on  the  other  hand  there  might 
be  more  than  the  due  share,  derived  from 
former  experiments.  Supposing  then,  that 
26  grains  of  oygen  were  extracted  from  the 
nitric  acid,  the  remaining  acid  would  require 
the  same  to  be  added  to  re-form  the  nitric; 
but  by  the  experiments  with  oxymuriate  of 
lime  it  seemed  to  require  32  grains  of  oxy- 
gen. This  difference  wants  an  explanation ; 
I  believe  the  greater  error  must  belong  to 
the  26  grains ;  perhaps  the  truth  might  be 
R  r 


322 


APPENDIX, 


approximated   best   by   supposing  both  to  be 
30  grains.    , 

When  the  liquid  decomposed  nitre  is  treated 
with  any  acid,  a  gas  is  instantly  expelled 
which  produces  red  fumes  in  the  air ;  it  is 
pure  nitrous  gas,  which  joining  with  the  oxy- 
gen of  the  atmosphere,  generates  nitrous  acid 
vapour.  At  the  same  time,  no  doubt,  the 
sub-nitrous  acid  is  disengaged  from  the  pot- 
ash, but  that  part  of  it  which  is  real  ni- 
trons acid  (1  atom  azote  to  2  of  oxygen)  is 
retained  by  the  water,  whilst  the  other  part, 
(l  atom  azote  and  1  of  oxygen)  assumes  the 
gaseous  form.  In  order  to  be  satisfied  re- 
specting this  point,  I  made  several  experi- 
ments with  the  liquid  over  mercury  :  taking 
a  given  portion  of  the  liquid,  and  sending  it 
to  the  top  of  a  graduated  tube  filled  with 
mercury,  I  passed  up  as  much  muriatic  acid 
as  was  sufficient  to  engage  the  potash  ;  im- 
mediately there  was  a  disengagement1  of 
nitrous  gas  and  carbonic  acid  gas,  and  after- 
wards a  slow  evolution  of  gas,  evidently  aris- 
ing from  the  liquid  in  contact  with  the  mer- 
cury. Wishing  to  ascertain  the  quantities,  I 
sent  up  25  grain  measures  of  liquid,  and  to 
that  nearly  half  its  bulk  of  muriatic  acid;  in 
2  or  3  minutes  there  was, 


AZOTE    AND    OXYGEN.  323 

1.1  cubic  inch  of  gas.  H.  M. 

1.4 in  0  45 

1.5     1  5 

1.7     2  45 

1.75  7  45 

1.78 9  45 


The  gas  was  washed  in  lime  .water,  and 
lost  .33  parts  of  an  inch  of  carbonic  acid  ;  the 
rest,  1.45  cubic  inch,  was  nitrous  gas.  It  is 
obvious  that  j  of  the  nitrous  gas,  together 
with  the  carbonic  acid,  was  liberated  in- 
stantly ;  the  rest  of  the  nitrous  gas  was  due 
to  the  nitrous  acid,  slowly  acting  upon  the 
mercury.  At  the  end  of  the  process,  there 
was  a  little  black  oxide  floating  upon  the 
mercury.  Calculating  from  this,  the  whole 
quantity  of  nitrous  gas  would  be  31  or  32 
grains,  whereas  it  ought  to  have  been  48  grains 
to  constitute  62  of  sub-nitrous  acid.  It  is 
probable  that  whilst  a  portion  of  the  subni- 
trous  acid  is  oxidizing  the  mercury,  another 
portion  may  be  forming  nitric  acid  and  dis- 
solving the  oxide. 

From  some  trials,  I  have  reason  to  think 
that  even  carbonic  acid  will  expel  nitrous 
gas  from  the  liquid  sub-nitrite  of  potash.         • 

In  the  essay  of  Dr.  Henry,  already  alluded 
to,  published  in  the  4th  Vol.  of  the  Manches- 
ter Society's  Memoirs,  a  new  and  interesting 
discovery  is  made ;  namely,  that  a   mixture 


324 


APPENDIX, 


of  nitroiis  and  defiant  gates,  though  not  ex- 
plosive  by  .  an.  electric  spark,  may  still   be 
exploded  by  the  more  powerful  impetus  of  a 
shock  from  a  charged  jar.     Dr.  Henry  has 
adduced  the  results  obtained  in  this  way,  as 
corroboratory  of  those  which  shew  the  consti- 
tution of  nitrous  gas  to  be  1  volume  of  azote 
and  1  of  oxygen  united  to  form  2  volumes  of 
nitrous  gas,    (See  page  507  of  the  Memoirs.) 
Some  time  ago  in  repeating  these  experi- 
ments of  Dr.  Henry,  I  found  some  extraor- 
dinary circumstances  attending  them.     After 
determining   that   1    volume  of  defiant  gas 
may  be  fired  with  from   6  to   10  volumes  of 
nitrous,  I  found  a  shock  from  ajar  sometimes 
inadequate  to  fire  the  mixture,  which,  how- 
ever, when  repeated  a  second  or  third  time, 
succeeded.     This  is  not  a  novelty  ;  for,  mix- 
tures of  olefiant  gas  as  well  as  other  gases  and 
Vapours,    with  a   minimum  of  oxygen,   fre- 
quently   require    several    sparks    before   the 
explosion  :  but  this  case  occurs  at  times  with 
nitrous  and  olefiant  gas,  when  they  are  mixed 
in  the  most  favourable  proportions  for  explod- 
ing.     The    most   remarkable   circumstance, 
however,  was,  that  when  a  phial  was  filled 
with  the  mixture  of  the  two  gases  in  the  pro*, 
portion  of  1  volume  olefiant  to  6  or  7  nitrous, 
(exclusive   of  small  portions  of  azote),  the 


AZOTE    AND    OXYGEN.  325 

decomposition  of  the  nitrous  gas  and  the  com- 
bustion of  the  olefiant  were  scarcely  ever  per- 
fect ;  and  what  increased  the  perplexity  more, 
was,  the  results  obtained  from  the  same  mix- 
ture scarcely  ever  agreed  one  with  the  other. 
After  about  80  experiments,  I  was  inclined  to 
adopt  the  conclusion,  that  the  uncertainty  was 
occasioned  by  the  oblong  form  of  the  eudio- 
meter. The  spark  or  shock,  in  my  eudiome- 
ter, is  imparted  at  one  extremity  of  a  column 
of  air,  which  is  often  10  times  as  much  in 
length  as  in  diameter :  it  mostly  was  found 
that  the  larger  the  quantity  of  mixture  ex- 
ploded at  once,  the  more  imperfect  and  in- 
complete was  the  combustion.  I  imagine 
the  intensity  of  heat  is  not  sufficient  to  carry 
on  the  combustion  through  the  length  of  the 
column,  owing,  perhaps,  to  the  cooling  power 
of  the  sides  of  the  tube.  Hence  it  was,  I  ap- 
prehend, that  in  one  or  two  instances,  when 
a  small  quantity  of  gas  was  used,  I  got 
nearly  complete  results,  as  Dr.  Henry  reports 
his ;  but  in  the  majority  both  gases  were 
found  in  the  residue  after  the  explosion. 

In  pursuing  this  enquiry  into  the  decompo- 
sition of  nitrous  gas  by  combustible  gases,  I 
found  that  it  might  be  effected  by  any  com- 
bustible gas  or  vapour:  at  least  it  succeeded 
in  all  I  tried.     The  method  I  pursued,  and 


3^6  APPENDIX. 

which  was  suggested  by  the  known  proper- 
ties of  phosphuretted  hydrogen,  is  this:  it 
has  been  shewn  (page  181)  that  a  mixture  of 
phosphuretted  hydrogen  and  nitrous  gas  ex- 
ploded by  an  electric  spark,  the  former  gas 
being  completely  burned  in  case  the  propor- 
tions are  duly  adjusted  ;  now,  it  occurred  to 
me,  that  as  the  above  combustible  gas  is  usu- 
ally a  mixture  of  pure  phosphuretted  hydro- 
gen and  of  hydrogen,  and  that  the  latter  of 
these  is  also  burned  as  well  as  the  former,  the 
effect  must  be  produced  through  the  heat 
occasioned  by  the  combustion  of  the  former. 
Having  some  old  phosphuretted  hydrogen  by 
me,  at  the  time,  which  on  examination,  I 
found  to  be  91  per  cent,  combustible  gas,  and 
9  azote ;  and  the  9J  combined  with  156  of 
oxygen,  consequently  was  74  pure,  and  17 
hydrogen  ;  I  tried  this  mixture  with  nitrous 
gas,  when  it  exploded  by  the  spark,  as  usual ; 
but  on  trying  it  with  an  excess  or  defect  of 
nitrous  gas,  the  spark  was  inefficient,  but  the 
shock  instantly  fired  the  mixture.  As  there 
did  not  appear  to  be  any  of  the  pure  hydrogen 
left  unburned  in  these  experiments,  I  pro- 
ceeded to  mix  the  old  phosphuretted  hydro- 
gen with  hydrogen  ;  and  then  this  new  mix- 
ture with  nitrous  gas.  The  first  experiment 
was  made  with  4  parts  of  old  phosphuretted 


AZOTE    AND    OXYGEN.  Ml 

hydrogen  4-  16  hydrogen  4-  #6  nitrous  gas 
=  56  total.  On  this  mixture  the  spark,  of 
course,  had  no  effect ;  but  it  exploded  the  first 
trial  by  the  jar,  and  left  20  measures,  of  which 
2  were  found  to  be  oxygen,  and  the  rest  azote. 
This  experiment  succeeding  so  well,  I  next 
tried  mixtures  of  phosphuretted  hydrogen, 
with  carbonic  oxide,  carburetted  hydrogen, 
and  ether  vapour  successively,  along  with 
nitrous  gas ;  and  found  that  all  these  mix- 
tures refused  combustion  by  the  spark,  but 
were  instantly  exploded  by  the  shock,  yield- 
ing carbonic  acid  and  water,  the  same  as  if 
the  combustion  had  been  effected  by  free  oxy- 
gen. In  some  instances  the  combustion  was 
complete,  leaving  neither  combustible  gas 
nor  nitrous  gas ;  but  generally  there  was  a 
residue  of  one  or  both  of  the  gases. 

From  these  experiments  it  may  be  con- 
cluded that  the  heat,  produced  by  the  combus- 
tion of  phosphuretted  hydrogen  and  nitrous 
gas  or  oxygen  gas,  disposes  other  gases,  acci- 
dentally in  the  mixture,  to  chemical  changes. 
In  conformity  with  this  view,  I  mixed  phos- 
phuretted hydrogen  and  oxygen,  in  the  pro- 
portion of  mutual  saturation  ;  and  taking  a 
small  proportion  of  this  mixture,  and  as  much 
ammoniacal  gas  as  would  saturate  the  phos- 
phoric acid  to  be  formed,  I  found  that  caus- 


328  APPENDIX. 

ing  an  explosion  over  mercury,  the  phospho- 
ric acid  combined  with  the  ammonia,  and 
nearly  the  whole  gas  disappeared.  In  this 
case,  the  heat  was  not  sufficient  to  decom- 
pose the  ammonia.  But  in  another  experi- 
ment, with  a  portion  of  the  same  explosive 
mixture  and  a  less  proportion  of  ammonia, 
after  the  firing  a  residue  of  azote  and  hydro- 
gen was  found,  amounting  nearly  to  the 
quantity  due  from  the  decomposition  of  the 
ammonia.  Here  the  heat  produced,  had 
evidently  decomposed  the  ammonia. 

ON   AMMONIA. 

The  constitution  of  ammonia  still  remains 
undecided.  The  latest  experiments  on  this 
article  are  those  of  Br,  Henry,  in  his  essay 
on  the  analysis  of  the  compounds  of  nitrogen, 
(Memoirs  of  the  Manchester  Society,  vol  4, 
1824.)  By  electrifying  ammoniacal  gas  over 
mercury,  as  carefully  as  could  be  devised,, 
Dr.  Henrv  found  results  as  under  : 


]  st  experiment     44  measures  became    88-f- 

2d  157 320 

3d   60 122 

4th 120  240 


The  evolved  gases  carefully  analysed  by  com- 
bustion with  oxygen,  M'ere  found  to  consist  of 


AMMONTA.  329 

?  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  1  of  azote.  The 
analysis  of  ammonia  was  also  effected  by  ex- 
ploding* it  with  nitrous  oxide,  with  the  requi- 
site precautions.  The  results  confirmed  the 
previous  ones  by  electricity,  both  in  regard  to 
doubling  the  volume  of  ammonia,  and  esta- 
blishing the  ratio  of  3  to  1  in  the  volume  of 
hydrogen  and  azote. — These  experiments  are 
highly  interesting  as  far  as  regards  the  ques- 
tion of  ammonia,  as  they  exhibit  the  latest 
investigations  of  one  who  has  previously 
shewn  uncommon  skill  and  perseverance  in 
this  kind  of  analysis.  (See  Philos.  Transact. 
1809,  &c.) 

Dr.  Henry's  analysis  of  ammonia,  in  1809, 
has  been  adverted  to  in  our  article  on  the 
subject,  vol.  1,  page  429.  The  results  of 
that  Essay  are  given  in  a  tabular  form ;  and 
the  mean  of  six  experiments  was  nearly  as 
we  have  stated,  namely,  that  ammonia  con- 
sists of  27 J  measures  of  azote,  and  72 \  hydro- 
gen. To  this  it  may  be  proper  to  add,  that 
the  two  extremes  were,  26.1  azote  and  78.9 
hydrogen,  and  28.2  azote  with  71.8  hydro- 
gen ;  also  that  a  small  error  has  crept  into 
the  table,  which  being  corrected,  the  average 
results  are  reduced  to  27  and  73,  very  nearly. 
Subsequently,    both  Dr.  Henry  and  Sir  H. 

Davy  concurred  in  assigning  26  and  74  for 

S  s 


$30  APPENDIX. 

tlie  most  approximating  numbers.  (See 
Nicholson's  Journal,  25,  page  153).  The 
true  quantity  of  gases  procured  by  the  de- 
composition of  ammoniacal  gas  by  electricity, 
was  concluded  by  both  these  authorities,  to  be 
180  for  each  100  of  ammonia,  when  the  re- 
quisite precautions  were  taken,  as  we  have 
related  in  vol.  1. 

From  what  is  stated  above,  it  is  evident  the 
subject  is  one  which  requires  extraordinary 
skill  and  attention.  This  I  can  attest  from 
my  own  experience,  which  has  been  fre- 
quently renewed  and  varied ;  but  the  results 
have  not  been  sufficiently  accordant  to  )ield 
me  satisfaction. 

About  ten  years  ago,  I  made  several 
experiments  on  the  decomposition  of  ammo- 
nia, which,  though  they  are  not  convincing, 
deserve,  perhaps,  to  be  recorded  in  their  re- 
sults.— Some  more  recent  experiments  are 
incorporated  with  them. 

Decomposition  of  ammonia  by  nitrous  oxide* 
—  I  made  many  experiments,  by  exploding 
mixtures  of  nitrous  oxide  and  ammoniacal 
gases  over  mercury.  The  excess  of  gas  was 
mostly  on  the  side  of  ammonia,  but  the  pro- 
portions were  varied  in  the  different  experi- 
ments, from  10  vol.  nitrous  oxide  to  1 1  ammo- 


AMMONIA.  331 

s 

nia  or  to  £,  which  are  about  the  extremes  ca- 
pable of  being  fired  by  the  electric  spark. 

When  10  parts  nitrous  oxide  and  5  of  am- 
monia are  exploded  over  mercury,  the  resid- 
uary gas  contains  some  free  oxygen  and  some 
nitrous  acid  derived  from  the  decomposition 
of  the  excess  of  nitrous  oxide  used  ;  with  6 
parts  of  ammonia  there  is  rarely  any  free  oxy- 
gen.    When  10  parts  of  nitrous  oxide,  and 
7  of  ammonia  are  fired,  I   never  found  any 
free  oxygen  or  hydrogen;  but  when  the  am- 
monia is  at  or  near  8  parts,  I  find  from  ™  to 
-j-V  of  the  hydrogen  from  the  ammonia  in  the 
residuary  gases.     The  two  gases  appear  to 
be  completely  decomposed;  the  oxygen  of 
the  nitrous  oxide,   as  far   as  it  can,  unites 
with  the  hydrogen  of  the  ammonia,  without 
forming  any  portion  of  nitrous  acid  or  of  free 
oxygen,  and  the  residue  contains  the  azote 
of  both  gases,  and  the  unburnt  hydrogen  from 
the  ammonia,  as  Dr.  Henry  first  observed. 
This  continues  to  be  the   case  till   the  am- 
monia becomes  11  parts,  when  the  hydrogen 
amounts  to  about  4-  of  the    whole  quantity 
which  the  ammonia  yields. 

From  the  above  it  would  seem  that  the 
proportions  for  mutual  saturation  must  be  10 
nitrous  oxide  with  from  7  to  8  parts  of  am- 
monia.    This  agrees   with  the  deduction  in 


332  APPENDIX. 

Dr.  Henry's  first  essay  that  13  nitrous  oxide 
require  10  of  ammonia;  or  that  10  require 
7.7  :  but  according  to  the  theory  of  volumes 
10  would  require  6^;  and  Dr.  Henry  recom- 
mends in  his  late  essay  10  nitrous  oxide  to 
7.7  or  8 1  parts  of  ammonia,  in  order  to  secure 
a  small  excess  of  the  last,  and  consequently 
some  free  hydrogen  after  the  explosion.  The 
former  of  these  proportions  would  have  nearly 
4-  of  the  residue  hydrogen,  and  the  latter 
nearly  j,  supposing  the  gases  pure  originally. 
Tins  gives  more  hydrogen  than  1  have  ever 
found  ;  but  the  azote  in  my  experience  nearly 
agrees  with  the  doctrine  of  multiple  volumes. 

Decomposition  of  ammonia  by  nitrous  gas. — 
About  30  experiments  carefully  made  on 
mixtures  of  nitrous  gas  and  ammoniacal  gas 
gave  very  discordant  results.  At  one  time  10 
parts  nitrous  gas  with  14  ammonia  gave  -4- 
of  hydrogen  in  excess,  and  another  time  10 
nitrous  with  12  ammonia  gave  excess  of  hy- 
drogen =  -?%;  generally  10  parts  with  6  or 
less  gave  oxygen,  and  10  with  8  or  more  gave 
hydrogen  in  the  residue. 

Decomposition  of  ammonia  by  oxygen. — 
The  limiting  proportions  of  oxygen  and  am- 
monia which  I  have  fired,  are  10  oxygen  to 
4  ammonia  for  the  minimum,  and  10  oxygen 
to  22  ammonia  for  the  maximum.     When  10 


AMMONIA.  &J3 

oxygen  were  fired  with  4  ammonia,  there 
were  *f  of  the  oxygen  left,  and  there  was  a 
deficiency  of  azote  amounting  to  T^  of  what 
was  expected  from  the  ammonia,  owing*  no 
doubt  to  nitrous  acid  generated  by  the  explo- 
sion. When  10  oxygen  to  1.8,  or  from  that 
to  2.2  ammonia  are  used,  there  is  a  surplus  of 
about  j  or  ■£  of  the  hydrogen  contained  in  the 
ammonia,  left  in  the  residue  of  the  gas. 
When  the  ammonia  is  between  13  and  14 
there  is  usually  a  trace  of  oxygen  or  hydro- 
gen as  it  approaches  either  of  these  limits. 
By  the  theory  of  volumes,  10  oxygen  should 
saturate  13f  of  ammoniacal  gas.  1  have  not 
any  instance  of  hydrogen  being  left  when  14 
ammonia  were  used,  though  there  ought  to  be 
^J  of  the  whole  left;  and  much  smaller  quan- 
tities than  that  are  appreciable  by  well  known 
methods.  The  azote  resulting  from  the  de- 
composition of  ammonia  is  usually  very  nearly 
|  the  volume  of  the  ammonia. 

On  the  whole  the  results  from  firing  am- 
monia and  oxygen  gas  appear  to  me  more 
satisfactory  than  those  obtained  from  nitrous 
oxide  and  nitrous  gas,  as  they  are  more  sim- 
ple and  less  perplexed  with  any  theoretic 
views. 

It  may  be  proper  to  remind  the  reader  that 
when  we  speak  of  10  parts  of  one  gas  uniting 


334  APPENDIX. 

with  8,  10,  or  more,  of  another  in  the  above 
and  other  cases,  it  is  to  be  understood  of 
gases  absolutely  pure  ;  not  that  we  ever  obtain 
them  in  that  state,  but  approximating  as  near 
as  we  can  to  it,  we  mix  given  portions  of 
such  gases  as  we  can  obtain,  and  then  in  our 
calculations  of  results  deduct  for  the  impu- 
rities. 

One  source  of  uncertainty  in  these  experi- 
ments on  firing  mixtures  of  ammonia,  is  that 
the  real  quantity  of  ammooiacal  gas  operated 
upon  is  not  known.  If  a  certain  measure  of 
ammonia  be  transferred  through  mercury 
ever  so  dry,  some  portion  of  it  gets  entangled 
in  the  mercury,  and  100  measures  become 
perhaps  95 :  now  in  the  explosion  it  is  a  ques- 
tion whether  any  part  of  the  5  measures  ab- 
sorbed is  decomposed.  I  have  marked  this 
attentively,  and  am  persuaded  that  generally 
speaking,  little  if  any  of  that  portion  is  de- 
composed ;  but  some  trace  of  it  appears  mostly 
afterwards  in  the  residue  as  it  is  liberated  from 
the  pressure  of  its  own  kind  of  gas,  and  hence 
easily  rises  into  the  gaseous  mixture.  Not- 
withstanding, when  the  loss  of  gas  by  trans- 
fer amounts  to  10  or  20  per  cent,  I  have  rea- 
son to  believe  that  some  part  of  it  suffers 
combustion  occasionally. 


AMMONIA.  335 

Volume  of  gases  from  the  decomposition  of 
ammonia. — It  has  been  observed  (vol.  I.  Am- 
monia) that  Sir  H.  Davy  obtained  180  mea- 
sures of  gases,  by  means  of  electricity,  from 
100  of  ammonia  as  the  maximum  when  the 
operation  was  performed  with  great  care,  and 
Dr.  Henry  in  like  circumstances,  produced 
181,  whilst  I  found  187  measures;  since  that, 
as  has  been  related,  Dr.  Henry  has  found 
200  measures.  It  is  not  easy  to  account  for 
these  differences ;  I  am  inclined  to  the  opinion 
that  the  volume  of  gases  is  very  nearly  dou- 
bled, but  probably  rather  less  than  more.  I 
find  the  experiments  on  the  rapid  combustion 
of  ammonia  agree  best  with  that  opinion. 

Decomposition  of  ammonia  by  a  red  heat. — • 
A  short  time  since  I  repeated  the  decomposi- 
tion of  ammonia  by  passing  the  gas  through 
a  red  hot  copper  tube.  The  proportion  of  azote 
to  hydrogen,  due  allowance  being  made  for  a 
minute  portion  of  atmospheric  air,  was  upon 
the  average  of  a  number  of  experiments,  26 
of  the  former  to  74  of  the  latter. 

Decomposition  of  ammonia  by  oxy muriatic 
acid. — I  have  made  several  experiments  on 
this  mode  of  decomposition  since  the  results 
published  in  vol.  1,  page  435.  It  is  well 
known  that  a  solution  of  oxymuriate  of  lime 
decomposes   ammoniacal    salts;     water  and 


336  APPENDIX. 

muriatic  acid  are  produced,  azote  liberated, 
and  the  acid  previbusly  combined  with  the 
ammonia  is  evolved.  But  this  is  not  all ;  an 
excessively  pungent  gas  or  perhaps  vapour  is 
produced,  exciting  sneezing,  and  inducing 
catarrh  ;  the  constitution  of  this  vapour  is  not 
well  understood ;  it  is  never  formed,  as  far 
as  I  know,  without  the  presence  of  both  oxy- 
muriatic  acid  and  ammonia.  The  results  of 
such  mixtures  are  of  course  complicated  and 
likely  to  be  unsatisfactory  ;  it  may  notwith- 
standing be  useful  to  relate  some  of  thenu 

When  clear  oxymuriate  of  lime  solution, 
and  a  salt  of  ammonia  are  mixed  together 
with  a  little  excess  of  oxymuriate,  the  am- 
monia is  mostly  decomposed,  the  oxymu- 
riate being  converted  into  muriate  of  lime 
by  the  hydrogen  of  the  ammonia,  whilst  the 
azote  is  evolved,  and  the  acid  previously 
combined  with  the  ammonia  is  liberated  ; 
hence  oxymuriatic  acid  gas  is  also  liberated 
along  with  the  azote  ;  and  it  is  required  to 
be  taken  out  before  the  azote  can  be  estimated. 
This  circumstance  may  be  obviated  by  pre- 
viously adding  the  requisite  quantity  of  pure 
potash  or  soda,  to  engage  the  acid,  or  by 
leaving  a  little  undissolved  lime  in  the  oxy- 
muriatic  solution.  I  could  never  obtain  a 
volume  of  azote  equal  to  half  that  of  the  am- 


AMMONIA.  337 

nionia  (.-supposed  lo  he  in  a  gaseous  state) 
though  it  is  universally  allowed  not  to  be  less 
than  that,  if  the  whole  of  the  azote  be  evolved  ; 
on  one  occasion  only  I  got  so  much  as  44  of 
that  quantity.  The  residue  of  liquid  has  the 
extremely  pungent  smell ;  but  the  azotic  gas 
after  passing  through  pure  water  has  no  smell. 
When  this  experiment  is  made  over  mercury, 
the  oxymuriatic  acid  acts  upon  it,  and  hence 
the  excess  of  oxy  muriate  should  be  such  as  to 
leave  a  portion  of  that  undecomposed  at  the 
conclusion. 

When  the  object  is  to  ascertain  the  hydro- 
gen in  ammonia,  a  portion  of  salt  known  to 
contain  a  given  weight  of  ammonia  is  to  be 
treated  with  oxymuriate  of  lime  solution,  the 
strength  of  which  is  accurately  determined  by 
means  of  green  sulphate  of  iron,  or  otherwise. 
The  ammoniacal  salt  in  solution  is  then  to  be 
mixed  with  a  moderate  redundance  of  the 
oxymuriate  liquid,  and  with  a  few  drops  of 
caustic  potash,  and  the  mixture  must  be  re- 
peatedly agitated  for  some  time.  At  length 
the  liquid  must  be  tested  by  the  green  sul- 
phate of  iron,  and  hence  the  quantity  of  acid 
spent  upon  the  ammonia  will  be  determined. 
I  have  mostly  found  the  hydrogen  this  way 
below  the  common  estimate,  allowing  the 
ammoniacal  salts  to  be  correctly  determined. 
T  t 


338  APPENDIX. 


&ULPHURET    OF    CARBON. 

Since  the  article  at  page  462,  vol.  1,  was 
written,  an  excellent  essay  on  the  sulpburet  of 
carbon  has  been  published  in  the  Philosophical 
Transactions,  (IB  13)  by  Professor  Berzelius 
and  Dr.  Marcet.  After  an  extensive  series  of 
experiments,  they  infer  the  atom  of  the  sul- 
phuret  to  consist  of  2  atoms  sulphur  and  L  of 
carbon.  The  investigation  did  not  seem  to 
warrant  their  including*  hydrogen  in  the  atom. 
I  have  made  several  experiments  on  the  com- 
bustion of  the  vapour  of  sulphuret  of  carbon 
in  oxygen  gas  by  electricity.  My  method 
generally  was,  to  vapourize  a  given  portion 
of  atmospheric  air  over  mercury,  taking  care 
that  the  vapour  was  below  the  maximum  for 
the  temperature  ;  this  is  easily  effected  by 
petting  the  liquid  into  a  phial  of  air,  drop  by 
drop,  and  inverting  it  over  mercury  till  the 
liquid  is  evaporated.  This  vapourized  air,  I 
find  may  be  transferred  through  mercury  with 
very  little  loss,  and  even  through  water  se- 
veral times,  without  a  total  condensation  of 
the  vapour.  The  vapour  of  ether  is  much 
more  coiiUensible  by  water  than  that  of  sul- 
phuret of  carbon.  A  given  portion  of  this 
vapourized  air  is  to  be  mixed  with  oxygen 
gas,  in  Volta's  eudiometer,  and  then  exploded 


STJLPHURET    OF    CARBON.  £89 

by  the  electric  spark  over  mercury.  One  vo- 
lume of  vapour  combines  with  nearly  3|  of 
oxygen,  and  therefore  requires  4  or  5  times 
its  bulk  of  that  gas  before  firing,  in  order 
that  the  combustion  may  be  complete.  The 
results  of  the  combustion  are  carbonic  acid 
and  sulphurous  acid  ;  and  I  suspect  a  small 
portion  of  water;  though  Professor  Berze- 
lius  and  Dr.  Marcet  could  not  detect  any. 

By  evaporating  a  given  weight  of  the  sul- 
phuret  of  carbon,  in.  a  given  volume  of  at- 
mospheric air,  at  the  temperature  of  60°,  I 
find  the  specific  gravity  of  the  vapour  to  be 
2.75  nearly,  air  being  1.  Now  if  we  assume 
the  atom  of  vapour  to  be  nearly  of  the  same 
volume  as  that  of  hydrogen,  and  to  consist  of 
1  atom  hydrogen,  2  sulphur,  and  1  carbon, 
it  will  require  7  atoms  of  oxygen  to  form 
water,  sulphurous  acid,  and  carbonic  acid, 
which  will  accord  very  well  with  my  experi- 
ence. When  vapourized  hydrogen  gas  is 
electrified  for  some  time,  there  is  no  change 
of  volume,  though  there  is  some  appearance 
of  decomposition.  Probably  the  hydrogen 
of  the  sulphuret  is  liberated.  It  is  difficult 
to  conceive  how  so  volatile  a  liquid  as  the  one 
in  question,  could  be  constituted  out  of  suL- 
phur  and  carbon  without  the  addition  of 
hydrogen. 


340  APPENDIX. 

POTASSIUM,    SODIUM,    &C 

Two  views  of  the   nature   of  these   bodies 
have  been  given  in  vol.  1,  (see  pages  260,  and 
484,  &c).     In  the, former  they  are  considered 
as  simple  metals;  in  the  latter,  as  compound 
bodies  resulting  from  the  abstraction  of  oxy- 
gen from  the  hydrates  of  potash  and  soda  ; 
or  as  being  constituted  of  1  atom  of  hydrogen 
united  to  1  atom  of  pure  potash  or  soda  res- 
pectively.    Those  who  have  had  the  most  ex- 
perience on  these  elements,    Sir  H.  Davy, 
and  M.  M.  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard,    seem 
now  to  concur  in  the  former  view,  and  it  has 
been  adopted  by  most  chemists.     Part  of  the 
objections  which  we  made  to  this  view   have 
been  obviated,  it  should  seem,  by  establishing 
the  fact,  that  oxymuriatic  gas  and  hydrogen 
gas  united,  form  muriatic  acid  gas.     There 
are  still,  however,  difficulties  to  remove  before 
this  view  can  be  considered  perfectly   satis- 
factory ;    but  they   are  not  greater  perhaps 
than  would  attach  to   any   other  explanation 
of  the  facts  connected  with  the  subject.     Be- 
sides potassium  and  sodium,    experience  as 
well  as  analogy  would  seem  to  render  proba- 
ble, if  not  to  establish,   the   existence  of  ba- 
rium, strontium,  and   calcium   as  metals,  of 
which  barytes,  strontites,  and  lime  are  the 


ALUM.  841 

protoxides,  as  potash  and  soda  are  of  the 
other  two  metals  ;  (other  oxides  of  potassium 
and  sodium  are  stated,  see  page  55 — 57); 
barium  has  a  deutoxide,  and  probably  cal- 
cium likewise.  The  rest  of  the  earths,  as 
magnesia,  alumine,  silex,  &c.  are  by  analogy 
considered  by  most  chemists  as  oxides  of 
particular  metals,  but  the  proportions  of  their 
elements  have  not  been  determined. 


ALUM. 

At  page  581,  vol.  1,  we  have  given  the 
constitution  of  this  important  salt,  as  under : 
since  that  time  Mr.  R.  Phillips  has  announ- 
ced another  view  of  it ;  and  Dr.  Thomson 
has  published  one  differing  from  both  of  these. 
They  are  as  follow  :     * 

Dalton —      1  atom  sulphate  of  potash. 

4  atoms  sulphate  of  alumine. 
30  atoms  water. 

Phillips —     1  atom  bi-sulphate  of  potash. 

2  atoms  sulphate  of  alumine. 
22  atoms  water. 

Thomson —  1  atom  sulphate  of  potash. 

3  atoms  sulphate  of  alumine. 
25  atoms  water. 


342  APPENDIX. 

Notwithstanding'  these  differences,  there  is 
a  near  approximation  in  all  three,  in  regard 
to  the  quantities  of  acid,  alumine,  potash, 
and  water  in  the  salt.  This  is  accounted  for 
partly  in  the  different  relative  weights  of  the 
atoms,  as  estimated  by  the  different  analysts,, 
but  chiefly  in  that  of  alumine. 

Some  very  curious  results  occurred  to  me 
about  10  years  ago  in  analysing'  alum;  they 
were  new  to  me,  but  I  have  since  found  they 
had  been  previously  discovered  by  Scheele. 
(See  his  essay  on  silex,  clay,  and  alum,  1776.) 
As  his  observations  are  not  to  be  found  in  any 
of  our  elementary  books  that  1  have  seen,  I 
shall  give  the  particulars  of  my  own  experi- 
ments here. 

I  take  24  grains  of  alum  and  dissolve  them 
in  water;  of  these  8  grains  may  be  allowed 
for  sulphuric  acid,  -j  of  which  =  1.6  grain 
—  1.1  grain  of  lime  —  880 -grains  of  lime- 
water,  such  as  I  commonly  use.  To  the  so- 
lution of  alum  I  put  880  grains  of  lime-water ; 
a  slight  precipitate  appears  which  soon  be- 
comes redissolved  almost  completely.  The 
liquid  is  then  acid  by  the  colour  test. 

To  this  liquid  I  put  880  more  of  lime-water, 
and  agitate;  a  copious  precipitate  appears 
and  continues ;  after  subsidence  the  clear  li- 
quid is  stiil  acid  by  the  colour  test. 


alum.  ms 

Another  880  grains  are  added*,  and  the 
whole  is  then  well  agitated  ;  the  agitation  is 
repeated  two  or  three  times  after  the  precipi- 
tate  has  partly  subsided,  so  as  to  diffuse  it 
equally  again  through  the  liquid;  finally,  the 
clear  liquid  is  found  to  be  neutral  by  the  co- 
lour test,  and  to  contain  no  alumine;  for, 
lime-water  produces  no  precipitate  when 
poured  into  it. 

Another  880  grains  being  added,  and  the 
whole  stirred  well,  the  clear  liquid  after  the 
subsidence  of  the  precipitate  is  still  neutral 
by  the  colour  test. 

The  fifth  portion  of  880  grains  being  then 
added,  and  the  mixture  well  agitated,  a  con- 
siderable portion  of  the  precipitate  will  evi- 
dently disappear,  and  the  mixture  become 
semitransparent ;  after  a  time  the  clear  super- 
natant liquid  is  found  strongly  alkaline  ;  a 
little  of  it  touched  with  an  acid  becomes 
milky,  and  adding  more  acid  clears  it  again. 
The  liquid  is  now  1.0025  sp.gr.,  or  a  little 
heavier  than  lime-water. 

The  sixth  portion  of  880  grains  being  now 
added  to  the  whole  mixture,  and  agitated, 
the  precipitate  rather  diminishes,  and  an  in- 
crease of  specific  gravity  takes  place  in  the 
liquid:  it  is  now  1.003. 


844  APPENDIX. 

The  seventh  and  last  portion  of  880  grains 
being  added  to  the  mixture,  and  agitation 
being  continued  for  some  time,  a  dense  bulky 
precipitate  is  formed,  which  falls  with  great 
celerity,  carrying  with  it  the  greatest  part 
of  the  acid,  the  alumine  and  the  lime,  and 
leaving  the  liquid  of  the  sp.  gr.  1.0012.  It 
is  a  subsulphate  into  which  acid,  potash,  lime 
and  alumine  enter,  as  will  be  shewn. 

These  phenomena  appear  to  me  to  be  best 
explained  by  adopting  a  constitution  of  alum, 
such  as  to  make  it  consist  of  1  atom  bisul- 
phate  of  potash  and  3  atoms  of  sulphate  of 
alumine;  after  which  the  following  explana- 
tion will  apply. 

The  first  portion  of  lime-water  saturates 
the  excess  of  acid. 

The  second  portion  throws  down  a  corres- 
pondent portion  of  alumine.  The  clear  liquid 
is  acid,  because  it  contains  sulphate  of  alu- 
mine, which  is  essentially  acid  by  the  colour 
test,  because  alumine  is  not  an  alkaline  ele- 
ment. 

The  third  portion  throws  down  another 
portion  or  atom  of  alumine ;  but  by  conti- 
nued agitation  the  two  atoms  of  alumine  liber- 
ated, join  the  remaining  atom  of  sulphate  of 
alumine,  and  the  whole  compound  falls  down, 
being  then  the  common  subsulphate  of  alum. 


ALUM.  345 

Hence  the*  liquid,  containing  nothing"  but 
sulphate  of  lime  and  sulphate  of  potash,  is 
neutral  by  the  test,  and  yields  no  alumine  by 
the  addition  of  lime-water. 

The  fourth  portion  of  lime-water  being 
put  in  and  duly  agitated,  the  atom  of  sul- 
phuric acid  is  drawn  from  the  subsulphate  to 
join  the  lime,  and  then  the  floating  subsul- 
phate of  alumine  becomes  pure  alumine,  and 
the  clear  liquor  is  still  neutral. 

The  fifth  portion  of  lime-water  tries  to  de- 
compose the  sulphate  of  potash,  but  is  unable 
of  itself;  however,  the  floating  alumine  as- 
sits  it,  and  by  double  affinity  the  potash  leaves 
the  acid  to  join  the  alumine,  and  the  lime 
takes  the  acid.  Hence  as  4  of  the  alumine 
enters  into  solution  with  the  potash,  the  pre- 
cipitate is  less  copious,  and  the  liquid  is  alka- 
line \  a  small  portion  of  acid  put  into  the 
clear  liquid  engages  the  potash,  and  liberates 
the  alumine,  but  a  larger  portion  redissolves 
the  alumine  also. 

The  sixth  portion  of  lime-water  seems  to 
complete  the  effect  which  the  fifth  commences, 
and  hence  the  density  of  the  liquid  increases, 
whilst  the  precipitate  rather  diminishes. 

The  seventh  portion  of  lime,  together  with 
the  sixth,  after  due  agitation  and  some  time, 

unite  the  lime  with  the  alumine,  one  atom  of 

Uu 


346  APPENDIX 

each,  and  form  a  precipitate  which  would  fall 
together,  were  no  other  compound  present, 
asT  found,  and  Seheele  before  me;  but  if  sul- 
phate of  lime  be  present,  each  compound 
atom  of  lime  and  alumine,  unites  with  one  of 
sulphate  of  lime,  and  the  whole  descends  to- 
gether, forming"  a  subsulphate  resembling  that 
of  alum,  only  two  atoms  of  lime  are  found 
as  substitutes  for  two  atoms  of  alumine.  This 
subsalt  is  very  little  soluble  in  water. 

According  to  this  view,  if  2  atoms  of  alum 
were  decomposed,  4  atoms  of  subsulphate 
would  be  formed,  each  consisting  of  1  'acid, 
2  lime,  and  1  alumine ;  also  2  compound 
atoms  of  potash  and  alumine,  and  6  atoms 
sulphate  of  lime.  But  in  the  final  arrange- 
ment, it  would  seem,  that  2  atoms  of  sulphate 
of  lime  are  again  decomposed,  and  sulphate 
of  potash  formed,  the  2  atoms  of  lime  com- 
bining with  the  2  of  alumine,  and  then  two 
more  atoms  of  subsulphate  are  formed,  and 
the  final  arrangement  is  6  atoms  subsulphate 
precipitated,  and  2  atoms  sulphate  of  potash, 
and  2  sulphate  of  lime  remain  in  solution. 

The  facts  above  stated  appear  to  me  to 
place  the  constitution  of  alum  in  a  clearer 
pointof  view  than  any  other  1  have  seen. 
They  make  no  difference  in  the  weights  of 
the  several  elements  in  100  grains  of  the  salt, 


ATOMIC    PRINCIPLES.  317 

from  what  we  have  given  in  Vol.  1  ;  only  the 
weight  of  the  atom  of  alumine  is  here  taken 
to  be  20  instead  of  15,  and  we  have  3  atoms 
of  it  in  1  of  ahim,  instead  of  4,  as  in  the 
former  account. 


ON    THE    PRINCIPLES    OF     THE    ATOMIC 
SYSTEM   OF    CHEMISTRY. 

It  is  generally  allowed  that  the  great  ob- 
jects of  the  atomic  system  are,  1st  to  deter- 
mine the  relative  weights  of  the  simple  ele- 
ments 5  and  2d  to  determine  the  number,  and 
consequently  the  weight,  of  simple  elements 
that  enter  into  combination  to  form  compound 
elements.     The   greatest  desideratum  at  the 
present  time  is  the  exact  relative   weight  of 
the  element  hydrogen.     The  small  weight  of 
100  cubic  inches  of  hydrogen   gas,  the  im- 
portant modifications  of  that  weight  by  even 
very  minute  quantities  of  common  air  and 
aqueous  vapour,  and  the  difficulties  in  ascer- 
taining the  proportions  of  air  and  vapour  in 
regard  to  hydrogen,  are  circumstances  suffi- 
cient to  make  one  distrust  results  obtained  by 
the  most  expert  and  scientific  operator.     The 
specific  gravity  of  hydrogen  gas  was  formerly 
estimated  at  ^  that  of  common  air ;  it  de- 
scended to  77^-,  which  is  the  ratio  we  adopted 


848  APPENDIX* 

in  the  Table  at  the  end  of  Vol.  1 .     It  is  now 
commonly  taken  to   be  j~j9  and   whether   it 
may  not  in  the  sequel  be  found   to    be  7*^7  is 
more  than  any  one  at  present,  I  believe,  has 
sufficient  data  to  determine.     The  other  fac- 
titious gases  have  mostly  undergone  some  ma- 
terial alterations  in   their  specific  gravities  in 
the  last  twenty  years,  several  of  which  1  have 
no  doubt  are  improvements  :  but  when  we  see 
these  specific  gravities  extended  to  the   3rd, 
4th,  and  5th   places   of  decimals,  it   appears 
to  me  to  require  a  credit  far  greater  than  any 
one  of  us  is   entitled   to.     In  the  mean  time, 
it  may  be  thought  a  fortunate   circumstance, 
that  the  weight  of  common  air  has  undergone 
no  change  for  the  last  thirty   or  forty  years; 
100  cubic  inches   being   estimated    to  weigh 
30. o   grains  at   the  temperature  of  60°,   and 
pressure  of  30  inches  of  mercury  :   (whether 
this  is  exclusive  of  the  moisture  I  do  not  re- 
collect.)    It  is  also  a  fortunate  circumstance, 
(provided  it  be   correct)  that  this  weight  is 
nearly  free  from  decimal  figures.     I   may    be 
allowed  to  add,  that  according  to  my   expe- 
rience, the  weight  of  100  cubic  inches  of  air 
is  more   nearly   31   grains  than  30.5.     I  ap- 
prehend these  observations  are   sufficient  to 
shew  that  something  more  remains  to  be  done 
before  we   obtain  a  tolerably  correct  table  of 


ATOMIC    PRINCIPLES.  349 

the  specific  gravities  of  gases;  the  importance 
of  this  object  can  not  be  too  highly  estimated. 

The  combinations  of  gases  in  equal  volumes, 
and  in  muhiple  volumes,  is  naturally  con- 
nected with  this  subject.  The  cases  of  this 
kind,  or  at  least  approximations  to  them, 
frequently  occur;  but  no  principle  has  yet 
been  suggested  to  account  for  the  phenomena ; 
till  that  is  done  I  think  we  ought  to  investi- 
gate the  facts  with  great  care,  and  not  suffer 
ourselves  to  be  led  to  adopt  these  analogies 
till  some  reason  can  be  discovered  for  them. 

The  2d  object  of  the  atomic  theory,  namely 
that  of  investigating  the  number  of  atoms  in 
the  respective  compounds,  appears  to  me  to 
have  been  little  understood,  even  by  some 
who  have  undertaken  to  expound  the  princi- 
ples of  the  theory. 

When  two  bodies,  A  and  B,  combine  in 
multiple  proportions  ;  for  instance,  10  parts 
of  A  combine  with  7  of  B,  to  form  one  com- 
pound, and  with  14  to  form  another,  we  are 
directed  by  some  authors  to  take  the  smallest 
combining  proportion  of  one  body  as  repre- 
sentative of  the  elementary  particle  or  atom 
of  that  body.  Now  it  must  be  obvious  to 
any  one  of  common  reflection,  that  such  a 
rule  will  be  more  frequently  wrong  than  right. 
For,  by  the  above  rule,  we  must  consider  the 


350  APPENDIX. 

first  of  the  combinations  as  containing  1  atom* 
of  B,  and  the  second  as  containing  2  atoms 
of  B,  with  1  atom  or  more  of  A  ;  whereas 
it  is  equally  probable  by  the  same  rule,  that 
the  compounds  may  be  2  atoms  of  A  to  1  of 
B,  and  1  atom  of  A  to  1  of  B  respectively  ; 
for,  the  proportions  being  10  A  to  7  B,  (or, 
which  is  the  same  ratio,  20  A  to  14  B,)  and 
10  A  to  14  B  ;  it  is  clear  by  the  rule,  that 
when  the  numbers  are  thus  stated,  we  must 
consider  the  former  combination  as  composed 
of  2  atoms  of  A,  and  the  latter  of  1  atom  of 
A,  united  to  1  or  more  of  B.  Thus  there 
would  be  an  equal  chance  for  right  or  wrong. 
But  it  is  possible  that  10  of  A,  and  7  of  B, 
may  correspond  to  1  atom  A,  and  2  atoms 
B;  and  then  10  of  A,  and  14  of  B,  must 
represent  1  atom  A,  and  4  atoms  B.  Thus 
it  appears  the  rule  will  be  more  frequently 
wrong  than  right. 

It  is  necessary  not  only  t®  consider  the 
combinations  of  A  with  B,  but  also  those  of 
A  with  C,  D,  Er  &c. ;  as  well  as  those  of 
B  with  C,  D,  &c,  before  we  can  have  good 
reason  to  be  satisfied  with  our  determinations 
•s  to  the  number  of  atoms  which  enter  inta 
the  various  compounds.  Elements  formed  of 
azote  and  oxygen  appear  to  contain  portions 
©f  oxygen,  as  the  numbers  ly  2,  3y  4,  5y  sue- 


ATOMIC   PRINCIPLES.  351 

cessively,  so  as  to  make  it  highly  improbable 
that  the  combinations  can  be  effected  in  any 
other  than  one  of  two  ways.  But  in  deciding 
which  of  those  two  we  ought  to  adopt,  we 
have  to  examine  not  only  the  compositions 
and  decompositions  of  the  several  compounds, 
of  these  two  elements,  but  also  compounds 
which  each  of  them  forms  with  other  bo- 
dies. I  have  spent  much  time  and  labour 
upon  these  compounds,  and  upon  others  of 
the  primary  elements  carbone,  hydrogen, 
•oxygen,  and  azote,  which  appear  to  me  to 
be  of  the  greatest  importance  in  the  atomic 
system;  but  it  will  be  seen  that  I  am  not  sa- 
tisfied on  this  head,  either  by  my  own  labour 
or  that  of  others,  chiefly  through  the  want  of 
an  accurate  knowledge  of  combining  pro- 
portions. 


352 


APPENDIX. 


NEW  TABLE 

OF    THE    RELATIVE    WEIGHTS    OF    ATOMS. 

At  the  close  of  the  last  volume,  the  weights  of  several 
principal  chemical  elements  or  atoms  were  given ;  but  as 
several  additions  and  alterations  have  been  educed  from 
subsequent  experience,  it  has  been  judged  expedient  to 
present  a  reformed  table  of  weights; 


SIMPLE    ELEMENTS. 


Weights. 

Hydrogen I 

Azote 5±,  or  10  P 

Carbone 5.4 

Oxygen 7 

Phosphorus  9 

Sulphur     ...13,  or  14 

Calcium 17  ? 

Sodium 21 

Arsenic 21 

Molybdenum   ...21,  or  42? 

Cerium    22? 

Iron ...25 

Manganese 25 

Nickel 26 

Zinc    29 

Tellurium     29,  or  58? 

Chromium  32 

Potassium 35 

Cobalt 37 


Weights. 

Strontium   39 

Antimony ....40 

Iridium    42 

Palladium  '.. 50 

Uranium    50,  or  100? 

Tin- 52 

Copper 56,  or  28? 

Rhodium    56 

Titanium    59? 

Gold 60± 

Barium    61 

Bismuth 62 

Platina    73 

Tungsten .84,  or  42  ? 

Silver 90 

Lead    90 

Columbium    ...107?  121? 
Mercury 167,  or  84? 


SIMPLE    OR    COMPOUND 

Weights 


Fluoric  Acid 10?  J5? 

Magnesia    17 

Alumine 20 

Glucine    .23?  34? 

Lime    24 

Oxymuriatic  Acid 

(chlorine) 29  or  30 


Muriatic  Acid 


Wrights. 

}  30,  or  31 

Zircone  45 

Silex 45? 

Yttria  53?  36?  18? 


RELATIVE    WEIGHTS    OF    ATOMS.      353 


COMPOUND    ELEMENTS. 


wdghts- 
Ammonia 6?  12?  L3r 

defiant  Gas 6.4?    12.8? 

Carburetted    ^ 

Hydrogen     > 7.4 

or  Pond  Gas  J 

Water    8 

Phosphuretted  7  .„ 

Hydrogen     j 

Nitrous  Gas 32,  or  24? 

Carbonic  Oxide S2.4 

Sulphuretted  Hydrogen  15 
Deutoxide  of  Hydrogen  15 

Nitrous  Oxide 17 

Nitrous  Acid  ...19,  or  38? 

Carbonic  Acid    19.4 

Sulphurous  Oxide  21 

Phosphoric  Acid     23 

Sulphurous  Acid    28 

Protoxide  of  Arsenic  ...28 

Soda .28 

H  ydr ate  of  Lime 32 

Protoxide  of  Iron 32 

Protoxide    of  Man-  } 

ganese     ) 

Protoxide  of  Nickel  ...33 

Sulphuric  Acid  35 

Sulphuret  of  Arsenic  7    q/- 

(native) j   JD 

Hydrate  of  Soda 36 

Oxide  of  Zinc 36 

Carbonate  of  Magnesia  36.4 
Protosulphuret  of  Iron  39 
DeutoxideofManga~7  ^ 

nese 3 

Oxide  of  Chromium  ...39 
Muriate  of  Magnesia... 39 


32 


Protosulphuret  of 

Nickel    

Protosulphuret  of 

Lime 

Carbonate  of  Lime 
Protoxide  of  Cobalt 

Strontites    46 

Muriate  of  Lime ..46 

Chromic  Acid 46 

Protoxide  of  Antimony  47 

Xx 


40 

41 

43. 

44 


Weights 

Carbonate  of  Soda 47.4 

Hydrate  of  Potash 50 

Muriate  of  Soda 50 

Sulphate  of  Magnesia  52 
Sulphuret  of  Antimony  54 
Sulphate  of  Alumine  7    -, 

(simple) ) 

Oxide  of  Palladium  ..   57 

Sulphate  of  Lime  59 

Protoxide  of  Tin    59 

Carbonate  of  Potash. ..61. 4 


55 


62 


Hydrosulphuret   of    7 

Antimony 3 

Nitrate  of  M  agnesia   . .  .62 

Sulphate  of  Soda   63 

Protoxide  of  Copper  ...63 

Muriate  of  Potash 64 

Deutoxide  of  Tin  66 

Protosulphuret  of  Tin    66 

Oxide  of  Gold    .. 67 

Barytes 68 

Muriate  of  Lime    .69 

Oxide  of  Bismuth 69 

Deutoxide  of  Copper  70 

Nitrate  of  Soda 73 

Sulphuret  of  Gold 74 

Protosulphuret   of  7     -g 

Bismuth 3 

Sulphate  of  Potash 77 

Oxide  of  Platina 80? 

Nitrate  of  Potash  ......87 

Carbonate  of  Barytes  87 
Muriate  of  Barytes    ...90 

Oxide  of  Silver 97 

Protoxide  of  Lead 97 

Minium ,...98 

Sulphate  of  Barytes  103 
Deutoxide  of  Lead  ...104 
Protosulphurets  of  7  . ^. 

Lead  and  Silver    3 
Nitrate  of  Barytes  ...113 
Protoxide  of  Mercury  174? 
Deutoxide  of  Mercury  181  ? 
Protosulphuret   of  7     1Q1  ? 

Mercury j     lbl 

Alum  .....277 


354  APPENDIX, 


ADDENDA. 


Steel.— Since  writing*  the  article  at  page 
214,  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  analysing  the 
crystalline  steel,  formed  by  Mr.  Macintosh's 
process  of  cementation  by  means  of  coal  gas. 
I  dissolved  21  grains  of  this  steel  in  sulphuric 
acid,  with  only  a  very  slight  excess  of  acid. 
The  whole  was  dissolved  except  about  XV  of 
a  grain  of  silvery-like  particles.  The  gas 
obtained  amounted  to  29.6  cubic  inches.  It 
yielded  no  trace  of  carbonic  acid.  When 
fired  with  oxygen  it  yielded  3  per  cent,  upon 
the  volume  of  hydrogen  of  carbonic  acid  ; 
and  this  arose,  as  I  ascertained,  from  the  hy- 
drogen containing  3  per  cent  of  carburetted 
hydrogen  gas:  it  contained  no  carbonic  ox- 
ide. Supposing  the  carbone  to  have  been 
combined  with  the  iron,  it  would  amount 
only  to  about  -J-  of  a  grain,  to  100  grains 
of  iron.  Whether  such  a  quantity  can  be 
deemed  an  essential  or  an  accidental  ingre- 
dient of  steel,  may  be  a  subject  of  consider- 
ation. 


MIXED    GASES.  355 


By  a  mistake  of  the  Printer,  the  following  paragraphs 
were  omitted  after  page  308. 

EXAMPLE. 

According  to  the  following  values  of  the  dif- 
ferent specific  gravities,  (of  the  accuracy  of 
some  of  which  there  may  be  doubts)  and 
referring  to  my  essay  on  oil  gas  (Manchester 
Memoirs,  Vol."'  4,  new  series,  page  79,)  we 
may  take  the  oil  gas,  which,  when  the  in- 
combustible portion  was  abstracted  would  be 
nearly  .812  sp.  gravity,  and 

100  pure  gas  give  152  carb.  acid  and  take 
24S  oxygen ; 

Here  w  =  100,  a  =  15%  g  =  248,  S  =  1.458, 
/=  .555,  c  =  .972  s  =  .0694  and  (7=  .812. 

The  value  of  u  reduces  to  the  following  form ; 

„       4.7916  a  -  If  a  -f  1.875  w  -  6  C  w        Q  .  « 
u  = — ^— 625  =   24° 

hydrogen  per  cent,  of  pure  combustible  gas. 
Hence  we  have  75.5  volumes  left  for  the  3 
other  ingredients  =  w  of  the  formula;  and 
abstracting  12  +  from  the  oxygen  on  account 
of  the  hydrogen,  g  =  236  -  ,  and  a  =152 
as  above. 


356  APPENDIX. 

Whence  x  =±  Superolefiant  =*  38* 

y  =  Carb.  hydrg.  ==  30.2 

and  z  =  Carb.  oxide    =    7-f- 


75.5 


These  results  differ  considerably  from  those 
deduced  in  the  above  essay  ;  probably  in  part 
from  errors  in  the  above  estimates  of  the  spe- 
cific gravities  of  one  or  more  of  the  gases, 

EXPANSION   OF  LIQUIDS    BY   HEAT. 

I  am  not  aware  of  any  particular  labour 
that  has  recently  been  given  to  the  enquiry 
how  far  pure  liquids  accord  with  each  other 
in  the  law  which  I  announced  as  derived  from 
the  experiments  on  water  and  mercury,  and 
corroborated  by  those  upon  several  other 
liquids.  See  Vol.  1,  Table  of  temperature, 
page  14 ;  also  page  36,  and  following. 

Perhaps  all  liquids  should  be  considered  as 
pure  that  are  subject  to  uniform  congelation 
at  certain  temperatures  on  the  one  hand,  and 
on  the  other  are  capable  of  being  distilled  by 
heat  without  any  alteration  in  their  constitu- 
tion. Water  and  mercury  will  rank  in  the 
first  place ;  alcohol  of  .82  specific  gravity 
and   ether   of    .72;     concentrated    sulphuric 


EXPANSION    OF    LIQUIDS.  357 

acid  ;  nitric  acid  of  1.42  specific  gravity  : 
naphtha  and  oil  of  turpentine,  &c.  will  pro- 
bably be  thought  to  claim  the  next  place. 
It  is  desirable  that  the  temperatures  at  which 
these  liquids  congeal  should  be  ascertained  ; 
also  whether  any  decomposition  is  effected 
by  the  operation.  If  these  expand  propor- 
tionally to  a  scale  of  square  numbers  for 
certain  given  equal  or  unequal  intervals  of 
temperature,  it  may  point  out  something  re- 
lative to  the  collocation  of  the  ultimate  par- 
ticles in  liquids.  The  apparent  coincidence 
of  this  rate  of  expansion  in  liquids,  with  the 
geometrical  progressive  force  of  steams  or 
vapours  creates  an  additional  interest.  It 
may  be  that  most  or  all  of  these  supposed 
relations  are  accidental,  and  only  approx- 
imative like  that  of  the  rate  of  expansion  of 
air  and  mercury,  between  the  temperatures 
of-  40°  and  212°;  but  I  cannot  think  this 
probable.  Even  should  they  be  only  approx- 
imations, they  are  of  sufficient  utility  to  be 
kept  in  view. 


FINIS. 


Printed  by  the  Executors  of  S.  Russell. 


BOOKS,  ESSAYS,  &c, 

PUBLISHED  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 

Meteorological  Observations  and  Essays. 
4.5.  8vo.  1793. 

Elements  of  English  Grammar  :  or,  a  new 
System  of  Grammatical  Instruction,  for  the  use 
of  Schools  and  Academies.  2s.  6d.  12mo.  1801. 

£>•  A  few  Copies  of  these  Works  may  still  be  had  of  the  London  Booksellers. 

A  New  System  of  Chemical  Philosophy. 
Part  I.  of  Vol.  I.    Is.  8vo.  1808. 

Part  II. 105.  6d.  8va— 1810. 

Published  by  G.  Wilson,  Bookseller,  Essex-street,  Strand,  London. 


ESSAYS,  by  the  same,  in  ithe  Memoirs  of  the  Literary 
and  Philosophical  Society,  Manchester. 

Vol.  5.  Part  1. — Extraordinary  facts  relating  to  the  vision 
of  colours. 

Part  2. — Experiments  and  observations  to  determine 
whether  the  quantity  of  rain  and  dew  is  equal  to  the 
quantity  of  water  carried  off  by  the  rivers,  and  raised  by 
evaporation  ;  with  an  enquiry  into  the  origin  of  springs. 

Experiments  and  observations  on  the  power  of  fluids, 
to  conduct  heat,  with  reference  to  Count  Rum  ford's 
seventh  essay  on  the  same  subject. 

Experiments  and  observations  on  the  heat  and  cold 
produced  by  the  mechanical  condensation  and  rarefaction 
of  air. 

Experimental  essays  on  the  constitution  of  mixed 
gases;  on  the  force  of  steam  or  vapour  from  water  and 
other  liquids,  in  different  temperatures,  both  in  a  Torri- 
cellian vacuum,  and  in  air  ;  on  evaporation ;  and  on  the 
expansion  of  gases  by  heat. 


i 


ESSAYS,    8tC. 

Meteorological  observations  made  at  Manchester,  from 
1793  to  1801. 

Vol.  1.  Second  series. — Experimental  enquiry  into  tile  pro- 
portions of  the  several  gases  or  elastic  fluids  constituting 
the  atmosphere. 

On  the  tendency  of  elastic  fluids  to  diffusion  through 
each  other. 

On  the  absorption  of  gases  by  water  and  other  liquids. 

Remarks  on  Mr.  Gough'stwo  essays  on  the  doctrine  of 
mixed  gases  ;  and  on  Professor  Schmidt's  experiments  on 
the  expansion  of  dry  and  moist  air  by  heat. 

Vol.  2.  On  respiration  and  animal  heat. 

Vol.  3.  Experiments  and  observations  on  phosphoric  acid 
and  on  the  salts  denominated  phosphates. 

Experiments  and  observations  on  the  combinations  of 
carbonic  acid  and  ammonia. 

Remarks  tending-  to  facilitate  the  analysis  of  spring 
and  mineral  waters. 

Memoir  on  sulphuric  ether. 

Observations  on  the  barometer,  thermometer,  and  rain, 
at  Manchester,  from  1794  to  1818  inclusive. 

Vol.  4.  On  oil,  and  the  gases  obtained  from  it  by  heat. 

Observations  in  Meteorology,  particularly  with  regard 
to  the  dew-point,  or  quantity  of  vapour  in  the  atmos- 
phere ;  made  on  the  mountains  in  the  North  of  England. 

On  the  saline  impregnation  of  the  rain  which  feli 
during  the  late  storm,  December  5th,  1822 — with  an 
appendix  to  the  same. 

On  the  nature  and  properties  of  indigo,  with  directions 
for  the  valuation   of  different  samples. 


In  the  Philosophical  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society. 
On  the  Constitution  of  the  Atmosphere. — 1826. 

In  Mr.  Nicholson's  Philosophical  Journal. 

Vol.  5.  (Quarto)  On  the  constitution  of  mixed  elastic  fluids, 
and  the  atmosphere. — 1801. 

Vol.  3.  (Octavo)  On  the  theory  of  mixed  gases. 

5.  On  the  zero  of  temperature. 

6.  Correction  of  a  mistake  in   Dr.   Kirwan's  essay  on 

the  state  of  vapour  in  the  atmosphere. 


ESSAYS,    k.C. 

8.  On  chemical  affinity  as  applied  to  atmospheric  air. 

9.  Observations  on  Mr.  Gough's  strictures  on  the  theory 

of  mixed  gases. 
10.  Facts  tending  to  decide  at  what  point  of  temperature 
water  possesses  the  greatest  density. 

12.  Remarks  on  Count  Rumford's  experiments  on  the 
max.  density  of  water. 

13&14.  On  the  max.  density  of  water  in  reference  to  Dr. 
Hope's  experiments. 

28,  On  the  signification  of  the  word  particle  as  used  by 
chemists. 

29  Observations  on  Dr.  Bostock's  review  of  the  atomic 
principles  of  chemistry. 


In  Dr.  Thomson's  Annals  of  Philosophy. 

Vol  1  &  2.  On  oxymuriate  of  lime. — 1813. 

3.  Remarks  on  the  essay  of  Dr.  Berzelius,  on  the 
cause  of  chemical  proportions. 

7.  Vindication  of  the  theory  of  the  absorption  of 
gases  by  water,  against  the  conclusions  of  M. 
De  Saussure. 

9  &  10.  On  the  chemical  compounds  of  azote  and  oxygen, 
and  on  ammonia. 

11.  On  phosphuretted  hydrogen. 

12.  On  the  combustion  of  alcohol,  by  the  lamp  with- 

out flame. 

On  the  vis  viva. 


In  Phillips's  Annals  of  Philosophy. 

Vol.  10.  (new  series).    On  the  analysis  of  atmospheric  air 
by  hydrogen. 


