Irving  Stringham 


OTlatenSon 


ELEMENTARY   TREATISE 


ON 


ELECTRICITY 


MAXWELL 


Honfcon 

HENRY     FROWDE 


OXFORD     UNIVERSITY     PRESS     WAREHOUSE 
7    PATERNOSTER   ROW 


Claretrtron 


AN 


ELEMENTARY    TREATISE 


ON 


ELECTRICITY 


BY 


JAMES    CLERK    MAXWELL,    M.A. 

l! 

LL.D.  EDIN.,    D.C.L.,    F.R.SS.  LONDON  AND  EDINBURGH 

HONORARY  FELLOW  OF  TRINITY  COLLEGE, 
AND   PROFESSOR   OF  EXPERIMENTAL  PHYSICS   IN  THE   UNIVERSITY  OF  CAMBRIDGE 


EDITED  BY 

WILLIAM    GABNETT,   M.A. 

FORMERLY    FELLOW    OF    ST.    JOHN'S     COLLEGE,     CAMBRIDGE 


AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 

1881 
[  All  rights  reserved  ] 


0 


QC5/S 


EDITOE'S  PEEFACE. 

IVjLOST  of  the  following  pages  were  written  by  the  late  Pro- 
fessor Clerk  Maxwell,  about  seven  years  ago,  and  some  of 
them  were  used  by  him  as  the  text  of  a  portion  of  his  lectures 
on  Electricity  at  the  Cavendish  Laboratory.  Very  little  ap- 
pears to  have  been  added  to  the  MS.  during  the  last  three 
or  four  years  of  Professor  Maxwell's  life,  with  the  exception 
of  a  few  fragmentary  portions  in  the  latter  part  of  the  work. 
This  was  partly  due  to  the  very  great  amount  of  time  and 
thought  which  he  expended  upon  editing  the  Cavendish  papers, 
nearly  all  of  which  were  copied  by  his  own  hand,  while  the 
experimental  investigations  which  he  undertook  in  order  to 
corroborate  Cavendish's  results,  and  the  enquiries  he  made 
for  the  purpose  of  clearing  up  every  obscure  allusion  in 
Cavendish's  MS.,  involved  an  amount  of  labour  which  left 
him  very  little  leisure  for  other  work. 

When  the  MS.  came  into  the  hands  of  the  present  Editor, 
the  first  eight  chapters  appeared  to  have  been  finished  and 
were  carefully  indexed  and  the  Articles  numbered.  Chapters 
IX  and  X  were  also  provided  with  tables  of  contents,  but  the 
Articles  were  not  numbered,  and  several  references,  Tables,  etc., 
were  omitted  as  well  as  a  few  sentences  in  the  text.  At  the 
end  of  the  table  of  contents  of  Chapter  X  three  points  to  be 
treated  were  mentioned,  viz. : — the  Passage  of  Electricity  at  the 
surfaces  of  insulators ;  Conditions  of  spark,  etc. ;  Electrification 
by  pressure,  friction,  rupture,  etc. :  no  Articles  corresponding 
to  these  headings  could  be  found  in  the  text.  Some  portions 
of  Chapters  IX  and  X  formed  separate  bundles  of  MS.,  and 


vi  EDITOR'S    PREFACE.' 

there  was  no  indication  of  the  place  which  they  were  intended 
to  fill.  This  was  the  case  with  Arts.  174-181  and  187-192. 
Arts.  194-196  and  200  also  formed  a  separate  MS.  with  no 
table  of  contents  and  no  indication  of  their  intended  position. 

It  was  for  some  time  under  consideration  by  the  friends  of 
Professor  Maxwell,  whether  the  MS.  should  be  published  in 
its  fragmentary  form  or  whether  it  should  be  completed  by 
another  hand,  so  as  to  carry  out  as  far  as  possible  the  author's 
original  design;  but  before  any  decision  had  been  arrived  at 
it  was  suggested  that  the  book  might  be  made  to  serve  the 
purposes  of  students  by  a  selection  of  Articles  from  Professor 
Maxwell's  Electricity  and  Magnetism,  so  as  to  make  it  in  a 
sense  complete  for  the  portion  of  the  subject  covered  by  the 
first  volume  of  the  last-mentioned  work.  In  accordance  with 
this  suggestion,  a  number  of  Articles  have  been  selected  from 
the  larger  book  and  reprinted.  These  are  indicated  by  a  * 
after  the  number  of  the  Article.  Arts.  93-98  and  141  are 
identical  with  Arts.  118-123  and  58  of  the  larger  treatise,  but 
these  have  been  reprinted  in  accordance  with  directions  con- 
tained in  Professor  Maxwell's  MS. 

In  the  arrangement  of  the  Articles  selected  from  the  Elec- 
tricity and  Magnetism  care  has  been  taken  to  interfere  as 
little  as  possible  with  the  continuity  of  the  MS.  of  the  present 
work,  and  in  some  cases  logical  order  has  been  sacrificed  to 
this  object,  so  that  some  subjects  which  are  treated  briefly  in 
the  earlier  portions  are  reintroduced  in  the  latter  part  of  the 
book.  In  Chapter  XII  some  articles  are  introduced  from  the 
larger  treatise  which  may  appear  somewhat  inconsistent  with 
the  plan  of  this  book ;  this  has  been  for  the  sake  of  the  prac- 
tical value  of  the  results  arrived  at.  The  latter  part  of  the 
note  on  pages  149  and  150  may  be  taken  as  Professor  Maxwell's 
own  comment  on  the  method  proposed  in  Art.  1 86  written  a  few 
years  subsequently  to  that  Article. 

All  references,  for  the  accuracy  of  which  Professor  Maxwell 
is  not  responsible,  and  all  Tables,  notes,  or  interpolations  in- 


EDITOR'S    PREFACE.  vii 

serted  by  the  Editor,  are  enclosed  in  square  brackets.  This 
system  has  not  been  carried  out  in  the  table  of  contents,  but 
the  portion  of  this  contained  in  Professor  Maxwell's  MS.  is 
stated  above. 

Of  the  Author's  Preface  the  portion  here  given  is  all  that 

has  been  found. 

W.  G. 


CAMBRIDGE, 

August,  1881. 


FRAGMENT    OF    AUTHOR'S    PREFACE. 

JL  HE  aim  of  the  following  treatise  is  different  from  that  of  my 
larger  treatise  on  electricity  and  magnetism.  In  the  larger 
treatise  the  reader  is  supposed  to  be  familiar  with  the  higher 
mathematical  methods  which  are  not  used  in  this  book,  and  his 
studies  are  so  directed  as  to  give  him  the  power  of  dealing 
mathematically  with  the  various  phenomena  of  the  science.  In 
this  smaller  book  I  have  endeavoured  to  present,  in  as  compact 
a  form  as  I  can,  those  phenomena  which  appear  to  throw  light 
on  the  theory  of  electricity,  and  to  use  them,  each  in  its  place, 
for  the  development  of  electrical  ideas  in  the  mind  of  the  reader. 

In  the  larger  treatise  I  sometimes  made  use  of  methods  which 
I  do  not  think  the  best  in  themselves,  but  without  which  the 
student  cannot  follow  the  investigations  of  the  founders  of  the 
Mathematical  Theory  of  Electricity.  I  have  since  become  more 
convinced  of  the  superiority  of  methods  akin  to  those  of  Faraday, 
and  have  therefore  adopted  them  from  the  first. 

In  the  first  two  chapters  experiments  are  described  which 
demonstrate  the  principal  facts  relating  to  electric  charge  con- 
sidered as  a  quantity  capable  of  being  measured. 

The  third  chapter,  'on  electric  work  and  energy,'  consists  of 
deductions  from  these  facts.  To  those  who  have  some  acquain- 
tance with  the  elementary  parts  of  mathematics,  this  chapter 
may  be  useful  as  tending  to  make  their  knowledge  more  precise. 
Those  who  are  not  so  prepared  may  omit  this  chapter  in  their 
first  reading  of  the  book. 

The  fourth  chapter  describes  the  electric  field,  or  the  region  in 
which  electric  phenomena  are  exhibited. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Art.  Page 

1.  Exp.  I.     Electrification  by  friction 1 

2.  „     II.     Electrification  of  a  conductor     ..       ..    \.       ..      -.  •   2 

3.  ,,     III.     Positive  and  negative  electrification        ..       ..      ..3 

4.  „     IY.     Electrophorus 4 

5.  Electromotive  force ..       •  •  5 

6.  Potential       8 

7.  Potential  of  a  conductor      6 

8.  Of  metals  in  contact 7 

9.  Equipotential  surfaces          7 

10.  Potential,  pressure,  and  temperature 7 

11.  Exp.  V.  Gold-leaf  electroscope 9 

12.  „     Y.     Gold-leaf  electroscope — continued      11 

13.  Quadrant  electrometer        11 

14.  Idio- and  Hetero-Static       13 

15.  Insulators ..  13 

16.  Apparatus ..       ..  14 

CHAPTER  II. 

ON   THE   CHAKGES    OF    ELECTRIFIED    BODIES. 

17.  Exp.  VI.  Electrified  body  within  a  closed  vessel        16 

18.  „     VII.  Comparison  of  the  charges  of  two  bodies 17 

19.  „     VIII.  Electrification  of  inside  of  closed  vessel  equal  and 

opposite  to  that  of  enclosed  body       18 

20.  „     IX.  To  discharge  a  body  completely 18 

21.  „     X.  To  charge  a  body  with  a  given  number  of  times  a 

particular  charge         19 

22.  Five  laws  of  Electrical  phenomena 20 

I.  In  insulated  bodies. 

II.  In  a  system  of  bodies  during  conduction. 

III.  In  a  system  of  bodies  during  electrification. 

IV.  Electrification  of  the  two  electrodes  of  a  dielectric  equal 

and  opposite. 

V.  No  electrification  on  the  internal  surface  of  a  conducting 

vessel. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  HE. 

ON   ELECTRICAL    WORK   AND    ENEKGY. 

Art.  Page 

23.  Definitions  of  work,  of  energy,  of  a  conservative  system    ..       ..  22 

24.  Principle  of  conservation  of  energy.     Examples  of  the  measure- 

ment of  work  ..........  *   ..........  23 

25.  Definition  of  electric  potential    ..............  23 

26.  Relation  of  the  electromotive  force  to  the  equipotential  surfaces  24 

27.  Indicator  diagram  of  electric  work     ............  25 

28.  Indicator  diagram  of  electric  work  —  continued  ........  25 

29.  Superposition  of  electric  effects   ..............  26 

30.  Charges  and  potentials  of  a  system  of  conductors       ......  27 

31.  Energy  of  a  system  of  electrified  bodies      ..........  28 

32.  Work  spent  in  passing  from  one  electrical  state  to  another       ..  29 

33.  P  =  ^|       ......................  29 

dti 

34.2  (EF)  =  2  (JVP)  ;—  Green's  theorem      ..........  30 

35.  Increment  of  energy  under  increments  of  potentials  ......  30 


37.  Reciprocity  of  potentials      ................  31 

38.  Reciprocity  of  charges         ......       .  .......       *.  32 

39.  Green's  theorem  on  potentials  and  charges         ........  32 

40.  Mechanical  work  during  the  displacement  of  an  insulated  system  33 
4  1  .  Mechanical  work  during  the  displacement  of  a  system  the  poten- 

tials of  which  are  maintained  constant  ..........  34 

CHAPTER  IV. 

THE   ELECTRIC   FIELD. 

42.  Two  conductors  separated  by  an  insulating  medium  ......  36 

43.  This  medium  called  a  dielectric  medium,  or,  the  electric  field   ..  36 

EXPLORATION   OP   THE    ELECTRIC    FIELD. 

44.  Exp.  XL     By  a  small  electrified  body       ..........  37 

45.  Exp.  XII.     By  two  disks   ................  38 

46.  Electric  tension    ....................  39 

47.  Exp.  XIII.     Coulomb's  proof  plane   ............  39 

48.  Exp.  XIV.      Electromotive  force  at  a  point       ........  41 

49.  Exp.  XV.       Potential  at  any  point  in  the  field.     Two  spheres  41 

50.  Exp.  XVI.     One  sphere      ................  42 

51.  Equipotential  surfaces          ................  42 

52.  Reciprocal  method.     Exp.  XVII  .....       ..       ..       ..       ..  42 


CONTENTS.  XI 

Art.  Page 

53.  Exp.  XVni.     Method  founded  on  Theorem  V 43 

54.  Lines  of  electric  force 44 

CHAPTER  V. 
FARADAY'S  LAW  OF  LINES  OF  INDUCTION. 

55.  Faraday's  Law 45 

56.  Hollow  vessel      45 

57.  Lines  of  force      45 

58.  Properties  of  a  tube  of  induction        46 

59.  Properties  of  a  tube  of  induction — continued 47 

60.  Cells ~       -.       ..  47 

61.  Energy         48 

62.  Displacement       .       ..  49 

63.  Tension        50 

64.  Analogies 51 

65.  Analogies — continued  ..       ..       52 

66.  Limitation 53 

67.  Faraday's  cube 53 

68.  Faraday's  cube — continued 54 

69.  Current 54 

70.  Displacement       55 

71.  Theorems 56 

72.  Induction  and  force 57 

73.  +  and  —  ends 57 

74.  Not  cyclic 57 

75.  In  the  inside  of  a  hollow  conducting  vessel  not  containing  any 

electrified  body  the  potential  is  uniform  and  there  is  no 

electrification 57 

76.  In  the  inside  of  a  hollow  conducting  vessel  not  containing  any 

electrified  body  the  potential  is  uniform  and  there  is  no 

electrification — continued       58 

77.  Superposition       58 

78.  Thomson's  theorem      58 

79.  Example       59 

80.  Induced  electricity  of  i  st  and  2nd  species 59 

CHAPTER  VI. 

PARTICULAR   CASES   OF   ELECTRIFICATION. 

81.  Concentric  spheres       62 

82.  Unit  of  electricity.     Law  of  force       63 

83.  Electromotive  force  at  a  point 63 

84.  Definition  of  electromotive  force  64 


xii  CONTENTS. 

Art.  Page 

85.  Coulomb's  law 64 

86.  Value  of  the  potential  due  to  a  uniformly  electrified  sphere     ..  65 

87.  Capacity  of  a  sphere 67 

88.  Two  concentric  spherical  surfaces.     Leyden  Jar      68 

89.  Two  parallel  planes 70 

90.  Force  between  planes         71 

91.  Thomson's  attracted  disk  electrometers 71 

92.  Inverse  problem  of  electrostatics       72 

93.  Equipotential  surfaces  and  lines  of  force  for  charges  of  20  and 

5  units  (Plate  I) 73 

94.  Equipotential  surfaces  and  lines  of  force  for  opposite  charges 

in  the  ratio  of  4  to  - 1  (Plate  H)          74 

95.  Equipotential  surfaces  and  lines  of  force  for  an  electrified  point 

in  a  uniform  field  of  force  (Plate  HI) 75 

96.  Equipotential  surfaces  and  lines  of  force  for  charges  of  three 

electrified  points  (Plate  IV) 75 

97.  Faraday's  use  of  the  conception  of  lines  of  force       76 

98.  Method  employed  in  drawing  the  diagrams      77 

CHAPTER  VII. 

ELECTRICAL    IMAGES. 

99.  Introductory      80 

100.  Idea  of  an  image  derived  from  optics       80 

101.  Electrical  image  at  centre  of  sphere          ..       ..  81 

102.  External  point  and  sphere         82 

103.  Two  spheres       84 

104.  Calculation  of  potentials  when  charges  are  given 85 

105.  Surface  density  induced  on  a  sphere  by  an  electrified  point    ..  86 

106.  Surface  density  on  two  spheres  and  condition  for  a  neutral  line  87 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

CAPACITY. 

107.  Capacity  of  a  condenser 89 

108.  Coefficients  of  condenser 90 

109.  Comparison  of  two  condensers  ..       ..       91 

110.  Thomson's  method  with  four  condensers 91 

111.  Condition  of  null  effect 93 

CHAPTER   IX. 

ELECTRIC    CURRENT. 

112.  Convection  current  with  pith  ball     ..       ..       96 

113.  Conduction  current  in  a  wire    ..                       96 


CONTENTS.  xni 

Art.  Page 

113.  No  evidence  as  to  the  velocity  of  electricity  in  the  current      ..  96 

114.  Displacement  and  discharge      98 

115.  Classification  of  bodies  through  which  electricity  passes  ..       ..  98 
Definition  of  the  conductor,  its  electrodes,  anode,  and  cathode  98 

External  electromotive  force 98 

Metals,  electrolytes,  and  dielectrics 99 

1.     Metals. 

116.  Ohm's  Law      \m      ..      ..      ..       ..      ..       ..       99 

117.  Generation  of  heat 99 

2.     Electrolytes. 

118.  Anion  and  cation       100 

Electrochemical  equivalents      ..       ..100 

119.  Faraday's  Laws         ..       ..       101 

Force  required  for  complete  electrolysis 101 

120.  Polarization       101 

121.  Helmholtz's  experiments 102 

122.  Supposed  inaccuracy  of  Faraday's  Law  not  confirmed      ..       ..  102 

123.  Measurement  of  resistance         103 

Ohm's  Law  true  for  electrolytes        103 

124.  Theory  of  Clausius 104 

125.  Theory  of  Clausius — continued         105 

126.  Velocities  of  ions       105 

127.  Molecular  conductivity  of  an  electrolyte 106 

128.  Kohlrausch's  experiments         106 

129.  Secondary  actions      107 

3.     Dielectrics. 

130.  Displacement 107 

131.  Dielectric  capacity  of  solids,  including  crystals         108 

132.  Dielectric  capacity  of  solids,  liquids,  and  gases        109 

133.  Disruptive  discharge.      Mechanical  and  electrical  analogies. 

Ultimate  strength.     Brittleness 109 

134.  Kesidual  charge         110 

135.  Mechanical  illustration ,.       ..  m 

136.  Electric  strength  of  gases 113 

137.  Gases  as  insulators 114 

138.  Experiment        114 

139.  Mercury  and  sodium  vapours    ..       ..       115 

140.  Kinetic  theory  of  gases      116 

141.  Electric  phenomena  of  Tourmaline ..  117 


xiv  CONTENTS. 

s 

Art.  Page 

142.  Electric  glow 118 

143.  Electric  windmill '.       ..       118 

Electrified  air 119 

Motion  of  thunder-clouds  not  due  to  electricity 119 

144.  To  detect  the  presence  of  electrified  air 119 

145.  Difference  between  positive  and  negative  electricity       ..       ..  119 

146.  Discharge  by  a  point  on  a  conductor  electrified  by  induction  120 

147.  The  electric  brush ..       ..  120 

148.  The  electric  spark 121 

149.  Spectroscopic  investigation     .. 121 

150*.  Description  of  the  voltaic  battery .„...,  122 

151*.  Electromotive  force          123 

152*.  Production  of  a  steady  current        123 

153*.  Magnetic  action  of  the  current         ..       ..124 

154*.  The  galvanometer 124 

155*.  Linear  conductors 125 

156*.  Ohm's  law        125 

157*.  Linear  conductors  in  series 126 

158*.  Linear  conductors  in  multiple  arc 127 

Kirchhoff's  Laws 127 

159*.  Resistance  of  conductor  of  uniform  section     ..       ..  128 


CHAPTER  X. 

PHENOMENA   OF   AN   ELECTRIC   CUEEENT   WHICH    FLOWS   THEOUGH 
HETEEOGENEOUS    MEDIA. 

160.  Seebeck's  discovery          129 

161.  Law  of  Magnus       130 

162.  Thermoelectric  diagram  and  definition  of  thermoelectric  power  130 

163.  Electromotive  force  measured  by  an  area  on  the  diagram      ..  131 

164.  Cumming's  discovery      ,.       ..132 

165.  Thermal  effects  of  the  current         133 

166.  Peltier's  effect ;      *.       ,,       133 

167.  Thomson's  effect      ..       ..       134 

168.  Thomson's  analogy  with  a  fluid  in  a  tube       134 

169.  Le  Roux's  experiments 135 

170.  Expression  of  Peltier's  and  Thomson's  effects         135 

171.  Heat  produced  at  a  junction  depends  on  its  temperature      ..  135 

172.  Application  of  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics          ..       ..  136 

173.  Complete  interpretation  of  the  diagram          136 

174.  Entropy  in  thermodynamics 137 

175.  Electric  entropy      •',,       ..  138 


CONTENTS.  XV 

Art.  Page 

176.  Definition  of  entropy       138 

177.  Electric  entropy  equivalent  to  thermoelectric  power     ..       ..  138 

178.  Thermoelectric  diagram 139 

179.  Specific  heat  of  electricity 140 

180.  Difference  between  iron  and  copper        140 

181.  Complete  interpretation  of  the  diagram          141 

182.  Thomson's  method  of  finding  the  E.  M.  F.  at  a  point  in  a 

circuit         142 

183.  Determination  of  the  seat  of  electromotive  force 143 

184.  E.  M.  F.  between  metal  and  electrolyte ..       .;       .1      ..       ..  143 

185.  Electrolysis.     Deposition  of  metal.     Solution  of  metal         ..  144 

186.  Heat  generated  or  absorbed  at  anode  and  cathode         ..       ..  145 

187.  On  the  conservation  of  energy  in  electrolysis         146 

188.  Joule's  experiments         147 

189.  Loss  of  heat  when  current  does  external  work 148 

190.  Electromotive  force  of  electrochemical  apparatus 148 

191.  Reversible  and  irreversible  effects 148 

192.  Example  from  electrolysis  of  argentic  chloride       149 

193*.  On  constant  voltaic  elements.     Daniell's  cell  150 


CHAPTER   XI. 

METHODS    OF   MAINTAINING   AN   ELECTRIC   CUEKENT. 

194.  Enumeration  of  methods         155 

195.  The  frictional  electric  machine        155 

196.  On  what  the  current  depends.     Use  of  silk  flaps 156 

197*.  Production  of  electrification  by  mechanical  work.    Nicholson's 

revolving  doubler  158 

198*.  Principle  of  Varley's  and  Thomson's  electrical  machines  ..  158 

199*.  Thomson's  water-dropping  machine  161 

200.  Holtz's  electrical  machine  '..  161 

201*.  Theory  of  regenerators  applied  to  electrical  machines  ..  ..  162 

202*.  Coulomb's  torsion  balance  for  measuring  charges 165 

203*.  Electrometers  for  measuring  potentials.  Snow — Harris's  and 

Thomson's 167 

204*.  Principle  of  the  guard-ring.  Thomson's  absolute  electrometer  168 

205*.  Heterostatic  method  ..  „ 171 

206*.  Measurement  of  the  electric  potential  of  a  small  body  ..  ..  173 
207*.  Measurement  of  the  potential  at  a  point  in  the  air  ..  ..174 
208*.  Measurement  of  the  potential  of  a  conductor  without  touching 

it  175 


xvi  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

ON    THE    MEASUEEMENT    OF   ELECTEIC    EESISTANCE. 
Art.  Page 

209*.  Advantage  of  using  material  standards  of  resistance  in  elec- 

trical measurements      ................  176 

210*.  Different  standards  which  have  been  used  and  different  systems 

which  have  been  proposed  -....       ..      ..       ......  176 

211*.  The  electromagnetic  system  of  units        ......       ..       ..177 

212*.  Weber's  unit,  and  the  British  Association  unit  or  Ohm          ..  177 

213*.  Professed  value  of  the  Ohm  10,000,000  metres  per  second    ..  177 

214*.  Reproduction  of  standards       ..      ...       ..       f.       ,i       ..       ..  178 

215*.  Forms  of  resistance  coils          ..............  179 

216*.  Coils  of  great  resistance   ..........       ......  180 

217*.  Arrangement  of  coils  in  series         ............  180 

218*.  Arrangement  in  multiple  arc  ..............  181 

219*.  On  the  comparison  of  resistances.     (1)  Ohm's  method  ..       ..  182 

220*.  (2)  By  the  differential  galvanometer       ..........  182 

221*.  (3)  By  Wheatstone's  Bridge   ..............  186 

222*.  Estimation  of  limits  of  error  in  the  determination         ..       ..187 

223*.  Best  arrangement  of  the  conductors  to  be  compared      ..       ..  188 

224*.  On  the  use  of  Wheatstone's  Bridge         ..........  190 

225*.  Thomson's  method  for  the  resistance  of  a  galvanometer         ..  192 

226*.  Mance's  method  of  determining  the  resistance  of  a  battery    ..  193 
227*.  Comparison  of  electromotive  forces         ......       ..       ..195 


CHAPTER 

ON    THE    ELECTEIC    EESISTANCE    OF    SUBSTANCES. 

228*.  Metals,  electrolytes  and  dielectrics          ..........  197 

229*.  Resistance  of  metals         ................  198 

230*.  Table  of  resistance  of  metals    ..............  199 

231*.  Resistance  of  electrolytes         ..............  200 

232*.  Experiments  of  Paalzow  ................  200 

233*.  Experiments  of  Kohlrausch  and  Nippoldt       ........  201 

234*.  Resistance  of  dielectrics  ................  202 

235*.  Gutta-percha    .....  .      V.       ............  203 

236*.  Glass         ................       ......  204 

237*.  Gases        .......................  204 

238*.  Experiments  of  "Wiedemann  and  Riihlmann  ........  205 

Note  on  the  determination  of  the  current  in  the  galvanometer 

of  Wheatstone's  Bridge      ..............  206 


AN  ELEMENTAEY  TEEATISE 


ELECTEICITY. 


CHAPTER  I. 

EXPERIMENT  I. 
Electrification  by  Friction. 

1.1  TAKE  a  stick  of  sealing-wax,  rub  it  on  woollen  cloth  or 
flannel,  and  then  bring  it  near  to  some  shreds  of  paper  strewed  on 
the  table.  The  shreds  of  paper  will  move,  the  lighter  ones  will 
raise  themselves  on  one  end,  and  some  of  them  will  leap  up  to  the 
sealing-wax.  Those  which  leap  up  to  the  sealing-wax  sometimes 
stick  to  it  for  awhile,  and  then  fly  away  from  it  suddenly.  It 
appears  therefore  that  in  the  space  between  the  sealing-wax  and 
the  table  is  a  region  in  which  small  bodies,  such  as  shreds  of  paper, 
are  acted  on  by  certain  forces  which  cause  them  to  assume  par- 
ticular positions  and  to  move  sometimes  from  the  table  to  the 
sealing-wax,  and  sometimes  from  the  sealing-wax  to  the  table. 

These  phenomena,  with  others  related  to  them,  are  called  electric 
phenomena,  the  bodies  between  which  the  forces  are  manifested  are 
said  to  be  electrified,  and  the  region  in  which  the  phenomena  take 
place  is  called  the  electric  field. 

Other  substances  may  be  used  instead  of  the  sealing-wax.  A 
piece  of  ebonite,  gutta-percha,  resin  or  shellac  will  do  as  well,  and 
so  will  amber,  the  substance  in  which  these  phenomena  were  first 
noticed,  and  from  the  Greek  name  of  which  the  word  electric  is 
derived. 

The  substance  on  which  these  bodies  are  rubbed  may  also  be 
varied,  and  it  is  found  that  the  fur  of  a  cat's  skin  excites  them 
better  than  flannel. 

It  is  found  that  in  this  experiment  only  those  parts  of  the 
surface  of  the  sealing-wax  which  were  rubbed  exhibit  these  phe- 

B 


-ELECTRIFICATION   BY   FRICTION.  \2. 


t  'some  parts  of  the  rubbed  surface  are  apparently 
more  active  than  others.  In  fact,  the  distribution  of  the  electri- 
fication over  the  surface  depends  on  the  previous  history  of  the 
sealing-wax,  and  this  in  a  manner  so  complicated  that  it  would  be 
very  difficult  to  investigate  it.  There  are  other  bodies,  however, 
which  may  be  electrified,  and  over  which  the  electrification  is 
always  distributed  in  a  definite  manner.  We  prefer,  therefore,  in 
our  experiments,  to  make  use  of  such  bodies. 

The  fact  that  certain  bodies  after  being  rubbed  appear  to  attract 
other  bodies  was  known  to  the  ancients.  In  modern  times  many 
other  phenomena  have  been  observed,  which  have  been  found  to  be 
related  to  these  phenomena  of  attraction.  They  have  been  classed 
under  the  name  of  electric  phenomena,  amber,  TJ\€KTpov,  having 
been  the  substance  in  which  they  were  first  described. 

Other  bodies,  particularly  the  loadstone  and  pieces  of  iron  and 
steel  which  have  been  subjected  to  certain  processes,  have  also  been 
long  known  to  exhibit  phenomena  of  action  at  a  distance.  These 
phenomena,  with  others  related  to  them,  were  found  to  differ  from 
the  electric  phenomena,  and  have  been  classed  under  the  name  of 
magnetic  phenomena,  the  loadstone,  juayz^j,  being  found  in 
Magnesia*. 

These  two  classes  of  phenomena  have  since  been  found  to  be 
related  to  each  other,  and  the  relations  between  the  various  pheno- 
mena of  both  classes,  so  far  as  they  are  known,  constitute  the 
science  of  Electromagnetism. 

EXPERIMENT  II. 

Electrification  of  a  Conductor. 

2.]  Take  a  metal  plate  of  any  kind  (a  tea-tray,  turned  upside 
down,  is  convenient  for  this  purpose)  and  support  it  on  three  dry 
wine  glasses.  Now  place  on  the  table  a  plate  of  ebonite,  a  sheet 
of  thin  gutta-percha,  or  a  well-dried  sheet  of  brown  paper.  Rub  it 
lightly  with  fur  or  flannel,  lift  it  up  from  the  table  by  its  edges 
and  place  it  on  the  inverted  tea-tray,  taking  care  not  to  touch  the 
tray  with  your  fingers. 

*  The  name  of  Magnesia  has  been  given  to  two  districts,  one  in  Lydia  the  other  in 
Thessaly.  Both  seem  to  have  been  celebrated  for  their  mineral  products,  and  several 
substances  have  been  known  by  the  name  of  magnesia  besides  that  which  modern 
chemists  know  by  that  name.  The  loadstone,  the  touchstone,  and  meerschaum, 
seem  however  to  have  been  the  principal  substances  which  were  called  Magnesian 
and  magnetic,  and  these  are  generally  understood  to  be  Lydian  stones. 


3.]  ELECTRIFICATION   OF   A  CONDUCTOR.  3 

It  will  be  found  that  the  tray  is  now  electrified.  Shreds  of 
paper  or  gold-leaf  placed  below  it  will  fly  up  to  it,  and  if  the 
knuckle  is  brought  near  the  edge  of  the  tray  a  spark  will  pass 
between  the  tray  and  the  knuckle,  a  peculiar  sensation  will  be  felt, 
and  the  tray  will  no  longer  exhibit  electrical  phenomena.  It  is 
then  said  to  be  discharged.  If  a  metal  rod,  held  in  the  hand,  be 
brought  near  the  tray  the  phenomena  will  be  nearly  the  same. 
The  spark  will  be  seen  and  the  tray  will  be  discharged,  but  the 
sensation  will  be  slightly  different. 

If,  however,  instead  of  a  metal  rod  or  wire,  a  glass  rod,  or  stick 
of  sealing-wax,  or  a  piece  of  gutta-percha,  be  held  in  the  hand  and 
brought  up  to  the  tray  there  will  be  no  spark,  no  sensation,  and 
no  discharge.  The  discharge,  therefore,  takes  place  through  metals 
and  through  the  human  body,  but  not  through  glass,  sealing-wax, 
or  gutta-percha.  Bodies  may  therefore  be  divided  into  two 
classes:  conductors,  or  those  which  transmit  the  discharge,  and 
non-conductors,  through  which  the  discharge  does  not  take  place. 

In  electrical  experiments,  those  conductors,  the  charge  of  which 
we  wish  to  maintain  constant,  must  be  supported  by  non-conducting 
materials.  In  the  present  experiment  the  tray  was  supported  on 
wine  glasses  in  order  to  prevent  it  from  becoming  discharged. 
Pillars  of  glass,  ebonite,  or  gutta-percha  may  be  used  as  supports, 
or  the  conductor  may  be  suspended  by  a  white  silk  thread,  Solid 
non-conductors,  when  employed  for  this  purpose,  are  called  insu- 
lators. Copper  wires  are  sometimes  lapped  with  silk,  and  some- 
times enclosed  in  a  sheath  of  gutta-percha,  in  order  to  prevent 
them  from  being  in  electric  communication  with  other  bodies. 
They  are  then  said  to  be  insulated. 

The  metals  are  good  conductors ;  air,  glass,  resins,  gutta-percha, 
caoutchouc,  ebonite,  paraffin,  &c.,  are  good  insulators ;  but,  as  we 
shall  find  afterwards,  all  substances  resist  the  passage  of  electricity, 
and  all  substances  allow  it  to  pass  though  in  exceedingly  different 
degrees.  For  the  present  we  shall  consider  only  two  classes  of 
bodies,  good  conductors,  and  good  insulators. 

EXPERIMENT  III. 

Positive  and  Negative  Electrification. 

3.]  Take  another  tray  and  insulate  it  as  before,  then  after 
discharging  the  first  tray  remove  the  electrified  sheet  from  it  and 
place  it  on  the  second  tray.  It  will  be  found  that  both  trays  are 

B  z 


4  POSITIVE   AND   NEGATIVE   ELECTRIFICATION.  [4. 

now  electrified.  If  a  small  ball  of  elder  pith  suspended  by  a  white 
silk  thread*  be  made  to  touch  the  first  tray,  it  will  be  immediately 
repelled  from  it  but  attracted  towards  the  second.  If  it  is  now 
allowed  to  touch  the  second  tray  it  will  be  repelled  from  it  but 
attracted  towards  the  first.  The  electrifications  of  the  two  trays 
are  therefore  of  opposite  kinds,  since  each  attracts  what  the  other 
repels.  If  a  metal  wire,  attached  to  an  ebonite  rod,  be  made  to 
touch  both  trays  at  once,  both  trays  will  be  completely  discharged. 
If  two  pith  balls  be  used,  then  if  both  have  been  made  to  touch 
the  same  tray  and  then  hung  up  near  each  other  they  are  found 
to  repel  each  other,  but  if  they  have  been  made  to  touch  different 
trays  they  attract  each  other.  Hence  bodies  when  electrified  in 
the  same  way  are  repelled  from  each  other,  but  when  they  are 
electrified  in  opposite  ways  they  are  attracted  to  each  other. 

If  we  distinguish  one  kind  of  electrification  by  calling  it  positive, 
we  must  call  the  other  kind  of  electrification  negative.  We  have 
no  physical  reason  for  assigning  the  name  of  positive  to  one  kind 
of  electrification  rather  than  to  the  other.  All  scientific  men, 
however,  are  in  the  habit  of  calling  that  kind  of  electrification 
positive  which  the  surface  of  polished  glass  exhibits  after  having 
been  rubbed  with  zinc  amalgam  spread  on  leather.  This  is  a 
matter  of  mere  convention,  but  the  convention  is  a  useful  one, 
provided  we  remember  that  it  is  a  convention  as  arbitrary  as 
that  adopted  in  the  diagrams  of  analytical  geometry  of  calling 
horizontal  distances  positive  or  negative  according  as  they  are 
measured  towards  the  right  or  towards  the  left  of  the  point  of 
reference. 

In  our  experiment  with  a  sheet  of  gutta-percha  excited  by 
flannel,  the  electrification  of  the  sheet  and  of  the  tray  on  which 
it  is  placed  is  negative :  that  of  the  flannel  and  of  the  tray  from 
which  the  gutta-percha  has  been  removed  is  positive. 

In  whatever  way  electrification  is  produced  it  is  one  or  other  of 
these  two  kinds. 

EXPERIMENT  IV. 
The  Electrophorus  of  Yolta. 

4.]  This  instrument  is  very  convenient  for  electrical  experiments 
and  is  much  more  compact  than  any  other  electrifying  apparatus. 

*  I  find  it  convenient  to  fasten  the  other  end  of  the  thread  to  a  rod  of  ebonite 
about  3  mm.  diameter.  The  ebonite  is  a  much  better  insulator  than  the  silk  thread 
especially  in  damp  weather. 


5-]  THE   ELECTKOPHOKUS.  5 

It  consists  of  two  disks,  and  an  insulating  handle  which  can  be 
screwed  to  the  back  of  either  plate.  One  of  these  disks  consists 
of  resin  or  of  ebonite  in  front  supported  by  a  metal  back.  In  the 
centre  of  the  disk  is  a  metal  pin*,  which  is  in  connection  with  the 
metal  back,  and  just  reaches  to  the  level  of  the  surface  of  the 
ebonite.  The  surface  of  the  ebonite  is  electrified  by  striking  it 
with  a  piece  of  flannel  or  cat's  fur.  The  other  disk,  which  is 
entirely  of  metal,  is  then  brought  near  the  ebonite  disk  by  means 
of  the  insulating  handle.  When  it  comes  within  a  certain  distance 
of  the  metal  pin,  a  spark  passes,  and  if  the  disks  are  now  separated 
the  metal  disk  is  found  to  be  charged  positively,  and  the  disk  of 
ebonite  and  metal  to  be  charged  negatively. 

In  using  the  instrument  one  of  the  disks  is  kept  in  connection 
with  one  conductor  while  the  other  is  applied  alternately  to  the 
first  disk  and  to  the  other  conductor.  By  this  process  the  two 
conductors  will  become  charged  with  equal  quantities  of  electricity, 
that  to  which  the  ebonite  disk  was  applied  becoming  negative, 
while  that  to  which  the  plain  metal  disk  was  applied  becomes 
positive. 

ELECTROMOTIVE  FORCE. 

5.]  Definition. —  Whatever  produces  or  tends  to  produce  a  transfer 
of  Electrification  is  called  Electromotive  Force. 

Thus  when  two  electrified  conductors  are  connected  by  a  wire, 
and  when  electrification  is  transferred  along  the  wire  from  one 
body  to  the  other,  the  tendency  to  this  transfer,  which  existed 
before  the  introduction  of  the  wire,  and  which,  when  the  wire  is 
introduced,  produces  this  transfer,  is  called  the  Electromotive  Force 
from  the  one  body  to  the  other  along  the  path  marked  out  by 
the  wire. 

To  define  completely  the  electromotive  force  from  one  point  to 
another,  it  is  necessary  in  general  to  specify  a  particular  path  from 
the  one  point  to  the  other  along  which  the  electromotive  force  is 
to  be  reckoned.  In  many  cases,  some  of  which  will  be  described 
when  we  come  to  electrolytic,  thermoelectric,  and  electromagnetic 
phenomena,  the  electromotive  force  from  one  point  to  another  may 
be  different  along  different  paths.  If  we  restrict  our  attention, 

*  [This  was  introduced  by  Professor  Phillips  to  obviate  the  necessity  of  touching 
the  carrier  plate  while  in  contact  with  the  ebonite.] 


6  ELECTRIC   POTENTIAL.  [6. 

however,  as  we  must  do  in  this  part  of  our  subject,  to  the  theory  of 
the  equilibrium  of  electricity  at  rest,  we  shall  find  that  the  electro- 
motive force  from  one  point  to  another  is  the  same  for  all  paths 
drawn  in  air  from  the  one  point  to  the  other. 


ELECTRIC  POTENTIAL. 

6.]  The  electromotive  force  from  any  point,  along  a  path  drawn 
in  air,  to  a  certain  point  chosen  as  a  point  of  reference,  is  called 
the  Electric  Potential  at  that  point. 

Since  electrical  phenomena  depend  only  on  differences  of  poten- 
tial, it  is  of  no  consequence  what  point  of  reference  we  assume  for 
the  zero  of  potential,  provided  that  we  do  not  change  it  during  the 
same  series  of  measurements. 

In  mathematical  treatises,  the  point  of  reference  is  taken  at  an 
infinite  distance  from  the  electrified  system  under  consideration. 
The  advantage  of  this  is  that  the  mathematical  expression  for  the 
potential  due  to  a  small  electrified  body  is  thus  reduced  to  its 
simplest  form. 

In  experimental  work  it  is  more  convenient  to  assume  as  a  point 
of  reference  some  object  in  metallic  connection  with  the  earth,  such 
as  any  part  of  the  system  of  metal  pipes  conveying  the  gas  or 
water  of  a  town. 

It  is  often  convenient  to  assume  that  the  walls,  floor  and  ceiling 
of  the  room  in  which  the  experiments  are  carried  on  has  conducting 
power  sufficient  to  reduce  the  whole  inner  surface  of  the  room  to 
the  same  potential.  This  potential  may  then  be  taken  for  zero. 
When  an  instrument  is  enclosed  in  a  metallic  case  the  potential 
of  the  case  may  be  assumed  to  be  zero. 

Potential  of  a  Conductor. 

7.]  If  the  potentials  at  different  points  of  a  uniform  conductor 
are  different  there  will  be  an  electric  current  from  the  places  of 
high  to  the  places  of  low  potential.  The  theory  of  such  currents 
will  be  explained  afterwards  (Chap.  ix).  At  present  we  are  dealing 
with  cases  of  electric  equilibrium  in  which  there  are  no  currents. 
Hence  in  the  cases  with  which  we  have  now  to  do  the  potential 
at  every  point  of  the  conductor  must  be  the  same.  This  potential 
is  called  the  potential  of  the  conductor. 

The  potential  of  a  conductor  is  usually  defined  as  the  potential 


10.]  EQUIPOTENTIAL   SURFACES.  7 

of  any  point  in  the  air  infinitely  close  to  the  surface  of  the  con- 
ductor. Within  a  nearly  closed  cavity  in  the  conductor  the 
potential  at  any  point  in  the  air  is  the  same,  and  by  making-  the 
experimental  determination  of  the  potential  within  such  a  cavity 
we  get  rid  of  the  difficulty  of  dealing  with  points  infinitely  close 
to  the  surface. 

8.]  It  is  found  that  when  two  different  metals  are  in  contact  and 
in  electric  equilibrium  their  potentials  as  thus  defined  are  in  general 
different.  Thus,  if  a  copper  cylinder  and  a  zinc  cylinder  are  held 
in  contact  with  one  another,  and  if  first  the  copper  and  then  the 
zinc  cylinder  is  made  to  surround  the  flame  of  a  spirit  lamp,  the 
lamp  being  in  connection  with  an  electrometer,  the  lamp  rapidly 
acquires  the  potential  of  the  air  within  the  cylinder,  and  the 
electrometer  shews  that  the  potential  of  the  air  at  any  point  within 
the  zinc  cylinder  is  higher  than  the  potential  of  the  air  within  the 
copper  cylinder.  We  shall  return  to  this  subject  again,  but  at 
present,  to  avoid  ambiguity,  we  shall  suppose  that  the  conductors 
with  which  we  have  to  do  consist  all  of  the  same  metal  at  the  same 
temperature,  and  that  the  dielectric  medium  is  air. 

9.]  The  region  of  space  in  which  the  potential  is  higher  than 
a  certain  value  is  divided  from  the  region  in  which  it  is  lower  than 
this  value  by  a  surface  called  an  equipotential  surface,  at  every 
point  of  which  the  potential  has  the  given  value. 

We  may  conceive  a  series  of  equipotential  surfaces  to  be  de- 
scribed, corresponding  to  a  series  of  potentials  in  arithmetical  order. 
The  potential  of  any  point  will  then  be  indicated  by  its  position  in 
the  series  of  equipotential  surfaces. 

No  two  different  equipotential  surfaces  can  cut  one  another,  for 
no  point  can  have  two  different  potentials. 

10.]  The  idea  of  electric  potential  may  be  illustrated  by  com- 
paring it  with  pressure  in  the  theory  of  fluids  and  with  temperature 
in  the  theory  of  heat. 

If  two  vessels  containing  the  same  or  different  fluids  are  put  into 
communication  by  means  of  a  pipe,  fluid  will  flow  from  the  vessel 
in  which  the  pressure  is  greater  into  that  in  which  it  is  less  till  the 
pressure  is  equalized.  This  however  will  not  be  the  case  if  one 
vessel  is  higher  than  the  other,  for  gravity  has  a  tendency  to  make 
the  fluid  pass  from  the  higher  to  the  lower  vessel. 

Similarly  when  two  electrified  bodies  are  put  into  electric  com- 
munication by  means  of  a  wire,  electrification  will  be  transferred 
from  the  body  of  higher  potential  to  the  body  of  lower  potential, 


8  POTENTIAL,    PRESSURE,    AND   TEMPERATURE.         [lO. 

unless  there  is  an  electromotive  force  tending  to  urge  electricity 
from  one  of  these  bodies  to  the  other,  as  in  the  case  of  zinc  and 
copper  above  mentioned. 

Again,  if  two  bodies  at  different  temperatures  are  placed  in 
thermal  communication  either  by  actual  contact  or  by  radiation, 
heat  will  be  transferred  from  the  body  at  the  higher  temperature 
to  the  body  at  the  lower  temperature  till  the  temperature  of  the 
two  bodies  becomes  equalized. 

The  analogy  between  temperature  and  potential  must  not  be 
assumed  to  extend  to  all  parts  of  the  phenomena  of  heat  and 
electricity.  Indeed  this  analogy  breaks  down  altogether  when  it  is 
applied  to  those  cases  in  which  heat  is  generated  or  destroyed. 

We  must  also  remember  that  temperature  corresponds  to  a  real 
physical  state,  whereas  potential  is  a  mere  mathematical  quantity, 
the  value  of  which  depends  on  the  point  of  reference  which  we  may 
choose.  To  raise  a  body  to  a  high  temperature  may  melt  or 
volatilize  it.  To  raise  a  body,  together  with  the  vessel  which  sur- 
rounds it,  to  a  high  potential  produces  no  physical  effect  whatever 
on  the  body.  Hence  the  only  part  of  the  phenomena  of  electricity 
and  heat  which  we  may  regard  as  analogous  is  the  condition  of  the 
transfer  of  heat  or  of  electricity,  according  as  the  temperature  or 
the  potential  is  higher  in  one  body  or  in  the  other. 

With  respect  to  the  other  analogy — that  between  potential  and 
fluid  pressure — we  must  remember  that  the  only  respect  in  which 
electricity  resembles  a  fluid  is  that  it  is  capable  of  flowing  along 
conductors  as  a  fluid  flows  in  a  pipe.  And  here  we  may  introduce 
once  for  all  the  common  phrase  The  Electric  Fluid  for  the  purpose 
of  warning  our  readers  against  it.  It  is  one  of  those  phrases, 
which,  having  been  at  one  time  used  to  denote  an  observed  fact, 
was  immediately  taken  up  by  the  public  to  connote  a  whole  system 
of  imaginary  knowledge.  As  long  as  we  do  not  know  whether 
positive  electricity,  or  negative,  or  both,  should  be  called  a  sub- 
stance or  the  absence  of  a  substance,  and  as  long  as  we  do  not 
know  whether  the  velocity  of  an  electric  current  is  to  be  measured 
by  hundreds  of  thousands  of  miles  in  a  second  or  by  an  hundreth  of 
an  inch  in  an  hour,  or  even  whether  the  current  flows  from  positive 
to  negative  or, in  the  reverse  direction,  we  must  avoid  speaking  of 
the  electric  fluid. 


II.]  GOLD-LEAF   ELECTROSCOPE.  9 

ON  ELECTROSCOPES. 

11.]  An  electroscope  is  an  instrument  by  means  of  which  the 
existence  of  electrification  may  be  detected.  All  electroscopes  are 
capable  of  indicating  with  more  or  less  accuracy  not  only  the 
existence  of  electrification,  but  its  amount.  Such  indications,  how- 
ever, though  sometimes  very  useful  in  guiding  the  experimenter, 
are  not  to  be  regarded  as  furnishing  a  numerical  measurement  of 
the  electrification.  Instruments  so  constructed  that  their  indi- 
cations afford  data  for  the  numerical  measurement  of  electrical 
quantities  are  called  Electrometers. 

An  electrometer  may  of  course  be  used  as  an  electroscope  if  it  is 
sufficiently  sensitive  to  indicate  the  electrification  in  question,  and 
an  instrument  intended  for  an  electroscope  may,  if  its  indications 
are  sufficiently  uniform  and  regular,  be  used  as  an  electrometer. 

The  class  of  electroscopes  of  simplest  construction  is  that  in 
which  the  indicating  part  of  the  instrument  consists  of  two  light 
bodies  suspended  side  by  side,  which,  when  electrified,  repel  each 
other,  and  indicate  their  electrification  by  separating  from  each 
other. 

The  suspended  bodies  may  be  balls  of  elder  pith,  gilt,  and  hung 
up  by  fine  linen  threads  (which  are  better  conductors  than  silk  or 
cotton),  or  pieces  of  straw  or  strips  of  metal,  and  in  the  latter  case 
the  metal  may  be  tinfoil  or  gold-leaf,  thicker  or  thinner  according 
to  the  amount  of  electrification  to  be  measured. 

We  shall  suppose  that  our  electroscope  is  of  the  most  delicate 
kind,  in  which  gold  leaves  are  employed  (see  Fig.  1).      The  indi- 
cating apparatus  I,  I,  is  generally  fastened  to  one 
end  of  a  rod  of  metal  _Z/,  which  passes  through  an 
opening  in  the  top  of  a  glass  vessel  G.     It  then 
hangs  within  the  vessel,  and  is  protected  from 
currents  of  air  which  might  produce  a  motion  of 
the  suspended   bodies  liable  to  be  mistaken  for 
that  due  to  electrification. 

To  test  the  electrification  of  a  body  the  electrified 
body  is  brought  near  the  disk  L  at  the  top  of  the 
metal  rod,  when,  if  the  electrification  is  strong 
enough,  the  suspended  bodies  diverge  from  one 
another. 

The  glass  case,  however,  is  liable,  as  Faraday  pointed  out,  to 
become  itself  electrified,  and  when  glass  is  electrified  it.  is  very 


10  GOLD-LEAF   ELECTROSCOPE.  [ll. 

difficult  to  ascertain  by  experiment  the  amount  and  the  distribution 
of  its  electrification.  There  is  thus  introduced  into  the  experiment 
a  new  force,  the  nature  and  amount  of  which  is  unknown,  and  this 
interferes  with  the  other  forces  acting  on  the  gold  leaves,  so  that 
their  divergence  can  no  longer  be  taken  as  a  true  indication  of 
their  electrification. 

The  best  method  of  getting  rid  of  this  uncertainty  is  to  place 
within  the  glass  case  a  metal  vessel  which  almost  surrounds  the 
gold  leaves,  this  vessel  being  connected  with  the  earth.  When  the 
gold  leaves  are  electrified  the  inside  of  this  vessel,  it  is  true,  becomes 
oppositely  electrified,  and  so  increases  the  divergence  of  the  gold 
leaves,  but  the  distribution  of  this  electrification  is  always  strictly 
dependent  on  that  of  the  gold  leaves,  so  that  the  divergence  of  the 
gold  leaves  is  still  a  true  indication  of  their  actual  electrical  state. 
A  continuous  metal  vessel,  however,  is  opaque,  so  that  the  gold 
leaves  cannot  be  seen  from  the  outside.  A  wire  cage,  however, 
may  be  used,  and  this  is  found  quite  sufficient  to  shield  the  gold 
leaves  from  the  action  of  the  glass,  while  it  does  not  prevent  them 
from  being  seen, 

The  disk,  L,  and  the  upper  part  of  the  rod  which  supports  the 
gold  leaves,  and  another  piece  of  metal  M,  which  is  connected  with 
the  cage  m,  m,  and  extends  beyond  the  case  of  the  instrument,  are 
called  the  electrodes,  a  name  invented  by  Faraday  to  denote  the  ways 
by  which  the  electricity  gets  to  the  vital  parts  of  the  instrument. 

The  divergence  of  the  gold  leaves  indicates  that  the  potential  of 
the  gold  leaves  and  its  electrode  is  different  from  that  of  the  sur- 
rounding metal  cage  and  its  electrode.  If  the  two  electrodes  are 
connected  by  a  wire  the  whole  instrument  may  be  electrified  to  any 
extent,  but  the  leaves  will  not  diverge. 

EXPERIMENT  V. 

The  divergence  of  the  gold  leaves  does  not  of  itself  indicate 
whether  their  potential  is  higher  or  lower  than  that  of  the  cage ; 
it  only  shews  that  these  potentials  are  different.  To  ascertain 
which  has  the  higher  potential  take  a  rubbed  stick  of  sealing  wax, 
or  any  other  substance  which  we  know  to  be  negatively  electrified, 
and  bring  it  near  the  electrode  which  carries  the  gold  leaves.  If 
the  gold  leaves  are  negatively  electrified  they  will  diverge  more  as 
the  sealing  wax  approaches  the  rod  which  carries  them  ;  but  if  they 
are  positively  electrified  they  will  tend  to  collapse.  If  the  electri- 


13.]  GOLD-LEAF   ELECTROSCOPE.  11 

fication  of  the  sealing"  wax  is  considerable  with  respect  to  that  of 
the  gold  leaves  they  will  first  collapse  entirely,  but  will  again 
open  out  as  the  sealing  wax  is  brought  nearer,  shewing  that  they 
are  now  negatively  electrified.  If  the  electrode  M  belonging  to 
the  cage  is  insulated  from  the  earth,  and  if  the  sealing  wax  is 
brought  near  it,  the  indications  will  be  exactly  reversed  ;  the  leaves, 
if  electrified  positively,  will  diverge  more,  and  if  electrified  nega- 
tively, will  tend  to  collapse. 

If  the  testing  body  used  in  this  experiment  is  positively  elec- 
trified, as  when  a  glass  tube  rubbed  with  amalgam  is  employed,  the 
indications  are  all  reversed. 

By  these  methods  it  is  easy  to  determine  whether  the  gold  leaves 
are  positively  or  negatively  electrified,  or,  in  other  words,  whether 
their  potential  is  higher  or  lower  than  that  of  the  cage. 

12.]  If  the  electrification  of  the  gold  leaves  is  considerable  the 
electric  force  which  acts  on  them  becomes  much  greater  than  their 
weight,  and  they  stretch  themselves  out  towards  the  cage  as  far  as 
they  can.  In  this  state  an  increase  of  electrification  produces  no 
visible  effect  on  the  electroscope,  for  the  gold  leaves  cannot  diverge 
more.  If  the  electrification  is  still  further  increased  it  often  happens 
that  the  gold  leaves  are  torn  off  from  their  support,  and  the  instru- 
ment is  rendered  useless.  It  is  better,  therefore,  when  we  have  to 
deal  with  high  degrees  of  electrification  to  use  a  less  delicate  in- 
strument. A  pair  of  pith  balls  suspended  by  linen  threads  answers 
very  well ;  the  threads  answer  sufficiently  well  as  conductors  of  elec- 
tricity, and  the  balls  are  repelled  from  each  other  when  electrified. 

For  very  small  differences  of  potential,  electroscopes  much  more 
sensitive  than  the  ordinary  gold-leaf  electroscope  may  be  used. 

THOMSON'S  QUADRANT  ELECTROMETER. 

13.]  In  Sir  William  Thomson's  Quadrant  Electrometer  the 
indicating  part  consists  of  a  thin  flat  strip  of  aluminium  (see 
Fig.  2)  called  the  needle,  attached  to  a  vertical  axle  of  stout 
platinum  wire.  It  is  hung  up  by  two  silk  fibres  #,  y,  so  as  to 
be  capable  of  turning  about  a  vertical  axis  under  the  action  of 
the  electric  force,  while  it  always  tends  to  return  to  a  definite 
position  of  equilibrium.  The  axis  carries  a  concave  mirror  t  by 
which  the  image  of  a  flame,  and  of  a  vertical  wire  bisecting  the 
flame,  is  thrown  upon  a  graduated  scale,  so  as  to  indicate  the 
motion  of  the  needle  round  a  vertical  axis.  The  lower  end  of 


12 


QUADRANT   ELECTROMETER. 


['3. 


the  axle,  dips  into  sulphuric  acid  contained  in  the  lower  part  of 
the  glass  case  of  the  instrument,  and  thus  puts  the  needle  into 
electrical  connection  with  the  acid.  The  lower  end  of  the  axle 
also  carries  a  piece  of  platinum,  immersed  in  the  acid  which  serves 
to  check  the  vibrations  of  the  needle.  The  needle  hangs  within 
a,  shallow  cylindrical  brass  box,  with  circular  apertures  in  the 

centre  of  its  top  and  bottom.  This  box 
is  divided  into  four  quadrants,  a,  b,  c,  d, 
which  are  separately  mounted  on  glass 
stems,  and  thus  insulated  from  the  case 
and  from  one  another.  The  quadrant  b 
is  removed  in  the  figure  to  shew  the 
needle.  The  position  of  the  needle,  when 
in  equilibrium,  is  such,  that  one  end  is 
half  in  the  quadrant  a  and  half  in  c, 
while  the  other  end  is  half  in  b  and 
half  in  d. 

The  electrode  /  is  connected  with  the 
quadrant  a  and  also  with  d  through  the 
wire  w.  The  other  electrode,  m,  is  con- 
nected with  the  quadrants  b  and  c. 

The  needle,  u,  is  kept  always  at  a 
high  potential,  generally  positive.  To 
test  the  difference  of  potential  between 

any  body  and  the  earth,  one  of  the  electrodes,  say  m,  is  connected 
to  the  earth,  and  the  other,  I,  to  the  body  to  be  tested. 

The  quadrants  b  and  c  are  therefore  at  potential  zero,  the 
quadrants  a  and  d  are  at  the  potential  to  be  tested,  and  the  needle 
u  is  at  a  high  positive  potential. 

The  whole  surface  of  the  needle  is  electrified  positively,  and 
the  whole  inner  surface  of  the  quadrants  is  electrified  negatively, 
but  the  greatest  electrification  and  the  greatest  attraction  is,  other 
things  being  equal,  where  the  difference  of  potentials  is  greatest. 
If,  therefore,  the  potential  of  the  quadrants  a  and  d  is  positive, 
the  needle  will  move  from  a  and  d  towards  b  and  c  or  in  the 
direction  of  the  hands  of  a  watch.  If  the  potential  of  a  and  d  is 
negative,  the  needle  will  move  towards  these  quadrants,  or  in  the 
opposite  direction  to  that  of  the  hands  of  a  watch. 

The  higher  the  potential  of  the  needle,  the  greater  will  be  the 
force  tending  to  turn  the  needle,  and  the  more  distinct  will  be  the 
indications  of  the  instrument. 


Fig.  2. 


1 5.]      IDIOSTATIC   AND   HETEROSTATIC    INSTRUMENTS.          13 


Idiostatic  and  Heterostatic  Instruments. 

14.]  In  the  gold-leaf  electroscope,  the  only  electrification  in 
the  field  is  the  electrification  to  be  tested.  In  the  Quadrant 
Electrometer  the  needle  is  kept  always  charged.  Instruments  in 
which  the  only  electrification  is  that  which  we  wish  to  test,  are 
called  Idiostatic.  Those  in  which  there  is  electrification  inde- 
pendent of  that  to  be  tested  are  called  Heterostatic.  In  an 
idiostatic  instrument,  like  the  gold-leaf  electroscope,  the  indications 
are  the  same,  whether  the  potential  to  be  tested  is  positive  or 
negative,  and  the  amount  of  the  indication  is,  when  very  small, 
nearly  as  the  square  of  the  difference  of  potential.  In  a  hetero- 
static instrument,  like  the  quadrant  electrometer,  the  indication 
is  to  the  one  side  or  to  the  other,  as  the  potential  is  positive  or 
negative,  and  the  amount  of  the  indication  is  proportional  to  the 
difference  of  potentials,  and  not  to  the  square  of  that  difference. 
Hence  an  instrument  on  the  heterostatic  principle,  not  only  in- 
dicates of  itself  whether  the  potential  is  positive  or  negative,  but 
when  the  potential  is  very  small  its  motion  for  a  small  variation 
of  potential  is  as  great  as  when  the  potential  is  large,  whereas  in 
the  gold  leaf  electroscope  a  very  small  electrification  does  not  cause 
the  gold  leaves  to  separate  sensibly. 

In  Thomson's  Quadrant  Electrometer  there  is  a  contrivance  by 
which  the  potential  of  the  needle  is  adjusted  to  a  constant  value, 
and  there  are  other  organs  for  special  purposes,  which  are  not 
represented  in  the  figure  which  is  a  mere  diagram  of  the  most 
essential  parts  of  the  instrument. 

ON  INSULATORS. 

15.]  In  electrical  experiments  it  is  often  necessary  to  support 
an  electrified  body  in  such  a  way  that  the  electricity  may  not 
escape.  For  this  purpose,  nothing  is  better  than  to  set  it  on  a 
stand  supported  by  a  glass  rod,  provided  the  surface  of  the  glass 
is  quite  dry.  But,  except  in  the  very  driest  weather,  the  surface 
of  the  glass  has  always  a  little  moisture  condensed  on  it.  For 
this  reason  electrical  apparatus  is  often  placed  before  a  fire,  before 
it  is  to  be  used,  so  that  the  moisture  of  the  air  may  not  condense 
on  the  warmed  surface  of  the  glass.  But  if  the  glass  is  made 
too  warm,  it  loses  its  insulating  power  and  becomes  a  good 
conductor. 


14  INSULATORS.  [l6. 

Hence  it  is  best  to  adopt  a  method  by  which,  the  surface  of  the 
glass  may  be  kept  dry  without  heating  it. 

The  insulating  stand  in  the  figure  consists  of  a  glass  vessel  C, 
with  a  boss  rising  up  in  the  middle  to  which 
is  cemented  the  glass  pillar  a  a.  To  the  upper 
part  of  this  pillar  is  cemented  the  neck  of  the 
bell  glass  B,  which  is  thus  supported  so  that 
its  rim  is  within  the  vessel  C,  but  does  not 
touch  it.  The  pillar  a  carries  the  stand  A  on 
which  the  body  to  be  insulated  is  placed. 

In  the  vessel  C  is  placed  some  strong  sul- 
phuric acid  c,  which  fills  a  wide  shallow  moat 
round  the  boss  in  the  middle.  The  air  within 
the  bell  glass  j5,  in  contact  with  the  pillar  a,  is 
thus  dried,  and  before  any  damp  air  can  enter 
this  part  of  the  instrument,  it  must  pass  down  between  C  and  B 
and  glide  over  the  surface  of  the  sulphuric  acid,  so  that  it  is 
thoroughly  dried  before  it  reaches  the  glass  pillar.  Such  an  in- 
sulating stand  is  very  valuable  when  delicate  experiments  have  to 
be  performed.  For  rougher  purposes  insulating  stands  may  be 
made  with  pillars  of  glass  varnished  with  shellac  or  of  sealing-wax 
or  ebonite. 

16.]  For  carrying  about  an  electrified  conductor,  it  is  very 
convenient  to  fasten  it  to  the  end  of  an  ebonite  rod.  Ebonite, 
however,  is  very  easily  electrified.  The  slightest  touch  with  the 
hand,  or  friction  of  any  kind,  is  sufficient  to  render  its  surface  so 
electrical,  that  no  conclusion  can  be  drawn  as  to  the  electrification 
of  the  conductor  at  the  end  of  the  rod. 

The  rod  therefore  must  never  be  touched  but  must  be  carried 
by  means  of  a  handle  of  metal,  or  of  wood  covered  with  tinfoil, 
and  before  making  any  experiment  the  whole  surface  of  the 
ebonite  must  be  freed  from  electrification  by  passing  it  rapidly 
through  a  flame. 

The  sockets  by  which  the  conductors  are  fastened  to  the  ebonite 
rods,  should  not  project  outwards  from  the  conductors,  for  the 
electricity  not  only  accumulates  on  the  projecting  parts,  but  creeps 
over  the  surface  of  the  ebonite,  and  remains  there  when  the 
electricity  of  the  conductor  is  discharged.  The  sockets  should 
therefore  be  entirely  within  the  outer  surface  of  the  conductors 
as  in  Fig.  4. 

It  is  convenient   to  have  a  brass   ball,   (Fig.   4),   one  inch   in 


1 6.] 


APPARATUS. 


15 


diameter,  a  cylindrical  metal  vessel  (Fig.  5)  about  three  inches 
in  diameter  and  five  or  six  inches  deep,  a  pair  of  disks  of  tin 
plate  (Figs.  6,  7),  two  inches  in  diameter,  and  a  thin  wire  about 
a  foot  long  (Fig.  8)  to  make  connection  between  electrified  bodies. 
These  should  all  be  mounted  on  ebonite  rods  (penholders),  one 
eighth  of  an  inch  diameter,  with  handles  of  metal  or  of  wood  covered 
with  tinfoil. 


Figs.  4. 


CHAPTEE  II. 


ON   THE   CHAEGES    OF   ELECTRIFIED   BODIES. 


EXPERIMENT  VI. 

17.]  TAKE  any  deep  vessel  of  metal, — a  pewter  ice-pail  was  used 
by  Faraday, — a  piece  of  wire  gauze  rolled  into  a  cylinder  and  set 
on  a  metal  plate  is  very  convenient,  as  it  allows  any  object  within 
it  to  be  seen.  Set  this  vessel  on  an  insulating-  stand,  and  place 
an  electroscope  near  it.  Connect  one  electrode  of  the  electroscope 
permanently  with  the  earth  or  the  walls  of  the  room,  and  the 
other  with  the  insulated  vessel,  either  permanently  by  a  wire 
reaching  from  the  one  to  the  other,  or  occasionally  by  means  of 
a  wire  carried  on  an  ebonite  rod  and  made  to  touch  the  vessel 
and  the  electrode  at  the  same  time.  We  shall  generally  suppose 
the  vessel  in  permanent  connection  with  the  elec- 
troscope. The  simplest  way  when  a  gold  leaf 
electroscope  is  used  is  to  set  the  vessel  on  the 
top  of  it. 

Take  a  metal  ball  at  the  end  of  an  ebonite  rod, 
electrify  it  by  means  of  the  electrophorus,  and 
carrying  it  by  the  rod  as  a  handle  let  it  down  into 
the  metal  vessel  without  touching  the  sides. 

As  the  electrified  ball  approaches  the  vessel  the 
indications  of  the  electroscope  continually  increase, 
but  when  the  ball  is  fairly  within  the  vessel,  that 
is  when  its  depth  below  the  opening  of  the  vessel 
becomes  considerable  compared  with  the  diameter 
of  the  opening,  the  indications  of  the  electroscope  no  longer  in- 
crease, but  remain  unchanged  in  whatever  way  the  ball  is  moved 
about  within  the  vessel. 

This  statement,  which  is  approximately  true  for  any  deep  .vessel, 
is  rigorously  true  for  a  clpsed  vessel.     This  may  be  shewn   by 


Fig.  9. 


1 8.]  COMPARISON   OF   CHARGES.  17 

closing  the  mouth  of  the  vessel  with  a  metal  lid  worked  by  means 
of  a  silk  thread.  If  the  electrified  ball  be  drawn  up  and  let 
down  in  the  vessel  by  means  of  a  silk  thread  passing  through  a 
hole  in  the  lid,  the  external  electrification  of  the  vessel  as  in- 
dicated by  the  electrometer  will  remain  unchanged,  while  the  ball 
changes  its  position  within  the  vessel.  The  electrifi- 
cation of  the  gold  leaves  when  tested  is  found  to  be 
of  the  same  kind  as  that  of  the  ball. 

Now  touch  the  outside  of  the  vessel  with  the  finger, 
so    as   to   put   it   in  electric   communication   with  the 
floor  and  walls  of  the  room.     The  external  electrifica- 
tion of   the  vessel  will   be  discharged,    and   the   gold 
leaves  of  the  electroscope  will  collapse.     If  the  ball  be 
now  moved  about   within   the   vessel,  the   electroscope 
will  shew  no  signs  of  electrification;   but  if  the  ball 
be  taken  out  of  the  vessel  without  touching  the  sides,. 
Fig.  10.      the  gold  leaves  will  again  diverge  as  much  as  they  did 
during  the  first  part  of  the  experiment.     Their  electri- 
fication however  will  be  found  to  be  of  the   opposite  kind  from 
that  of  the  ball. 

1  EXPERIMENT  VII. 

To  compare  the  charges  or  total  Electrification  of  two 
electrified  balls. 

18.]  Since  whatever  be  the  position  of  the  electrified  bodies 
within  the  vessel  its  external  electrification  is  the  same,  it  must 
depend  on  the  total  electrification  of  the  bodies  within  it,  and 
not  on  the  distribution  of  that  electrification.  Hence,  if  two  balls, 
when  alternately  let  down  into  the  vessel,  produce  the  same  diver- 
gence of  the  gold  leaves,  their  charges  must  be  equal.  This  may 
be  further  tested  by  discharging  the  outside  of  the  vessel  when 
the  first  ball  is  in  it,  and  then  removing  it  and  letting  the  second 
ball  down  into  the  vessel.  If  the  charges  are  equal,  the  electro- 
scope will  still  indicate  no  electrification. 

If  we  wish  to  ascertain  whether  the  charges  of  two  bodies, 
oppositely  electrified,  are  numerically  equal,  we  may  do  so  by 
discharging  the  vessel  and  then  letting  down  both  bodies  into 
it.  If  the  charges  are  equal  and  opposite,  the  electroscope  will  not 
be  affected. 


18  TO   DISCHARGE   A   BODY   COMPLETELY.  [19. 


EXPERIMENT  VIII. 

When  an  electrified  body  is  hung  up  within  a  closed  metallic  vessel, 
the  total  electrification  of  the  inner  surface  of  the  vessel  is  equal 
and  opposite  to  that  of  the  lody. 

19.]  After  hanging  the  body  within  the  vessel,  discharge  the 
external  electrification  of  the  vessel,  and  hang  up  the  whole  within 
a  larger  vessel  connected  with  the  electroscope.  The  electroscope 
will  indicate  no  electrification,  and  will  remain  unaffected  even 
if  the  electrified  body  be  taken  out  of  the  smaller  vessel  and  moved 
about  within  the  larger  vessel.  If,  however,  either  the  electrified 
body  or  the  smaller  vessel  be  removed  from  the  large  vessel,  the 
electroscope  will  indicate  positive  or  negative  electrification. 

When  an  electrified  body  is  placed  within  a  vessel  free  of  charge, 
the  external  electrification  is  equal  to  that  of  the  body.  This 
follows  from  the  fact  already  proved  that  the  internal  electrifica- 
tion is  equal  and  opposite  to  that  of  the  body,  and  from  the  cir- 
cumstance that  the  total  charge  of  the  vessel  is  zero. 

But  it  may  also  be  proved  experimentally  by  placing,  first  the 
electrified  body  itself,  and  then  the  electrified  body  surrounded 
by  an  uncharged  vessel,  within  the  larger  vessel  and  observing 
that  the  indications  of  the  electroscope  are  the  same  in  both 
cases. 

EXPERIMENT  IX. 

When  an  electrified  body  is  placed  within  a  closed  vessel  and  then 
put  into  electrical  connection  with  the  vessel,  the  body  is  com- 
pletely discharged. 

20.]  In  performing  any  of  the  former  experiments  bring  the 
electrified  body  into  contact  with  the  inside  of  the  vessel,  and 
then  take  it  out  and  test  its  charge  by  placing  it  within  another 
vessel  connected  with  the  electroscope.  It  will  be  found  quite 
free  of  charge.  This  is  the  case  however  highly  the  body  may 
have  been  originally  electrified,  and  however  highly  the  vessel 
itself,  the  inside  of  which  it  is  made  to  touch,  may  be  electrified. 

IfA  the  vessel,  during  the  experiment,  is  kept  connected  with  the 
electroscope,  no  alteration  of  the  external  electrification  can  be 
detected  at  the  moment  at  which  the  electrified  body  is  made  to 
touch  the  inside  of  the  vessel.  This  affords  another  proof  that 
the  electrification  of  the  interior  surface  is  equal  and  opposite  to 


21.]  MULTIPLE   OF  A   GIVEN   CHAEGE.  19 

that  of  the  electrified  body  within  it.  It  also  shews  that  when 
there  is  no  electrified  body  within  the  surface  every  part  of  that 
surface  is  free  from  charge. 


EXPERIMENT  X. 

To  charge  a  vessel  with  any  number  of  times  the  charge  of  a  given 
electrified  lody. 

21.]  Place  a  smaller  vessel  within  the  given  vessel  so  as  to  be 
insulated  from  it.  Place  the  electrified  body  within  the  inner 
vessel,  taking  care  not  to  discharge  it.  The  ex- 
terior charges  of  the  inner  and  outer  vessels  will 
now  be  equal  to  that  of  the  body,  and  their  in- 
terior charges  will  be  numerically  equal  but  of 
the  opposite  kind.  Now  make  electric  connection 
between  the  two  vessels.  The  exterior  charge  of 
the  inner  vessel  and  the  interior  charge  of  the 
outer  vessel  will  neutralise  each  other,  and  the 
outer  vessel  will  now  have  a  charge  equal  to  that 
of  the  body,  and  the  inner  vessel  an  equal  and  op- 
posite charge. 

Now  remove  the  electrified  body;  take  out  the 
inner  vessel  and  discharge  it;  then  replace  it; 
place  the  electrified  body  within  it ;  and  make  contact  between  the 
vessels.  The  outer  vessel  has  now  received  a  double  charge,  and 
by  repeating  this  process  any  number  of  charges,  each  equal  to 
that  of  the  electrified  body,  may  be  communicated  to  the  outer 
vessel. 

To  charge  the  outer  vessel  with  electrification  opposite  to  that 
of  the  electrified  body  is  still  easier.  We  have  only  to  place  the 
electrified  body  within  the  smaller  vessel,  to  put  this  vessel  for  a 
moment  in  connection  with  the  walls  of  the  room  so  as  to  dis- 
charge the  exterior  electrification,  then  to  remove  the  electrified 
body  and  carry  the  vessel  into  the  inside  of  the  larger  vessel  and 
bring  it  into  contact  with  it  so  as  to  give  the  larger  vessel  its 
negative  charge,  and  then  to  remove  the  smaller  vessel,  and  to 
repeat  this  process  the  required  number  of  times. 

We  have  thus  a  method  of  comparing  the  electric  charges  of 
different  bodies  without  discharging  them,  of  producing  charges 
equal  to  that  of  a  given  electrified  body,  and  either  of  the  same 

c  3 


20  LAWS   OF   ELECTRICAL   PHENOMENA.  [22. 

or  of  opposite  signs,  and  of  adding  any  number  of  such  charges 
together. 

22.]  In  this  way  we  may  illustrate  and  test  the  truth  of  the 
following  laws  of  electrical  phenomena. 

I.  The  total  electrification  or  charge  of  a  body  or  system  of 
bodies  remains  always  the  same,  except   in  so  far  as  it  receives 
electrification  from,  or  gives  electrification  to  other  bodies. 

In  all  electrical  experiments  the  electrification  of  bodies  is  found 
to  change,  but  it  is  always  found  that  this  change  arises  from 
defective  insulation,  and  that  as  the  means  of  insulation  are  im- 
proved, the  loss  of  electrification  becomes  less.  We  may  therefore 
assert  that  the  electrification  of  a  body  cut  off  from  electrical  com- 
munication with  all  other  bodies  by  a  perfectly  insulating  medium 
would  remain  absolutely  constant. 

II.  When  one  body  electrifies  another  by  conduction  the  total 
electrification  of  the  two  bodies  remains  the  same,  that  is,  the  one 
loses  as  much  positive  or  gains  as  much  negative  electrification  as 
the  other  gains  of  positive  or  loses  of  negative  electrification. 

For  if  the  electric  connection  is  made  when  both  bodies  are 
enclosed  in  a  metal  vessel,  no  change  of  the  total  electrification  is 
observed  at  the  instant  of  contact. 

III.  When  electrification  is  produced  by  friction  or  by  any  other 
known  method,  equal  quantities  of  positive  and  of  negative  elec- 
tricity are  produced. 

For  if  the  process  of  electrification  is  conducted  within  the 
closed  vessel,  however  intense  the  electrification  of  the  parts  of 
the  system  may  be,  the  electrification  of  the  whole,  as  indicated  by 
the  electroscope  connected  with  the  vessel,  remains  zero. 

IV.  If  an  electrified  body  or  system  of  bodies  be  placed  within 
a  closed  conducting  surface  (which  may  consist  of  the  floor,  walls, 
and  ceiling  of  the  room  in  which  the  experiment  is  made),  the  in- 
terior electrification  of  this  surface  is  equal  and  opposite  to  the 
electrification  of  the  body  or  system  of  bodies. 

V.  If  no  electrified  body  is  placed  within  the  hollow  conducting 
surface,  the  electrification  of  this  surface  is  zero.     This  is  true,  not 
only  of  the  electrification  of  the  surface  as  a  whole,  but  of  every 
part  of  this  surface. 

For  if  a  conductor  be  placed  within  the  surface  and  in  contact 
with  it,  the  surface  of  this  .conductor  becomes  electrically  continu- 
ous with  the  interior  surface  of  the  enclosing  vessel,  and  it  is  found 
that  if  the  conductor  is  removed  and  tested,  its  electrification  is 


22.]  LAWS   OF   ELECTRICAL   PHENOMENA.  21 

always  zero,  shewing  that  the  electrification  of  every  part  of  an 
interior  surface  within  which  there  is  no  electrified  body  is  zero. 

By  means  of  Thomson's  Quadrant  Electrometer  it  is  easy  to 
measure  the  electrification  of  a  body  when  it  is  a  million  times  less 
than  when  charged  to  an  amount  convenient  for  experiment. 
Hence  the  experimental  evidence  for  the  above  statements  shews 
that  they  cannot  be  erroneous  to  the  extent  of  one-millionth  of  the 
principal  electrifications  concerned. 


CHAPTER  III. 

ON  ELECTRICAL  WORK  AND   ENERGY. 

23.]  WORK  in  general  is  the  act  of  producing  a  change  of  con- 
figuration in  a  material  system  in  opposition  to  a  force  which 
resists  this  change. 

Energy  is  the  capacity  of  doing  work. 

"When  the  nature  of  a  material  system  is  such  that  if  after  the 
system  has  undergone  any  series  of  changes  it  is  brought  back 
in  any  manner  to  its  original  state,  the  whole  work  done  by 
external  agents  on  the  system  is  equal  to  the  whole  work  done 
by  the  system  in  overcoming  external  forces,  the  system  is  called 
a  Conservative  system. 

The  progress  of  physical  science  has  led  to  the  investigation  of 
different  forms  of  energy,  and  to  the  establishment  of  the  doctrine, 
that  all  material  systems  may  be  regarded  as  conservative  systems 
provided  that  all  the  different  forms  of  energy  are  taken  into  account. 
This  doctrine,  of  course,  considered  as  a  deduction  from  experiment, 
can  assert  no  more  than  that  no  instance  of  a  non-conservative 
system  has  hitherto  been  discovered,  but  as  a  scientific  or  science- 
producing  doctrine  it  is  always  acquiring  additional  credibility 
from  the  constantly  increasing  number  of  deductions  which  have 
been  drawn  from  it,  which  are  found  in  all  cases  to  be  verified. 
In  fact,  this  doctrine  is  the  one  generalised  statement  which  is 
found  to  be  consistent  with  fact,  not  in  one  physical  science  only, 
but  in  all.  When  once  apprehended  it  furnishes  to  the  physical 
enquirer  a  principle  on  which  he  may  hang  every  known  law 
relating  to  physical  actions,  and  by  which  he  may  be  put  in  the 
way  to  discover  the  relations  of  such  actions  in  new  branches  of 
science.  For  such  reasons  the  doctrine  is  commonly  called  the 
Principle  of  the  Conservation  of  Energy. 


25.]  ELECTRIC   POTENTIAL.  23 


GENERAL  STATEMENT  OF  THE  CONSERVATION  OF  ENERGY. 

24.]  The  total  energy  of  any  system  of  bodies  is  a  quantity 
which  can  neither  be  increased  nor  diminished  by  any  mutual 
action  of  those  bodies,  though  it  may  be  transformed  into  any  of 
the  forms  of  which  energy  is  susceptible. 

If,  by  the  action  of  some  external  agent,  the  configuration  of  the 
system  is  changed,  then,  if  the  forces  of  the  system  are  such  as  to 
resist  this  change  of  configuration,  the  external  agent  is  said  to  do 
work  on  the  system.  In  this  case  the  energy  of  the  system  is 
increased.  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  forces  of  the  system  tend  to 
produce  the  change  of  configuration,  so  that  the  external  agent  has 
only  to  allow  it  to  take  place,  the  system  is  said  to  do  work  on 
the  external  agent,  and  in  this  case  the  energy  of  the  system  is 
diminished.  Thus  when  a  fish  has  swallowed  the  angler's  hook 
and  swims  off,  the  angler  following  him  for  fear  his  line  should 
break,  the  fish  is  doing  work  against  the  angler,  but  when  the  fish 
becomes  tired  and  the  angler  draws  him  to  shore,  the  angler  is 
doing  work  against  the  fish. 

Work  is  always  measured  by  the  product  of  the  change  of 
configuration  into  the  force  which  resists  that  change.  Thus,  when 
a  man  lifts  a  heavy  body,  the  change  of  configuration  is  measured 
by  the  increase  of  distance  between  the  body  and  the  earth,  and 
the  force  which  resists  it  is  the  weight  of  the  body.  The  product 
of  these  measures  the  work  done  by  the  man.  If  the  man,  instead 
of  lifting  the  heavy  body  vertically  upwards,  rolls  it  up  an  inclined 
plane  to  the  same  height  above  the  ground,  the  work  done  against 
gravity  is  precisely  the  same ;  for  though  the  heavy  body  is  moved 
a  greater  distance,  it  is  only  the  vertical  component  of  that 
distance  which  coincides  in  direction  with  the  force  of  gravity 
acting  on  the  body. 

25.]  If  a  body  having  a  positive  charge  of  electricity  is  carried 
by  a  man  from  a  place  of  low  to  a  place  of  high  potential,  the 
motion  is  opposed  by  the  electric  force,  and  the  man  does  work  on 
the  electric  system,  thereby  increasing  its  energy.  The  amount 
of  work  is  measured  by  the  product  of  the  number  of  units  of 
electricity  into  the  increase  of  potential  in  moving  from  the  one 
place  to  the  other. 

We  thus  obtain  the  dynamical  definition  of  electric  potential. 


24  ELECTROMOTIVE   FQKCE.     .  [26. 

The  electric  potential  at  a  given  point  of  the  field  is  measured  ly 
the  amount  of  work  which  must  le  done  by  an  external  agent  in 
carrying  one  unit  of  positive  electricity  from  a  place  where  the  potential 
is  zero  to  the  given  point. 

This  definition  is  consistent  with  the  imperfect  definition  given 
at  Art.  6,  for  the  work  done  in  carrying  a  unit  of  electricity  from 
one  place  to  another  will  be  positive  or  negative  according  as  the 
displacement  is  from  lower  to  higher  or  from  higher  to  lower 
potential.  In  the  latter  ease  the  motion,  if  not  prevented,  will 
take  place,  without  any  interference  from  without,  in  obedience  to 
the  electric  forces  of  the  system.  Hence  the  flow  of  electricity 
along  conductors  is  always  from  places  of  high  to  places  of  low 
potential. 

26.]  We  have  already  defined  the  electromotive  force  from  one 
place  to  another  along  a  given  path  as  the  work  done  by  the 
electric  forces  of  the  system  on  a  unit  of  electricity  carried  along 
that  path.  It  is  therefore  measured  by  the  excess  of  the  potential 
at  the  beginning  over  that  at  the  end  of  the  path. 

The  electromotive  force  at  a  point  is  the  force  with  which  the 
electrified  system  would  act  on  a  small  body  electrified  with  a  unit 
of  positive  electricity,  and  placed  at  that  point. 

If  the  electrified  body  is  moved  in  such  a  way  as  to  remain  on 
the  same  equipotential  surface,  no  work  is  done  by  the  electric 
forces  or  against  them.  Hence  the  direction  of  the  electric  force 
acting  on  the  small  body  is  such  that  any  displacement  of  the  body 
along  any  line  drawn  on  the  equipotential  surface  is  at  right  angles 
to  the  force.  The  direction  of  the  electromotive  force,  therefore,  is 
at  right  angles  to  the  equipotential  surface. 

The  magnitude  of  this  force,  multiplied  by  the  distance  between 
two  neighbouring  equipotential  surfaces,  gives  the  work  done  in 
passing  from  the  one  equipotential  surface  to  the  other,  that  is  to 
say,  the  difference  of  their  potentials. 

Hence  the  magnitude  of  the  electric  force  may  be  found  by 
dividing  the  difference  of  the  potentials  of  two  neighbouring  equi- 
potential surfaces  by  the  distance  between  them,  the  distance 
being,  of  course,  very  small,  and  measured  perpendicularly  to 
either  surface.  The  direction  of  the  force  is  that  of  the  normal 
to  the  equipotential  surface  through  the  given  point,  and  is 
reckoned  in  the  direction  in  which  the  potential  diminishes. 


28.]  DIAGRAM   OF   WORK. 


25 


INDICATOR  DIAGRAM  OF  ELECTRIC  WORK. 

27.]  The  indicator  diagram,  employed  by  Watt  for  measuring 
the  work  done  by  a  steam  engine,*  may  be  made  use  of  in  investi- 
gating the  work  done  during  the  charging  of  a  conductor  with 
electricity. 


Fig.  12. 

Let  the  charge  of  the  conductor  at  any  instant  be  represented  by 
a  horizontal  line  OC,  drawn  from  the  point  0,  which  is  called  the 
origin  of  the  diagram,  and  let  the  potential  of  the  conductor  at 
the  same  instant  be  represented  by  a  vertical  line  CA,  drawn  from 
the  extremity  of  the  first  line,  then  the  position  of  the  extremity 
of  the  second  line  will  indicate  the  electric  state  of  the  conductor, 
both  with  respect  to  its  charge,  and  also  with  respect  to  its 
potential. 

If  during  any  electrical  operation  this  point  moves  along  the 
line  AFGHB,  we  know  not  only  that  the  charge  has  been  increased 
from  the  value  OC  to  the  value  02),  and  that  the  potential  has 
been  increased  from  CA  to  DB,  but  that  the  charge  and  the 
potential  at  any  instant,  corresponding,  say,  to  the  point  F  of  the 
curve,  are  represented  respectively  by  Ox  and  xF. 

28.]  Theorem.  The  work  expended  by  an  external  agent  in 
bringing  the  increment  of  charge  from  the  walls  of  the  room  to 
the  conductor  is  represented  by  the  area  enclosed  by  the  base  line 
CD,  the  two  vertical  lines  CA  and  DB,  and  the  curve  AFGHB. 

For  let  CD,  the  increment  of  the  charge,  be  divided  into  any 
number  of  equal  parts  at  the  points  #,  yt  z. 

*  Maxwell's  'Theory  of  Heat/  4th  ed.,  p.  102. 


26  WOKK  DONE   IN   CHARGING  A   CONDUCTOR.  [29. 

The  value  of  the  potential  just  before  the  application  of  the 
charge  Cx  is  represented  by  AC.  Hence  if  the  potential  were  to 
remain  constant  during  the  application  of  the  charge  Cos,  the  work 
expended  in  charging  the  conductor  would  be  represented  by  the 
product  of  this  potential  and  the  charge,  or  by  the  area  ACxQ. 

As  soon  as  the  charge  Cx  has  been  applied  the  potential  is  xF. 
If  this  had  been  the  value  of  the  potential  during  the  whole 
process,  the  work  expended  would  have  been  represented  by 
KCxF.  But  we  know  that  the  potential  rises  gradually  during 
the  application  of  the  charge,  and  that  during  the  whole  process 
it  is  never  less  than  CA  or  greater  than  xF.  Hence  the  work 
expended  in  charging  the  conductor  is  not  less  than  ACxQ,  nor 
greater  than  KCxF. 

In  the  same  way  we  may  determine  the  lower  and  higher 
limits  of  the  work  done  during  the  application  of  any  other  portion 
of  the  entire  charge. 

"We  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  work  expended  in  increasing 
the  charge  from  OC  to  OD  is  not  less  than  the  area  of  the  figure 
CAQFRGSHTD,  nor  greater  than  CKFLGMHNBD.  The  differ- 
ence between  these  two  values  is  the  sum  of  the  parallelograms 
KQ,  LR>  MS,  NT,  the  breadths  of  which  are  equal,  and  their 
united  height  is  ST.  Their  united  area  is  therefore  equal  to  that 
of  the  parallelogram  Nv  VE. 

By  increasing  without  limit  the  number  of  equal  parts  into 
which  the  charge  is  divided,  the  breadth  of  the  parallelograms  will 
be  diminished  without  limit.  In  the  limit,  therefore,  the  difference 
of  the  two  values  of  the  work  vanishes,  and  either  value  becomes 
ultimately  equal  to  the  area  CAFGHBD,  bounded  by  the  curve, 
the  extreme  ordinates,  and  the  base  line. 

This  method  of  proof  is  applicable  to  any  case  in  which  the 
potential  is  always  increasing  or  always  diminishing  as  the  charge 
increases.  When  this  is  not  the  case,  the  process  of  charging 
may  be  divided  into  a  number  of  parts,  in  each  of  which  the 
potential  is  either  always  increasing  or  always  diminishing,  and 
the  proof  applied  separately  to  each  of  these  parts. 

SUPEKPOSITION   OF   ELECTRIC   EFFECTS. 

29.]  It  appears  from  Experiment  VII  that  several  electrified  bodies 
placed  in  a  hollow  vessel  produce  each  its  own  effect  on  the 
electrification  of  the  vessel,  in  whatever  positions  they  are  placed. 


3O.]  SUPERPOSITION   OF   ELECTRIC   EFFECTS.  27 

From  this  it  follows  that  one  electric  phenomenon  at  least,  that 
called  electrification  by  induction,  is  such  that  the  effect  of  the 
whole  electrification  is  the  sum  of  the  effects  due  to  the  different 
parts  of  the  electrification.  The  different  electrical  phenomena, 
however,  are  so  intimately  connected  with  each  other  that  we  are 
led  to  infer  that  all  other  electrical  phenomena  may  be  regarded 
as  composed  of  parts,  each  part  being  due  to  a  corresponding  part 
of  the  electrification. 

Thus  if  a  body  A,  electrified  in  a  definite  manner,  would  produce 
a  given  potential,  P,  at  a  given  point  of  the  field,  and  if  a  body,  B, 
also  electrified  in  a  definite  manner,  would  produce  a  potential,  Q, 
at  the  same  point  of  the  field,  then  when  both  bodies,  still  elec- 
trified as  before,  are  introduced  simultaneously  into  their  former 
places  in  the  field,  the  potential  at  the  given  point  will  be  P+  Q. 
This  statement  may  be  verified  by  direct  experiment,  but  its  most 
satisfactory  verification  is  founded  on  a  comparison  of  its  conse- 
quences with  actual  phenomena. 

As  a  particular  case,  let  the  electrification  of  every  part  of  the 
system  be  multiplied  n  fold.  The  potential  at  every  point  of  the 
system  will  also  be  multiplied  by  n. 

30.]  Let  us  now  suppose  that  the  electrical  system  consists  of  a 
number  of  conductors  (which  we  shall  call  Al ,  A2 ,  &c.)  insulated  from 
each  other,  and  capable  of  being  charged  with  electricity.  Let  the 
charges  of  these  conductors  be  denoted  by  H19  E2)  &c.,  and  their 
potentials  by  Plt  P2,  &c. 

If  at  first  the  conductors  are  all  without  charge,  and  at  potential 
zero,  and  if  at  a  certain  instant  each  conductor  begins  to  be  charged 
with  electricity,  so  that  the  charge 
increases  uniformly  with  the  time, 
and  if  this  process  is  continued  till 
the  charges  simultaneously  become 
El  for  the  first  conductor,  E%  for  the 
second,  and  so  on,  then  since  the  in- 
crement of  the  charge  of  any  con- 
ductor is  the  same  for  every  equal 
interval  of  time  during  the  process, 
the  increment  of  the  potential  of 
each  conductor  will  also  be  the  same 

for  every  equal  increment  of  time,  so  that  the  line  which  represents, 
on  the  indicator  diagram,  the  succession  of  states  of  a  given  con- 
ductor with  respect  to  charge  and  potential  will  be  described  with 


28  ENERGY   OF   AN   ELECTRIFIED   SYSTEM.  [31. 

a  velocity,  the  horizontal  and  vertical  components  of  which  remain 
constant  during  the  process.  This  line  on  the  diagram  is  therefore 
a  straight  line,  drawn  from  the  origin,  which  represents  the  initial 
state  of  the  system  when  devoid  of  charge  and  at  potential  zero,  to 
the  point  A1  which  indicates  the  final  state  of  the  conductor  when 
its  charge  is  E,  and  its  potential  P19  and  will  represent  the  process 
of  charging  the  conductor  A±.  The  work  expended  in  charging 
this  conductor  is  represented  by  the  area  OCA,  or  half  the  product 
of  the  final  charge  E  and  the  final  potential  P. 

ENERGY  OF  A  SYSTEM  OF  ELECTRIFIED  BODIES. 

31.]  When  the  relative  positions  of  the  conductors  are  fixed,  the 
work  done  in  charging  them  is  entirely  transformed  into  electrical 
energy.  If  they  are  charged  in  the  manner  just  described,  the 
work  expended  in  charging  any  one  of  them  is  J  EP,  where  E  re- 
presents its  final  charge  and  P  its  final  potential.  Hence  the  work 
expended  in  charging  the  whole  system  may  be  written 

4^  +  4-^2+ &c., 
there  being  as  many  products  as  there  are  conductors  in  the  system. 

It  is  convenient  to  write  the  sum  of  such  a  series  of  terms  in  the 
form  12  (.EP), 

where  the  symbol  2  (sigma)  denotes  that  all  the  products  of  the 
form  EP  are  to  be  summed  together,  there  being  one  such  product 
for  each  of  the  conductors  of  which  the  system  consists. 

Since  an  electrified  system  is  subject  to  the  law  of  Conservation 
of  Energy,  the  work  expended  in  charging  it  is  entirely  stored  up 
in  the  system  in  the  form  of  electrical  energy.  The  value  of  this 
energy  is  therefore  equal  to  that  of  the  work  which  produced  it,  or 
\^,(EP).  But  the  electrical  energy  of  the  system  depends  al- 
together on  its  actual  state,  and  not  on  its  previous  history.  Hence 

THEOREM  I. 

The  electrical  energy  of  a  system  of  conductors,  in  whatever  way 
they  may  have  leen  charged ',  is  half  the  sum  of  the  products  of  the 
charge  into  the  potential  of  each  conductor. 

We  shall  denote  the  electric  energy  of  the  system  by  the  symbol 
Q>  where  Q  =  ±2(EP) (1) 


33-] 


WORK  DONE   IN   ALTERING   CHARGES. 


29 


Work  done  in  altering  the  charges  of  the  system. 

32.]  We  shall  next  suppose  that  the  conductors  of  the  system, 
instead  of  being  originally  without  charge  and  at  potential  zero,  are 
originally  charged  with  quantities  J^ ,  222 ,  &c.  of  electricity,  and  are 
at  potentials  P1?  P23  &c.  respectively. 

When  in  this  state  let  the  charges  of  the  conductors  be  changed, 
each  at  a  uniform  rate,  the  rate  being,  in  general,  different  for 
each  conductor,  and  let  this  process  go  on  uniformly,  till  the 
charges  have  become  HL'9  E2',  &c.,  and  the  potentials  P/,  P2',  &c. 
respectively. 

By  the  principle  of  the  superposition  of  electrical  effects  the  in- 
crement of  the  potential  will  vary  as  the  increment  of  the  charge, 
and  the  potential  of  each  con- 
ductor will  increase  or  diminish 
at  a  uniform  rate  from  P  to  P7, 
while  its  charge  varies  at  a  uni- 
form rate  from  E  to  E'.  Hence 
the  line  AA ',  which  represents 
the  varying  state  of  the  con- 
ductor during  the  process,  is  the 
straight  line  which  joins  A,  the 
point  which  indicates  its  original 
state,  with  A',  which  represents 
its  final  state.  The  work  spent 
in  producing  this  increment  of 
charge  in  the  conductor  is  represented  by  the  area  ACC'A',  or 
iCCT  (CA+C'A'\  or  (ff-E)  \  (P  +  P^,  or,  in  words,  it  is  the  pro- 
duct of  the  increase  of  charge  and  the  half  sum  of  the  potentials 
at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  operation,  and  this  will  be  true  for 
every  conductor  of  the  system. 

As,  during  this  process,  the  electric  energy  of  the  system  changes 
from  Q,  its  original,  to  Q',  its  final  value,  we  may  write 

Q'=Q+^^{(H'-E)(P'+P)} (2) 

hence, 

THEOKEM  II. 

The  increment  of  the  energy  of  the  system  is  half  the  sum  of  the 
products  of  the  increment  of  charge  of  each  conductor  into  the 
sum  of  its  potentials  at  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  process. 

33.]  If  all  the  charges  but  one  are  maintained  constant  (by  the 
insulation  of  the  conductors)  the  equation  (2)  is  reduced  to 


FIG.  14. 


30  GREEN'S  THEOREM.  [34. 


If  the  increment  of  the  charge  is  taken  always  smaller  and  smaller 
till  it  ultimately  vanishes,  Pf  becomes  equal  to  P  and  the  equation 
may  he  interpreted  thus  :  — 

The  rate  of  increase  of  the  electrical  energy  due  to  the  increase 
of  the  charge  of  one  of  the  conductors  at  a  rate  unity  is  numerically 
equal  to  the  potential  of  that  conductor. 

In  the  notation  of  the  differential  calculus  this  result  is  expressed 
by  the  equation  ^  =  p  (4) 

in  which  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  all  the  charges  but  one  are 
maintained  constant. 

34.]  Returning  to  equation  (2),  we  have  already  shewn  that 

«  =  1S(£P)     and     <2'=4S(^);  ............  (5) 

we  may  therefore  write  equation  (2) 

i  2  (E'F)  =  J2  (EP)+\  2  (E'F-EP+WP-EP')  .......  (6) 

Cutting  out  from  the  equation  the  terms  which  destroy  each 
other,  we  obtain  S(^P')  =  2  (E'P),  ........................  (7) 

or  in  words, 

THEOEEM  III. 

In  a  fixed  system  of  conductors  the  sum  of  the  products  of  the 
original  charge  and  the  final  potential  of  each  conductor  is  equal 
to  the  sum  of  the  products  of  the  final  charge  and  the  original 
potential. 

This  theorem  corresponds,  in  the  elementary  treatment  of  electro- 
statics, to  Green's  Theorem  in  the  analytical  theory.     By  properly 
choosing  the  original  and  the  final  state  of  the  system  we  may 
deduce  a  number  of  results  which  we  shall  find  useful  in  our  after- 
work. 

35.]  In  the  first  place  we  may  write,  as  before, 

\^I{(W-E)(P/+P}}  =  \Z(E'F-EP+E'P-EP')',  ...   (8) 
adding  and  subtracting  the  equal  quantities  of  equation  (7), 

0  =  ^(EP'-E'P\  ........................  (9) 

and  the  right-hand  side  becomes 

(10) 


37-]  RECIPROCITY   OF   POTENTIALS.  31 


or  \^,{(E'-E)(F+P)}  =  Qf-q  =  ^{(E'+E)(P'-P)},  (11) 
or  in  words, 

THEOREM  IV. 

The  increment  of  the  energy  of  a  fixed  system  of  conductors  is  equal 
to  half  the  sum  of  the  products  of  the  increment  of  the  potential 
of  each  conductor  into  the  sum  of  the  original  and  final  charges 
of  that  conductor. 

36.]  If  all  the  conductors  but  one  are  maintained  at  constant 
potentials  (which  may  be  done  by  connecting  them  with  voltaic 
batteries  of  constant  electromotive  force),  equation  (11)  is  reduced  to 

<Z-Q,  =  k(E'+E)(F-P),  ...............  (12) 

J=|  =  iOr  +  ^)  ............................  (13) 

If  the  increment  of  the  potential  is  taken  successively  smaller  and 
smaller,  till  it  ultimately  vanishes,  W  becomes  at  last  equal  to  E 
and  the  equation  may  be  interpreted  thus  :  — 

The  rate  of  increase  of  the  electrical  energy  due  to  the  increase 
of  potential  of  one  of  the  conductors  at  a  rate  unity  is  numerically 
equal  to  the  charge  of  that  conductor. 

In  the  notation  of  the  differential  calculus  this  result  is  expressed 
by  the  equation  *Qp  =  %  (14) 

in  which  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  all  the  potentials  but  one  are 
maintained  constant. 

37.]  We  have  next  to  point  out  some  of  the  results  which  may 
be  deduced  from  Theorem  III. 

If  any  conductor,  as  At,  is  insulated  and  without  charge  both  in 

the  initial  and  the  final  state,  then  Et  =  0  and  28t'=  0,  and  therefore 

EtPt=0  and  Et'Pt=0,  ..................  (15) 

so  that  the  terms  depending  on  At  disappear  from  both  members 
of  equation  (7). 

Again,  if  another  conductor,  say  Au  ,  be  connected  with  the  earth 
both  in  the  initial  and  in  the  final  state,  Pu  =  0  and  P/  =  0,  so  that 

EUPU'=0  and  ^tt'Ptt=0; 

so  that,  in  this  case  also,  the  terms  depending  on  Au  disappear  from 
both  sides  of  equation  (7). 

If,  therefore,  all  the  conductors  with  the  exception  of  two,  say 


32  RECIPROCITY   OF   POTENTIALS   AND    CHARGES. 

Ar  and  As ,  are  either  insulated  and  without  charge,  or  else  connected 
with  the  earth,  equation  (7)  is  reduced  to  the  form 

ErPr'  +  EsP8'=Er'Pr+E8'P8 (16) 

Let  us  first  suppose  that  in  the  initial  state  all  the  conductors 
except  Ar  are  without  charge,  and  that  in  the  final  state  all  the  con- 
ductors except  As  are  without  charge.  The  equation  then  becomes 

Erp;=Es'ps,  (17) 

PS  Pr 

01'  7T  =   1^  ' 

Er       E8 
or  in  words, 

THEOREM  V. 

In  a  system  of  fixed  insulated  conductors,  the  potential  (P8]  produced 
in  A8  by  a  charge  E  communicated  to  Ar  is  equal  to  the  potential 
(Prf) produced  in  Ar  by  an  equal  charge  E  communicated  to  A8. 

This  is  the  first  instance  we  have  met  with  of  the  reciprocal 
relation  of  two  bodies.  There  are  many  such  reciprocal  relations. 
They  occur  in  every  branch  of  science,  and  they  often  enable  us 
to  deduce  the  solution  of  new  electrical  problems  from  those  of 
simpler  problems  with  which  we  are  already  familiar.  Thus,  if 
we  know  the  potential  which  an  electrified  sphere  produces  at  a 
point  in  its  neighbourhood,  we  can  deduce  the  effect  which  a  small 
electrified  body,  placed  at  that  point,  would  have  in  raising  the 
potential  of  the  sphere. 

38.]  Let  us  next  suppose  that  the  original  potential  of  As  is  Ps 
and  that  all  the  other  conductors  are  kept  at  potential  zero  by 
being  connected  with  the  walls  of  the  room,  and  let  the  final 
potential  of  Ar  be  P/,  that  of  all  the  others  being  zero,  then  in 
equation  (7)  all  the  terms  involving  zero  potentials  will  vanish, 
and  we  shall  have  in  this  case  also 

ErPr'=E8'Ps (18) 

If,  therefore,  P/  =  P8,         Er=  E8\ (19) 

or  in  words, 

THEOREM  VI. 

In  a  system  of  fixed  conductors,  connected,  all  but  one,  with  the  walls 
of  the  room,  the  charge  (Er)  induced  on  Ar  when  As  is  raised  to 
the  potential  Ps  is  equal  to  the  charge  (E8)  induced  on  Aa  when 
Ar  is  raised  to  an  equal  potential  (P/). 

39.]  As  a  third  case,  let  us  suppose  all  the  conductors  insulated 
and  without  charge,  and  that  a  charge  is  communicated  to  Ar 


4o.]  GREEN'S  THEOREM  ON  POTENTIALS  AND  CHARGES.  33 

which  raises  its  potential  to  Pr  and  that  of  A8  to  Ps.  Next, 
let  As  be  connected  with  the  earth,  and  let  a  charge  Er'  on  Ar 
induce  the  charge  E{  on  A8 . 

In  equation  (16)  we  have  Ur=Q  and  Ps'=  0,  so  that  the  left- 
hand  member  vanishes  and  the  equation  becomes 

0  =  E,'Pr  +  E;P§, (20) 

£-   *'. 

Pr~  ~  E; 

Hence,  if  P8=raPr,         E;=-nE8',  (21) 

or  in  words, 

THEOREM  VII. 

If  in  a  system  of  fixed  conductors  insulated  and  originally  without 
charge  a  charge  be  communicated  to  Ar  which  raises  its  potential 
to  Pr,  unity,  and  that  of  Ag  to  n,  then  if  in  the  same  system  of 
conductors  a  charge  unity  be  communicated  to  Ag  and  Ar  be 
connected  with  the  earth  the  charge  induced  on  Ar  will  be  —n. 

If,  instead  of  supposing  the  other  conductors  At  &c.  to  be  all 
insulated  and  without  charge,  we  had  supposed  some  or  all  of  them 
to  be  connected  with  the  earth,  the  theorem  would  still  be  true, 
only  the  value  of  n  would  be  different  according  to  the  arrange- 
ment we  adopt. 

This  is  one  of  Green's  theorems.  As  an  example  of  its  applica- 
tion, let  us  suppose  that  we  have  ascertained  the  distribution  of 
electric  charge  induced  on  the  various  parts  of  the  surface  of  a 
conductor  by  a  small  electrified  body  in  a  given  position  with 
unit  charge.  Then  by  means  of  this  theorem  we  can  solve  the 
following  problem.  The  potential  at  every  point  of  a  surface 
coinciding  in  position  with  that  of  the  conductor  being  given, 
determine  the  potential  at  a  point  corresponding  to  the  position  of 
the  small  electrified  body. 

Hence,  if  the  potential  is  known  at  all  points  of  any  closed 
surface,  it  may  be  determined  for  any  point  within  that  surface 
if  there  be  no  electrified  body  within  it,  and  for  any  point  outside 
if  there  be  no  electrified  body  outside. 

Mechanical  work  done  ly  the  electric  forces  during  the  displacement 
of  a  system  of  insulated  electrified  conductors. 

40.]  Let  A19  A2  &c.  be  the  conductors,  E^  E2  &c.  their  charges, 
which,  as  the  conductors  are  insulated,  remain  constant.  Let  PI} 
P2  &c.  be  their  potentials  before  and  P/,  P2'  &c.  their  potentials 

D 


34  MECHANICAL  WORK   DURING   DISPLACEMENT.        [41. 

after  the  displacement.     The  electrical  energy  of  the  system  before 

the  displacement  is  q  —  i  2  (EP) ,(22) 

During  the  displacement  the  electric  forces  which  act  in  the 
same  direction  as  the  displacement  perform  an  amount  of  work 
equal  to  W9  and  the  energy  remaining  in  the  system  is 

q'=\*(EF) (23) 

The  original  energy,  Q,  is  thus  transformed  into  the  work  ^and 
the  final  energy  Q'j  so  that  the  equation  of  energy  is 

<2  =  r+<2', (24) 

or  W=  iSf^P-P')] (25) 

This  expression  gives  the  work  done  during  any  displacement, 
small  or  large,  of  an  insulated  system.  To  find  the  force,  we 
must  make  the  displacement  so  small  that  the  configuration  of  the 
system  is  not  sensibly  altered  thereby.  The  ultimate  value  of  the 
quotient  found  by  dividing  the  work  by  the  displacement  is  the 
value  of  the  force  resolved  in  the  direction  of  the  displacement. 

Mechanical  work  done  by  the  electric  force  during  the  displace- 
ment of  a  system  of  conductors  each  of  which  is  kept  at  a 
constant  potential. 

41.]  Let  us  begin  by  supposing  each  conductor  of  the  system 
insulated,  and  that  a  small  displacement  is  given  to  the  system,  by 
which  the  potential  is  changed  from  P  to  Px.  The  work  done 
during  this  displacement-  is,  as  we  have  shewn, 

W=IS[S(P-PJ] (26) 

Next,  let  the  conductors  remain  fixed  while  the  charges  of  the  con- 
ductors are  altered  from  E  to  S19  so  as  to  bring  back  the  value  of 
the  potential  from  Px  to  P.  Then  we  know  by  equation  (7)  that 

S(.#P— ^PJ  =0 (27) 

Hence,  substituting  for  2  (EP)  in  (26), 

r=i2[(^1-^)P1] (28) 

Performing  these  two  operations  alternately  for  any  number  of 
times,  and  distinguishing  each  pair  of  operations  by  a  suffix,  we 
find  the  whole  work 

(29) 

(30) 

By  making  each  of  the  partial  displacements  small  enough,  the 


41.]       MECHANIC  AX   WORK   DURING  DISPLACEMENT.  35 

values  of  Pl  ,  P2  &c.  may  be  made  to  approach  without  limit  to  P, 
the  constant  value  of  the  potential,  and  the  expression  becomes 


where  E*  is  the  value  of  E  after  the  last  operation.    The  final  result 
is  therefore  TF=±2[(E'—E)P],  ........................  (32) 

which  is  an  expression  giving  the  work  done  during  a  displace- 
ment of  any  magnitude  of  a  system  of  conductors,  the  potential  of 
each  of  which  is  maintained  constant  during  the  displacement. 

We  may  write  this  result 

7r=l2(.ET)-i2(#P),  .....................  (33) 

or  JT=  Q'-Q;    ....................................  (34) 

or  the  work  done  by  the  electric  forces  is  equal  to  the  increase  of 
the  electric  energy  of  the  system  during  the  displacement  when 
the  potential  of  each  conductor  is  maintained  constant.  When  the 
charge  of  each  conductor  was  maintained  constant,  the  work  done 
was  equal  to  the  decrease  of  the  energy  of  the  system. 

Hence,  when  the  potential  of  each  conductor  is  maintained  con- 
stant during  a  displacement  in  which  a  quantity  of  work,  W,  is 
done,  the  voltaic  batteries  which  are  employed  to  keep  the  poten- 
tials constant  must  do  an  amount  of  work  equal  to  2  W.  Of  this 
energy  supplied  to  the  system,  half  is  spent  in  increasing  the 
energy  of  the  system,  and  the  other  half  appears  as  mechanical 
work. 


CHAPTEE  IV. 

THE   ELECTRIC   FIELD. 

42.]  WE  have  seen  that,  when  an  electrified  body  is  enclosed  in 
a  conducting  vessel,  the  total  electrification  of  the  interior  surface 
of  the  surrounding-  vessel  is  invariably  equal  in  numerical  value 
but  opposite  in  kind  to  that  of  the  body.  This  is  true,  however 
large  this  vessel  may  be.  It  may  be  a  room  of  any  size  having 
its  floor,  walls  and  ceiling  of  conducting  matter.  Its  boundaries 
may  be  removed  further,  and  may  consist  of  the  surface  of  the 
earth,  of  the  branches  of  trees,  of  clouds,  perhaps  of  the  extreme 
limits  of  the  atmosphere  or  of  the  universe.  In  every  case,  where- 
ever  we  find  an  electrified  insulated  body,  we  are  sure  to  find  at 
the  boundaries  of  the  insulating  medium,  wherever  they  may  be, 
an  equal  amount  of  electrification  of  the  opposite  kind. 

This  correspondence  of  properties  between  the  two  limits  of 
the  insulating  medium  leads  us  to  examine  the  state  of  this 
medium  itself,  in  order  to  discover  the  reason  why  the  electrifica- 
tion at  its  inner  and  outer  boundaries  should  be  thus  related.  In 
thus  directing  our  attention  to  the  state  of  the  insulating  medium, 
rather  than  confining  it  to  the  inner  conductor  and  the  outer  sur- 
face, we  are  following  the  path  which  led  Faraday  to  many  of  his 
electrical  discoveries. 

43.]  To  render  our  conceptions  more  definite,  we  shall  begin  by 
supposing  a  conducting  body  electrified  positively  and  insulated 
within  a  hollow  conducting  vessel.  The  space  between  the  body 
and  the  vessel  is  filled  with  air  or  some  other  insulating  medium. 
We  'call  it  an  insulating  medium  when  we  regard  it  simply  as 
retaining  the  charge  on  the  surface  of  the  electrified  body.  When 
we  consider  it  as  taking  an  important  part  in  the  manifestation 
of  electric  phenomena  we  shall  use  Faraday's  expression,  and  call 
it  a  dielectric  medium.  Finally,  when  we  contemplate  the  region 


44-]  EXPLORATION   OF   THE   ELECTRIC   FIELD.  37 

occupied  by  the  medium  as  being  a  part  of  space  in  which  electric 
phenomena  may  be  observed,  we  shall  call  this  region  the  Electric 
Field.  By  using  this  last  expression  we  are  not  obliged  to  figure 
to  ourselves  the  mode  in  which  the  dielectric  medium  takes  part  in 
the  phenomena.  If  we  afterwards  wish  to  form  a  theory  of  the 
action  of  the  medium,  we  may  find  the  term  dielectric  useful. 


EXPLORATION  OF  THE  ELECTRIC  FIELD. 
EXPERIMENT  XI. 

(a)  Exploration  by  means  of  a  small  electrified  body. 

44.]  Electrify  a  small  round  body,  a  gilt  pith  ball,  for  example, 
and  carry  it  by  means  of  a  white  silk  thread  into  any  part  of  the 
field.  If  the  ball  is  suspended  in  such  a  way  that  the  tension  of 
the  string  exactly  balances  the  weight  of  the  ball,  then  when  the 
ball  is  placed  in  the  electric  field  it  will  move  under  the  action  of  a 
new  force  developed  by  the  action  of  the  electrified  ball  on  the 
electric  condition  of  the  field.  This  new  force  tends  to  move  the 
ball  in  a  certain  direction,  which  is  called  the  direction  of  the 
electromotive  force. 

If  the  charge  of  the  ball  is  varied,  the  force  is  sensibly  pro- 
portional to  the  charge,  provided  this  charge  is  not  sufficient  to 
produce  a  sensible  disturbance  of  the  state  of  electrification  of  the 
system.  If  the  charge  is  positive,  the  force  which  acts  on  the  ball 
is,  on  the  whole,  from  the  positively  electrified  body,  and  towards 
the  negatively  electrified  walls  of  the  room.  If  the  charge  is 
negative,  the  force  acts  in  the  opposite  direction. 

Since,  therefore,  the  force  which  acts  on  the  ball  depends  partly 
on  the  charge  of  the  ball  and  partly  on  its  position  and  on  the 
electrification  of  the  system,  it  is  convenient  to  regard  this  force  as 
the  product  of  two  factors,  one  being  the  charge  of  the  ball,  and 
the  other  the  electromotive  force  at  that  point  of  the  field  which  is 
occupied  by  the  centre  of  the  ball. 

This  electromotive  force  at  the  point  is  definite  in  magnitude 
and  direction.  A  positively  charged  body  placed  there  tends  to 
move  in  the  positive  direction  of  the  line  representing  the  force.  A 
negatively  charged  body  tends  to  move  in  the  opposite  direction. 


38  EXPLORATION    OF   THE   ELECTRIC   FIELD.  [45. 

EXPEEIMENT   XII. 

(/3)  Exploration  ly  means  of  two  dish. 

45.]  But  the  electromotive  force  not  only  tends  to  move  elec- 
trified bodies,  it  also  tends  to  transfer  electrification  from  one  part 
of  a  body  to  another. 

Take  two  small  equal  thin  metal  disks,  fastened  to  handles  of 
shellac  or  ebonite ;  discharge  them  and  place  them  face  to  face  in 
the  electric  field,  with  their  planes  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of 
the  electromotive  force.  Bring  them  into  contact,  then  separate 

them  and  remove  them,  and 
test  first  one  and  then  the 
other  by  introducing  them 
into  the  hollow  vessel  of  Ex- 
periment VII.  It  will  be 
found  that  each  is  charged, 
and  that  if  the  electromotive 
force  acts  in  the  direction  AB, 
the  disk  on  the  side  of  A  will 
Fi  15  be  charged  negatively,  and 

that  on  the  side  of  B  posi- 
tively, the  numerical  values  of  these  charges  being  equal.  This  shews 
that  there  has  been  an  actual  transference  of  electricity  from  the  one 
disk  to  the  other,  the  direction  of  this  transference  being  that  of 
the  electromotive  force.  This  experiment  with  two  disks  affords  a 
much  more  convenient  method  of  measuring  the  electromotive  force 
at  a  point  than  the  experiment  with  the  charged  pith  ball.  The 
measurement  of  small  forces  is  always  a  difficult  operation,  and 
becomes  almost  impossible  when  the  weight  of  the  body  acted  on 
forms  a  disturbing  force  and  has  to  be  got  rid  of  by  the  adjust- 
ment of  counterpoises.  The  measurement  of  the  charges  of  the 
disks,  on  the  other  hand,  is  much  more  simple. 

The  two  disks,  when  in  contact,  may  be  regarded  as  forming  a 
single  disk,  and  the  fact  that  when  separated  they  are  found  to 
have  received  equal  and  opposite  charges,  shews  that  while  the 
disks  were  in  contact  there  was  a  distribution  of  electrification 
between  them,  the  electrification  of  each  disk  being  opposite  to 
that  of  the  body  next  to  it,  whether  the  insulated  body,  which  is 
charged  positively,  or  the  inner  surface  of  the  surrounding  vessel, 
which  is  charged  negatively. 


47-]  ELECTRIC   TENSION.  39 

Electric  Tension. 

46.]  The  two  disks,  after  being  brought  into  contact,  tend  to 
separate  from  each  other,  and  to  approach  the  oppositely  electrified 
surfaces  to  which  they  are  opposed.  The  force  with  which  they 
tend  to  separate  is  proportional  to  the  area  of  the  disks,  and  it 
increases  as  the  electromotive  force  increases,  not,  however,  in  the 
simple  ratio  of  that  force,  but  in  the  ratio  of  the  square  of  the 
electromotive  force. 

The  electrification  of  each  disk  is  proportional  to  the  electro- 
motive force,  and  the  mechanical  force  on  the  disk  is  proportional 
to  its  electrification  and  the  electromotive  force  conjointly,  that  is, 
to  the  square  of  the  electromotive  force. 

This  force  may  be  accounted  for  if  we  suppose  that  at  every 
point  of  the  dielectric  at  which  electromotive  force  exists  there  is 
a  tension,  like  the  tension  of  a  stretched  rope,  acting  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  electromotive  force,  this  tension  being  proportional  to 
the  square  of  the  electromotive  force  at  the  point.  This  tension 
acts  only  on  the  outer  side  of  each  disk,  and  not  on  the  side  which 
is  turned  towards  the  other  disk,  for  in  the  space  between  the  disks 
there  is,  no  electromotive  force,  and  consequently  no  tension. 

The  expression  Electric  Tension  has  been  used  by  some  writers 
in  different  senses.  In  this  treatise  we  shall  always  use  it  in  the 
sense  explained  above, — the  tension  of  so  many  pounds'  or  grains' 
weight  on  the  square  foot  exerted  by  the  air  or  other  dielectric 
medium  in  the  direction  of  the  electromotive  force. 

EXPERIMENT  XIII. 
CoulomUs  Proof  Plane. 

47.]  If  one  of  these  disks  be  placed  with  one  of  its  flat  sur- 
faces in  contact  with  the  surface  of  an  electrified  conductor  and 
then  removed,  it  will  be  found  to  be  charged.  If  the  disk  is 
very  thin,  and  if  the  electrified  surface  is  so  nearly  flat  that  the 
whole  surface  of  the  disk  lies  very  close  to  it,  the  charge  of  the  disk 
will  be  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  portion  of  the  electrified  surface 
which  it  covered.  If  the  disk  is  thick,  or  does  not  lie  very  close  to 
the  electrified  surface,  its  charge,  when  removed,  will  be  somewhat 
greater. 

This  method  of  ascertaining  the  density  of  electrification  of  a 
surface  was  introduced  by  Coulomb,  and  the  disk  when  used  for 
this  purpose  is  called  Coulomb's  Proof  Plane. 


40  COULOMB'S  PROOF  PLANE.  [47. 

The  charge  of  the  disk  is  by  Experiment  XII  proportional  to  the 
electromotive  force  at  the  electrified  surface.  Hence  the  electro- 
motive force  close  to  a  conducting  surface  is  proportional  to  the 
density  of  the  electrification  at  that  part  of  the  surface. 

Since  the  surface  of  the  conductor  is  an  equipotential  surface,  the 
electromotive  force  is  perpendicular  to  it.  The  fact  that  the  elec- 
tromotive force  at  a  point  close  to  the  surface  of  a  conductor  is 
perpendicular  to  the  surface  and  proportional  to  the  density  of  the 
electrification  at  that  point  was  first  established  experimentally  by 
Coulomb,  and  it  is  generally  referred  to  as  Coulomb's  Law. 

To  prove  that  when  the  proof  plane  coincides  with  the  surface  of 
the  conductor  the  charge  of  the  proof  plane  when  removed  from 
the  electrified  conductor  is  equal  to  the  charge  on  the  part  of  the 
surface  which  it  covers,  we  may  make  the  following  experiment. 

A  sphere  whose  radius  is  5  units  is  placed  on  an  insulating 
stand.  A  segment  of  a  thin  spherical  shell  is  fastened  to  an  in- 
sulating handle.  The  radius  of  the  spherical  surface  of  the  shell 
is  5,  the  diameter  of  the  circular  edge  of  the  segment  is  8,  and  the 
height  of  the  segment  is  2.  When  applied  to  the  sphere  it  covers 
one-fifth  part  of  its  surface.  A  second  sphere,  whose  radius  is 
also  5,  is  placed  on  an  insulating  handle. 

The  first  sphere  is  electrified,  the  segment  is  then  placed  in 
contact  with  it  and  removed.  The  second  sphere  is  then  made  to 
touch  the  first  sphere,  removed  and  discharged,  and  then  made  to 
touch  the  first  sphere  again.  The  segment  is  then  placed  within 
a  conducting  vessel,  which  is  discharged  to  earth,  and  then  in- 
sulated and  the  segment  removed.  One  of  the  spheres  is  then 
made  to  touch  the  outside  of  the  vessel,  and  is  found  to  be  perfectly 
discharged. 

Let  e  be  the  electrification  of  the  first  sphere,  and  let  the  charge 
removed  by  the  segment  be  ne,  then  the  charge  remaining  on  the 
sphere  is  (l—n)e.  The  charge  of  the  first  sphere  is  then  divided 
with  the  second  sphere,  and  becomes  J(l  — n)e.  The  second  sphere 
is  then  discharged,  and  the  charge  is  again  divided,  so  that  the 
charge  on  either  sphere  is  J(l—  n)e.  The  charge  on  the  insulated 
vessel  is  equal  and  opposite  to  that  on  the  segment,  and  it  is  there- 
fore —  ne,  and  this  is  perfectly  neutralized  by  the  charge  on  one  of 
the  spheres ;  hence  J  (1  —  n)e  -f  (— ne]  =  0, 
from  which  we  find  n  =  ^, 

or  the  electricity  removed  by  the  segment  covering  one-fifth  of  the 
surface  of  the  sphere  is  one-fifth  of  the  whole  charge  of  the  sphere. 


49-]     ELECTROMOTIVE  FORCE  AND  POTENTIAL.       41 

EXPERIMENT  XIV. 
Direction  of  Electromotive  Force  at  a  Point. 

48.]  A  convenient  way  of  determining  the  direction  of  the  elec- 
tromotive force  is  to  suspend  a  small  elongated  conductor  with  its 
middle  point  at  the  given  point  of  the  field.  The  two  ends  of  the 
short  conductor  will  become  oppositely  electrified,  and  will  then  be 
drawn  in  opposite  directions  by  the  electromotive  force,  so  that  the 
axis  of  the  conductor  will  place  itself  in  the  direction  of  the  force 
at  that  point.  A  short  piece  of  fine  cotton  or  linen  thread,  through 
the  middle  of  which  a  fine  silk  fibre  is  passed,  answers  very  well. 
The  silk  fibre,  held  by  both  ends,  serves  to  carry  the  piece  of  thread 
into  any  desired  position,  and  the  thread  then  takes  up  the  direc- 
tion of  the  electric  force  at  that  place. 

EXPERIMENT  XV. 
Potential  at  any  Point  of  the  Field. 

49.]  Suspend  two  small  uncharged  metal  balls  in  the  field  by 
silk  threads,  and  then  connect  them  by  means  of  a  fine  metal  wire 
fastened  to  the  end  of  an  ebonite  rod.  Remove  the  wire  and  the 
spheres  separately,  and  then  examine  the  charges  of  the  spheres. 

It  will  be  found  that  the  two  spheres,  if  they  have  become 
electrified,  have  received  equal  and  opposite  charges.  If  the  poten- 
tials at  the  points  of  the  field  occupied  by  the  centres  of  the  spheres 
are  different,  positive  electrification  will  be  transferred  from  the 
place  of  high  to  the  place  of  low  potential,  and  the  sphere  at  the 
place  of  high  potential  will  thus  become  charged  negatively,  and 
that  at  the  place  of  low  potential  will  become  charged  positively. 
These  charges  may  be  shewn  to  be  proportional  to  the  difference  of 
potentials  at  the  two  places. 

We  have  thus  a  method  of  determining  points  of  the  field  at 
which  the  potential  is  the  same.  Place  one  of  the  spheres  at 
a  fixed  point,  and  move  the  other  about  till,  on  connecting  the 
spheres  with  a  wire  as  before,  no  charge  is  found  on  either  sphere. 
The  potentials  of  the  field  at  the  points  occupied  by  the  centres  of 
the  spheres  must  now  be  the  same.  In  this  way  a  number  of 
points  may  be  found,  the  potential  at  each  of  which  is  equal  to  that 
at  a  given  point. 


42  POTENTIAL   DETERMINED   BY  ,ONE    SPHERE.          [50. 

All  these  points  lie  on  a  certain  surface,  which  is  called  an  equi- 
potential  surface.  On  one  side  of  this  surface  the  potential  is 
higher,  on  the  other  it  is  lower,  than  at  the  surface  itself. 

We  have  seen  that  electricity  has  no  tendency  to  flow  from  one 
part  of  such  a  surface  to  another.  An  electrified  body,  if  con- 
strained so  as  to  be  capable  of  moving-  only  from  one  point  of  the 
surface  to  another,  would  be  in  equilibrium,  and  the  force  acting  on 
such  a  body  is  therefore  everywhere  perpendicular  to  the  equi- 
potential  surface. 

EXPERIMENT  XVI. 

50.]  We  may  use  one  sphere  only,  and  after  placing  it  with  its 
centre  at  any  given  point  of  the  field  we  may  touch  it  for  a  moment 
with  a  wire  connected  to  the  earth.  We  may  then  remove  the 
sphere  and  determine  its  charge.  The  charge  of  the  sphere  is  pro- 
portional to  the  potential  at  the  given  point,  a  positive  charge, 
however,  corresponding  to  a  negative  potential. 

Equipotential  Surfaces. 

51.]  In  this  way  the  potential  at  any  number  of  points  in  the 
field  may  be  ascertained,  and  equipotential  surfaces  may  be  sup- 
posed drawn  corresponding  to  values  of  the  potential  represented 
by  the  numbers  1,  2,  3,  &c. 

These  surfaces  will  form  a  series,  each,  in  general,  lying  within 
the  preceding  surface  and  having  the  succeeding  surface  within  it. 
No  two  distinct  surfaces  can  intersect  each  other,  though  a  par- 
ticular equipotential  surface  may  consist  of  two  or  more  sheets, 
intersecting  each  other  at  certain  lines  or  points. 

The  surface  of  any  conductor  in  electric  equilibrium  is  an  equi- 
potential surface.  For  if  the  potential  at  one  point  of  the  con- 
ductor is  different  from  that  at  another  point,  electricity  will  flow 
from  the  place  of  higher  potential  to  the  place  of  lower  potential 
till  the  potentials  are  rendered  equal. 

EXPERIMENT  XVII. 

52.]  To  make  an  experimental  determination  of  the  equipotential 
surfaces  belonging  to  an  electrified  system  we  may  use  a  small 
exploring  sphere  permanently  connected  by  a  fine  wire  with  one 
electrode  of  the  electroscope,  the  other  electrode  being  connected 
with  the  earth.  Place  the  centre  of  the  sphere  at  a  given  point, 


53-] 


RECIPROCAL   METHOD. 


and  connect  the  electrodes  together  for  an  instant.  The  indication  of 
the  electroscope  will  thus  be  reduced  to  zero.  If  the  sphere  is  now 
moved  in  such  a  manner  that  the  indication  of  the  electrometer 
remains  zero  during  the  motion,  the  path  of  the  centre  of  the 
exploring-  sphere  will  lie  on  an  equipotential  surface.  For  if  it 
moves  to  a  place  of  higher  potential,  electricity  will  flow  from  the 
sphere  to  the  electroscope,  and  if  it  moves  to  a  place  of  lower 
potential,  electricity  will  flow  from  the  electroscope  to  the  sphere. 

If  the  bodies  belonging  to  the  electrified  system  are  not  perfectly 
insulated,  their  potentials  and  the  potentials  of  the  points  of  the 
field  will  tend  to  approach  zero.  The  path  in  which  the  centre  of 
the  exploring  sphere  moves  is.  such  that  its  potential  at  any  point 
has  a  given  value  at  the  time  when  the  centre  of  the  sphere  passes 
it.  The  different  points  of  the  path  are  not  therefore  on  a  surface 
which  has  the  same  potential  at  any  one  instant,  for  the  potential 
is  diminishing  everywhere,  and  the  path  must  therefore  pass  from 
surfaces  of  lower  to  surfaces  of  higher  potential  so  as  to  make  up 
for  this  loss. 

EXPERIMENT  XVIII. 

53.]  The  following  method,  founded  on  Theorem  V,  Art.  37,  is 
therefore  in  many  cases  more  convenient,  as  it  is  much  easier  to 
secure  good  insulation 
for  the  exploring  sphere 
on  an  insulating  handle 
than  for  a  large  electri- 
fied conductor  of  irregu- 
lar form.  Let  it  be  re- 
quired to  determine  the 
equipotential  surfaces  due 
to  the  electrification  of 
the  conductor  C  placed 
on  an  insulating  stand. 
Connect  the  conductor 
with  one  electrode  of  the 
electroscope,  the  other 
being  connected  with 
the  earth.  Electrify  the 
exploring  sphere,  and,  Fig.  16. 

carrying  it  by  the  insulating  handle,  bring  its  centre  to  a  given 
point.  Connect  the  electrodes  for  an  instant,  and  then  move  the 


44  LINES   OF   ELECTRIC   FORCE.  [54. 

sphere  in  such  a  path  that  the  indication  of  the  electroscope  remains 
zero.  This  path  will  lie  on  an  equipotential  surface. 

For  by  Theorem  V,  the  part  of  the  potential  of  the  conductor  C 
due  to  the  presence  of  the  charged  exploring  sphere  with  its  centre 
at  a  given  point  is  equal  to  the  potential  at  the  given  point  due  to 
a  charge  on  the  conductor  C  equal  to  that  of  the  exploring  sphere. 

By  this  method  the  potential  of  the  conductor  remains  zero,  or 
very  nearly  zero,  during  the  whole  time  of  the  experiment,  so  that 
there  is  very  little  tendency  to  change  of  the  charge  of  this  body. 
The  exploring  sphere,  on  the  other  hand,  is  at  a  high  potential,  but 
as  it  is  not  connected  by  a  wire  with  any  other  body,  its  insulation 
may  be  made  very  good. 

Lines  of  Electric  Force. 

54.]  If  the  direction  of  the  electric  force  at  various  points  of  the 
field  be  determined,  and  if  a  line  be  drawn  so  that  its  direction  at 
every  point  of  its  course  coincides  with  the  direction  of  the  electric 
force  at  that  point,  such  a  line  is  called  a  Line  of  Force.  By 
drawing  a  number  of  such  lines,  the  direction  of  the  force  at 
different  parts  of  the  field  may  be  indicated. 

The  lines  of  force  and  equipotential  surfaces  may  be  drawn,  not  in 
the  electric  field  itself,  where  the  mechanical  operation  of  drawing 
them  might  produce  disturbance,  but  in  a  model  or  plan  of  the 
electric  field.  Drawings  of  this  kind  are  given  in  Plates  I  to  VI 
at  the  end  of  the  volume. 

Since  the  electric  force  is  everywhere  perpendicular  to  the  equi- 
potential surfaces,  the  lines  of  force  cut  these  surfaces  everywhere 
at  right  angles.  The  lines,  of  force  which  meet  the  surface  of  a 
conductor  are  therefore  at  right  angles  to  it.  When  they  issue  from 
the  surface  the  electrification  is  positive,  and  when  they  enter  the 
surface  of  the  conductor  the  electrification  is  negative. 

A  line  of  force  in  every  part  of  its  course  passes  from  places  of 
higher  to  places  of  lower  potential. 

The  extremities  of  the  same  line  of  force  are  called  corresponding 
points. 

The  beginning  of  the  line  is  a  point  on  a  positively  electrified 
surface,  and  the  end  of  the  line  is  a  corresponding  point  on  a 
negatively  electrified  surface. 

The  potential  of  the  first  of  these  surfaces  must  be  higher  than 
that  of  the  second. 


CHAPTER  V. 

FARADAY'S  LAW  OF  LINES  OF  INDUCTION. 


55.]  FARADAY  in  his  electrical  researches  employs  the  lines  of 
force  to  indicate,  not  only  the  direction  of  the  electric  force  at  each 
point  of  the  field,  but  also  the  quantity  of  electrification  on  any 
given  portion  of  the  electrified  surface. 

If  we  consider  a  portion  of  an  electrified  surface  as  cut  off  from 
the  rest  by  the  bounding  line  which  surrounds  it,  and  if  from  every 
point  of  this  bounding  line  we  draw  a  line  of  force,  producing  it 
till  it  meets  the  surface  of  some  other  body  in  a  point  which  is 
said  to  correspond  to  the  point  of  the  body  from  which  the  line  was 
drawn,  these  lines  will  form  a  tubular  surface,  and  will  cut  off  a 
certain  portion  from  the  surface  of  the  other  body  corresponding  to 
the  portion  of  the  surface  of  the  first  body,  and  the  total  electrifica- 
tions of  the  two  corresponding  portions  are  equal  in  numerical 
magnitude  but  opposite  in  kind. 

56.]  A  particular  instance  of  Faraday's  law  is  that  which  we 
have  already  proved  by  experiment,  namely,  that  the  electrification 
of  the  inner  surface  of  a  closed  conducting  vessel  is  equal  and 
opposite  to  that  of  an  electrified  body  placed  within  it.  Here 
we  have  a  relation  between  the  whole  electrification  of  the  inner 
surface  and  that  of  the  opposed  surface  of  the  interior  body. 
Faraday's  law  asserts  that,  by  drawing  lines  of  force  from  the  one 
surface  to  the  other,  points  corresponding  to  each  other  in  the  two 
surfaces  may  be  found ;  that  corresponding  lines  are  such  that  any 
point  of  one  has  its  corresponding  point  in  the  other ;  and  that  the 
electrifications  of  the  two  portions  of  the  opposed  surfaces  bounded 
by  such  corresponding  lines  are  equal  and  opposite. 

57.]  We  have  called  these  lines  'lines  of  force'  because  we 
began  by  defining  them  as  lines  whose  direction  at  every  point 


46         FARADAY'S  LAW  OF  LINES  QF  INDUCTION.       [58. 

coincides  with  that  of  the  electric  force.  Every  line  of  force 
begins  at  a  positively  electrified  surface  and  ends  at  a  negatively 
electrified  surface,  and  the  points  of  these  surfaces  at  which  it 
begins  and  ends  are  called  corresponding  points. 

A  system  of  lines  of  force  forming  a  tubular  surface  closed  at 
the  one  end  by  a  portion  of  the  positively  electrified  surface  and 
at  the  other  by  the  corresponding  portion  of  the  negative  surface, 
is  called  by  Faraday  a  Tube  of  Induction >  because  electric  induction, 
according  to  Faraday,  is  that  condition  of  the  dielectric  by  which 
the  electrifications  of  the  opposed  surfaces  are  placed  in  that 
physical  relation  to  one  another,  which  we  express  by  saying  that 
their  electrifications  are  equal  and  opposite. 

Properties  of  a  Tube  of  Induction. 

58.]  (l)  The  electrification  of  the  portion  of  the  positively 
electrified  surface  from  which  the  tube  of  induction  proceeds  is 
equal  in  numerical  value  but  opposite  in  sign  to  the  negative 
electrification  of  the  portion  of  the  surface  at  which  the  tube  of 
induction  terminates 

By  dividing  the  positive  surface  into  portions,  the  electrification 
of  each  of  which  is  unity,  and  drawing  tubes  corresponding  to 
each  portion,  we  obtain  a  system  of  unit  tubes,  which  will  be  very 
convenient  in  describing  electric  phenomena.  For  in  this  case 
the  electrification  of  any  surface  is  measured  by  the  number  of 
tubes  which  abut  on  it.  If  they  proceed  from  the  surface,  this 
number  is  to  be  taken  as  representing  the  positive  electrification ; 
if  the  tubes  terminate  at  the  surface,  the  electrification  is  negative. 

It  is  in  this  sense  that  Faraday  so  often  speaks  of  th  number  of 
lines  of  force  which  fall  on  a  given  area. 

If  we  suppose  an  imaginary  surface  drawn  in  the  electric  field, 
then  the  quantity  of  electrostatic  induction  through  this  surface 
is  measured  by  the  number  of  tubes  of  induction  which  pass 
through  it,  and  is  reckoned  positive  or  negative  accordingly  as 
the  tubes  pass  through  it  in  the  positive  or  negative  direction. 

Note.  By  an  imaginary  surface  is  meant  a  surface  which  has 
no  physical  existence,  but  which  may  be  imagined  to  exist  in 
space  without  interfering  with  the  physical  properties  of  the  sub- 
stance which  occupies  that  space.  Thus  we  may  imagine  a  vertical 
plane  dividing  a  man's  head  longitudinally  into  two  equal  parts, 
and  by  means  of  this  imaginary  surface  we  may  render  our  ideas 


60.]  PROPERTIES   OF  A   TUBE   OF   INDUCTION.  47 

of  the  form  of  his  head  more  precise,  though  any  attempt  to  con- 
vert this  imaginary  surface  into  a  physical  one  would  be  criminal. 
Imaginary  quantities,  such  as  are  mentioned  in  treatises  on 
analytical  geometry,  have  no  place  in  physical  science. 

59.]  In  every  part  of  the  course  of  a  line  of  electrostatic  in- 
duction it  is  passing  from  places  of  higher  to  places  of  lower 
potential.,  and  in  a  direction  at  right  angles  to  the  equipotential 
surfaces  which  it  cuts. 

We  have  seen  that  the  electric  field  is  divided  by  the  equi- 
potential surfaces  into  a  series  of  shells,  like  the  coats  of  an  onion, 
the  thickness  of  each  shell  at  any  point  being  inversely  as  the 
electric  force  at  that  point. 

We  have  now  divided  the  electric  field  into  a  system  of  unit 
tubes  of  induction,  the  section  of  each  tube  at  any  point  varying 
inversely  as  the  intensity  of  the  electric  induction  at  that  point. 

Each  of  these  tubes  is  cut  by  the  equipotential  surfaces  into  a 
number  of  segments  which  we  may  call  unit  cells. 

60.]  If  we  take  the  simplest  case  —  that  of  a  single  positively 
electrified  body  placed  within  a  closed  conducting  vessel,  all  the 
tubes  of  induction,  begin  at  the  positively  electrified  body  and  end 
at  the  negatively  electrified  surface  of  the  inner  vessel.  The 
number  of  these  tubes,  since  they  are  unit-tubes,  is  equal  to  the 
number  of  electrical  units  in  the  charge  of  the  electrified  body. 
Each  of  them  cuts  all  the  equipotential  surfaces  which  enclose 
the  electrified  body  and  are  enclosed  by  the  vessel.  Each  tube, 
therefore,  is  divided  into  a  number  of  cells  representing  the  differ- 
ence of  the  potential  of  the  electrified  body  from  that  of  the  vessel. 
If  e  is  the  charge  of  the  body  and  p  its  potential,  E  and  P  being  the 
charge  and  potential  of  the  vessel,  the  whole  number  of  cells  is 


or,  since  E  =  —  e,  we  may  write  this  expression 

ep  +  EP. 

Now  this  is  double  of  the  expression  which  we  formerly  obtained 
for  the  electrical  energy  of  the  system  (see  Art.  31).  Hence  in 
this  simple  case  the  number  of  cells  is  double  the  number  of  units 
of  energy  in  the  system. 

If  there  are  several  electrified  bodies,  A,  B,  C,  &c.,  the  tubes 
of  induction  proceeding  from  one  of  them,  A,  may  abut  either 
on  the  inner  surface  of  the  surrounding  vessel  or  on  one  of  the 
other  electrified  bodies. 


48  ENERGY   OF   AN   ELECTRIFIED    SYSTEM.  [6  1. 

Let  E19  E2,  E3  be  the  charges  of  A,  3,  C  and  P15  P2,  P3  their 
potentials,  the  charge  and  potential  of  the  vessel  being  JS0  and  P0  . 

Let  EAB>  EAC,  EAO  denote  the  number  of  tubes  of  induction 
which  pass  from  A  to  the  conductors  B  and  C  and  the  vessel  0, 
respectively.  Then  the  whole  number  of  cells  will  be 


By  arranging  the  terms  according  to  the  potentials  involved  in 
them,  and  remembering  that  since  EAB  denotes  the  number  of 
tubes  which  pass  from  A  to  £,  EBA  must  denote  the  number 
which  pass  from  B  to  A  and  therefore 

EBA  =  —EAB, 
the  expression  may  be  written 


+  EGA  +  ECB)> 


Now  EAB  +  EAC  +  EAO  is  the  whole  number  of  tubes  issuing  from 
A  and  this  therefore  is  equal  to  E±  ,  the  charge  of  A,  and  the  co- 
efficients of  the  other  potentials  are  also  the  charges  of  the  bodies 
to  which  they  refer,  so  that  the  final  expression  is 


and  this  is  double  the  energy  of  the  system. 

Hence,  whether  there  is  one  electrified  body  or  several,  the  num- 
ber of  cells  is  twice  the  number  of  units  of  electrical  energy  in  the 
system. 

61.]  This  remarkable  correspondence  between  the  number  of  cells 
into  which  the  tubes  of  induction  are  cut  by  the  equipotential  sur- 
faces, and  the  electrical  energy  of  the  system,  leads  us  to  enquire 
whether  the  electrical  energy  may  not  have  its  true  seat  in  the 
dielectric  medium  which  is  thus  cut  up  into  cells,  each  cell  being  a 
portion  of  the  medium  in  which  half  a  unit  of  energy  is  stored  up. 
We  have  only  to  suppose  that  the  electromotive  force,  when  it  acts 
on  a  dielectric,  puts  it  into  a  certain  state  of  constraint,  from  which 
it  is  always  endeavouring  to  relieve  itself. 

To  make  our  conception  of  what  takes  place  more  precise,  let  us 


62.]  ELECTRIC   DISPLACEMENT.  49 

consider  a  single  cell  belonging-  to  a  tube  of  induction  proceeding 
from  a  positively  electrified  body,  the  cell  being  bounded  by  two 
consecutive  equipotential  surfaces  surrounding  the  body. 

We  know  that  there  is  an  electromotive  force  acting  outwards 
from  the  electrified  body.  This  force,  if  it  acted  on  a  conducting 
medium,  would  produce  a  current  of  electricity  which  would  last  as 
long  as  the  force  continued  to 
act.  The  medium  however  is 
a  non-conducting  or  dielectric 
medium,  and  the  effect  of  the 
electromotive  force  is  to  produce 
what  we  may  call  electric  dis- 
placement, that  is  to  say,  the 
electricity  is  forced  outwards  in 
the  direction  of  the  electromo- 
tive force,  but  its  condition  when 
so  displaced  is  such  that,  as  soon 

as  the  electromotive  force  is  removed,  the  electricity  resumes  the 
position  which  it  had  before  displacement. 

The  amount  of  electric  displacement  is  measured  by  the  quantity 
of  electricity  which  crosses  an  imaginary  fixed  surface  drawn  parallel 
to  the  equipotential  surfaces. 

We  know  absolutely  nothing  with  respect  to  the  distance  through 
which  any  particular  portion  of  electricity  is  displaced  from  its 
original  position.  The  only  thing  we  know  is  the  quantity  which 
crosses  a  given  surface.  The  greater  the  amount  of  electricity 
which  we  suppose  to  exist,  say,  in  a  cubic  inch,  the  smaller  the 
distance  through  which  we  must  suppose  it  displaced  in  order  that 
a  given  quantity  of  electricity  may  be  displaced  across  a  square 
inch  of  area  fixed  in  the  medium.  It  is  probable  that  the  actual 
motion  of  displacement  is  exceedingly  small,  in  which  case  we  must 
suppose  the  quantity  of  electricity  in  a  cubic  inch  of  the  medium  to 
be  exceedingly  great.  If  this  is  really  the  case  the  actual  velocity 
of  electricity  in  a  telegraph  wire  may  be  very  small,  less,  say,  than 
the  hundredth  of  an  inch  in  an  hour,  though  the  signals  which  it 
transmits  may  be  propagated  with  great  velocity. 

62.]  The  displacement  across  any  section  of  a  unit  tube  of  in- 
duction is  one  unit  of  electricity  and  the  direction  of  the  displace- 
ment is  that  of  the  electromotive  force,  namely,  from  places  of 
higher  to  places  of  lower  potential. 

Besides  the   electric  displacement  within   the  cell  we  have  to 

E 


50  ELECTBIC   TENSION.  [63. 

consider  the  state  of  the  two  ends  of  the  cell  which  are  formed  by 
the  equipotential  surfaces.  We  must  suppose  that  in  every  cell  the 
end  formed  by  the  surface  of  higher  potential  is  coated  with  one 
unit  of  positive  electricity,  the  opposite  end,  that  formed  by  the 
surface  of  lower  potential,  being  coated  with  one  unit  of  negative 
electricity.  In  the  interior  of  the  medium  where  the  positive  end 
of  one  cell  is  in  contact  with  the  negative  end  of  the  next,  these 
two  electrifications  exactly  neutralise  each  other,  but  where  the 
dielectric  medium  is  bounded  by  a  conductor,  the  electrification  is 
no  longer  neutralised,  but  constitutes  the  observed  electrification  at 
the  surface  of  the  conductor. 

According  to  this  view  of  electrification,  we  must  regard  electri- 
fication as  a  property  of  the  dielectric  medium  rather  than  of  the 
conductor  which  is  bounded  by  it. 

63.]  If  we  further  admit  that  in  every  part  of  a  dielectric 
medium  through  which  electric  induction  is  taking  place  there  is 
a  tension,  like  that  of  a  rope,  in  the  direction  of  the  lines  of  force, 
and  a  pressure  in  all  directions  at  right  angles  to  the  lines  of  force, 
we  may  account  for  all  the  mechanical  actions  which  take  place 
between  electrified  bodies. 

The  tension,  referred  to  unit  of  surface,  is  proportional  to  the 
square  of  the  electromotive  force  at  the  point.  The  pressure  has 
the  same  numerical  value,  but  is,  of  course,  opposite  in  sign. 

In  my  larger  treatise  on  electricity  a  proof  is  given  of  the  fact 
that  a  system  of  stress  such  as  is  here  described  is  consistent  with 
the  equilibrium  of  a  fluid  dielectric  medium,  and  that  this  state  of 
stress  in  the  medium  is  mechanically  equivalent  to  the  attraction 
or  repulsion  which  electrified  bodies  manifest. 

I  have  not,  however,  attempted,  by  any  hypothesis  as  to  the  in- 
ternal constitution  of  the  dielectric  medium,  to  explain  in  what  way 
the  electric  displacement  causes  or  is  associated  with  this  state  of  stress. 

We  have  thus,  by  means  of  the  tubes  of  induction  and  the 
equipotential  surfaces,  constructed  a  geometrical  model  of  the  field 
of  lectric  force.  Diagrams  of  particular  cases  are  given  in  the 
figures  at  the  end  of  this  book. 

The  direction  and  magnitude  of  the  electric  force  at  any  point 
may  be  indicated  either  by  means  of  the  equipotential  surfaces  or 
by  means  of  the  tubes  of  induction.  Hence,  when  it  is  expressed 
in  both  ways,  we  may  by  the  study  of  the  relation  between  the 
equipotential  surfaces  and  the  tubes  of  induction  deduce  important 
theorems  in  the  theory  of  electricity. 


64.]    ANALOGIES  BETWEEN  ELECTROSTATICS  AND  HEAT.     51 


On  the  use  of  Physical  Analogies. 

64.]  In  many  cases  the  relations  of  the  phenomena  in  two 
different  physical  questions  have  a  certain  similarity  which  enables 
us,  when  we  have  solved  one  of  these  questions,  to  make  use  of  our 
solution  in  answering  the  other.  The  similarity  which  constitutes 
the  analogy  is  not  between  the  phenomena  themselves,  but  be- 
tween the  relations  of  these  phenomena. 

To  begin  with  a  case  of  extreme  simplicity; — a  person  slow  at 
arithmetic  having  to  find  the  price  of  52  yards  of  cotton  at  7  pence 
a  yard,  if  he  happened  to  remember  that  there  are  52  weeks  and  a 
day  in  a  year  of  365  days,  might  at  once  give  the  answer,  364 
pence,  without  performing  the  calculation.  Here  there  is  no  re- 
semblance whatever  between  the  quantities  themselves — the  weeks 
and  the  yards  of  cotton, — the  sole  resemblance  is  between  the  arith- 
metical relations  of  these  quantities  to  others  in  the  same  question. 

The  analogy  between  electrostatic  phenomena  and  those  of  the 
uniform  conduction  of  heat  in  solid  bodies  was  first  pointed  out  by 
Sir  W.  Thomson  in  a  paper  *  On  the  Uniform  Motion  of  Heat  in 
Homogeneous  Solid  Bodies,  and  its  connection  with  the  Mathema- 
tical Theory  of  Electricity/  published  in  the  Cambridge  Mathematical 
Journal,  Feb.  1842 ;  reprinted  in  the  Phil.  Mag.  1854,  and  in  the 
reprint  of  Thomson's  papers  on  Electrostatics  and  Magnetism.  The 
analogy  is  of  the  following  nature : — 

Heat. 

An  unequally  heated  body. 
A  body  which  conducts  heat. 
The  temperature  at  different  points  in  the 

body. 
The  flow   of  heat   by  conduction   from 

places   of   higher  to   places  of  lower 

temperature. 


Electrostatics. 

The  electric  field. 

A  dielectric  medium. 

The  electric  potential  at  different  points 
of  the  field. 

The  electromotive  force  which  tends  to 
move  positively  electrified  bodies  from 
places  of  higher  to  places  of  lower  po- 
tential. 

A  conducting  body. 

The  positively  electrified  surface  of  a  con- 
ductor. 

The  negatively  electrified  surface  of  a 
conductor. 

A  positively  electrified  body. 

A  negatively  electrified  body. 

An  equipotential  surface. 
A  line  or  tube  of  induction. 


A  perfect  conductor  of  heat. 

A  surface  through  which  heat  flows  into 

the  body. 
A  surface  through   which  heat  escapes 

from  the  body. 
A  source  of  heat. 
A  sink  of  heat,  that  is,  a  place  at  which 

heat  disappears  from  the  body. 
An  isothermal  surface. 
A  line  or  tube  of  flow  of  heat. 

By  a  judicious  use  of  this  analogy  and  other  analogies  of  the 
same  nature  the  progress  of  physical  science  has  been  greatly  as- 

E  2 


52      ANALOGIES  BETWEEN  ELECTROSTATICS  AND  HEAT.     [6$. 

sisted.  In  order  to  avoid  the  dangers  of  crude  hypotheses  we  must 
study  the  true  nature  of  analogies  of  this  kind.  We  must  not  con- 
clude from  the  partial  similarity  of  some  of  the  relations  of  the 
phenomena  of  heat  and  electricity  that  there  is  any  real  physical 
similarity  between  the  causes  of  these  phenomena.  The  similarity 
is  a  similarity  between  relations,  not  a  similarity  between  the  things 
related. 

This  similarity  is  so  complete  as  far  as  it  goes  that  any  result  we 
may  have  obtained  either  about  electricity  or  about  the  conduction 
of  heat  may  be  at  once  translated  out  of  the  language  of  the  one 
science  into  that  of  the  other  without  fear  of  error;  and  in  pursuing 
our  investigations  in  either  subject  we  are  at  liberty  to  make  use 
of  the  ideas  belonging  to  the  other,  if  by  so  doing  we  are  enabled 
to  see  more  clearly  the  connection  between  one  step  and  another  of 
the  reasoning. 

We  must  bear  in  mind  that  at  the  time  when  Sir  W.  Thomson 
pointed  out  the  analogy  between  electrostatic  and  thermal  phe- 
nomena men  of  science  were  as  firmly  convinced  that  electric  at- 
traction was  a  direct  action  between  distant  bodies  as  that  the 
conduction  of  heat  was  the  continuous  flow  of  a  material  fluid 
through  a  solid  body.  The  dissimilarity,  therefore,  between  the 
things  themselves  appeared  far  greater  to  the  men  of  that  time  than 
to  the  readers  of  this  book,  who,  unless  they  have  been  previously 
instructed,  have  not  yet  learned  either  that  heat  is  a  fluid  or  that 
electricity  acts  at  a  distance. 

65.]  But  we  must  now  consider  the  limits  of  the  analogy — the 
points  beyond  which  we  must  not  push  it. 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  only  a  particular  class  of  cases  of  the 
conduction  of  heat  that  have  analogous  cases  in  electrostatics.  In 
general,  when  heat  is  flowing  through  a  body  it  causes  the  tempera- 
ture of  some  parts  of  the  body  to  rise  and  that  of  others  to  fall, 
and  the  flow  of  heat,  which  depends  on  the  relation  of  these  tempera- 
tures, is  therefore  variable.  If  the  supply  of  heat  is  maintained 
uniform,  the  temperatures  of  the  different  parts  of  the  body  tend  to 
adjust  themselves  to  a  state  in  which  they  remain  constant.  The 
quantity  of  heat  which  enters  any  given  portion  of  the  body  is  then 
exactly  equal  to  that  which  leaves  it  during  the  same  time.  Under 
these  circumstances  the  flow  of  heat  is  said  to  be  steady. 

Now  the  analogy  with  electric  phenomena  applies  to  the  steady 
flow  of  heat  only.  The  more  general  case,  that  of  variable  flow  of 
heat,  has  nothing  in  electrostatics  analogous  to  it.  Even  the  re- 


67.]  LIMITATION  TO   THE   USE   OF   ANALOGIES.  53 

stricted  case  of  steady  flow  of  heat  differs  in  a  most  important 
element  from  the  electrostatic  analogue.  The  steady  flow  of  heat 
must  be  kept  up  by  the  continual  supply  of  heat  at  a  constant  rate 
and  the  continual  withdrawal  of  heat  at  an  equal  rate.  This  in- 
volves a  continual  expenditure  of  energy  to  maintain  the  flow  of 
heat  in  a  constant  state,  so  that  though  the  state  of  the  body 
remains  constant  and  independent  of  time,  the  element  of  time 
enters  into  the  calculation  of  the  amount  of  heat  required. 

The  element  of  time  does  not  enter  into  the  corresponding  case 
in  electrostatics.  So  far  as  we  know,  a  set  of  electrified  bodies 
placed  in  a  perfectly  insulating  medium  might  remain  electrified 
for  ever  without  a  supply  of  anything  from  external  sources. 
There  is  nothing  in  this  case  to  which  we  can  apply  the  term 
'flow/  which  we  apply  to  the  case  of  the  transmission  of  heat 
with  the  same  propriety  that  we  apply  it  to  the  case  of  a  current 
of  electricity,  of  water,  or  of  time  itself. 

66.]  Another  limitation  to  the  analogy  is  that  the  temperature 
of  a  body  cannot  be  altered  without  altering  its  physical  state. 
The  density,  conductivity,  electric  properties,  &c.  all  vary  when  the 
temperature  rises. 

The  electrical  potential,  however,  which  is  the  analogue  of  tem- 
perature is  a  mere  scientific  concept.  We  have  no  reason  to 
regard  it  as  denoting  a  physical  state.  If  a  number  of  bodies 
are  placed  within  a  hollow  metallic  vessel  which  completely  sur- 
rounds them,  we  may  charge  the  outer  surface  of  the  vessel  and 
discharge  it  as  we  please  without  producing  any  physical  effect 
whatever  on  the  bodies  within.  But  we  know  that  the  electric 
potential  of  the  enclosed  bodies  rises  and  falls  with  that  of  the 
vessel.  This  may  be  proved  by  passing  a  conductor  connected 
to  the  earth  through  a  hole  in  the  vessel.  The  relation  of  the 
enclosed  bodies  to  this  conductor  will  be  altered  by  charging  and 
discharging  the  vessel.  But  if  the  conductor  be  removed,  the 
simultaneous  rise  and  fall  of  the  potentials  of  the  bodies  in  the 
vessel  is  not  attended  with  any  physical  effect  whatever. 

67.]  Faraday*  proved  this  by  constructing  a  hollow  cube,  twelve 
feet  in  the  side,  covered  with  good  conducting  materials,  insulated 
from  the  ground  and  highly  electrified  by  a  powerful  machine. 
( I  went  into  this  cube,'  he  says,  *  and  lived  in  it,  but  though  I 
used  lighted  candles,  electrometers,  and  all  other  tests  of  electrical 
states,  I  could  not  find  the  least  influence  upon  them,  or  indication 

*  Exp.  Res.  1173. 


54  FARADAY'S  CUBE.  [68. 

of  anything-  particular  given  by  them,  though  all  the  time  the 
outside  of  the  cube  was  powerfully  charged  and  large  sparks  and 
brushes  were  starting  off  from  every  part  of  its  outer  surface.' 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  most  sudden  changes  of  potential 
produce  no  physical  effects  on  matter,  li\ce  or  dead,  provided  these 
changes  take  place  simultaneously  on  all  the  bodies  in  the  field. 

If  Faraday,  instead  of  raising  his  cube  to  a  high  electric  potential, 
had  raised  it  to  a  high  temperature,  the  result,  as  we  know,  would 
have  been  very  different. 

68.]  It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  analogy  between  the  con- 
duction of  heat  and  electrostatic  phenomena  has  its  limits,  beyond 
which  we  must  not  attempt  to  push  it.  At  the  time  when  it  was 
pointed  out  by  Thomson,  men  of  science  were  already  acquainted 
with  the  great  work  of  Fourier  on  the  conduction  of  heat  in  solid 
bodies,  and  their  minds  were  more  familiar  with  the  ideas  there 
developed  than  with  those  belonging  to  current  electricity,  or  to 
the  theory  of  the  displacements  of  a  medium. 

It  is  true  that  Ohm  had,  in  182 7,  applied  the  results  obtained 
by  Fourier  for  heat  to  the  theory  of  the  distribution  of  electric 
currents  in  conductors,  but  it  was  long  before  the  practical  value 
of  Ohm's  work  was  understood,  and  till  men  became  familiar 
with  the  idea  of  electric  currents  in  solid  conductors,  any  illustra- 
tion of  electrostatic  phenomena  drawn  from  such  currents  would 
have  served  rather  to  obscure  than  to  enlighten  their  minds. 

69.]  When  an  electric  current  flows  through  a  solid  conductor, 
the  direction  of  the  current  at  any  point  is  from  places  of  higher 
to  places  of  lower  potential,  and  its  intensity  is  proportional  to  the 
rate  at  which  the  potential  decreases  from  point  to  point  of  a  line 
drawn  in  the  direction  of  the  current. 

We  may  suppose  equipotential  surfaces  drawn  in  the  conducting 
medium.  The  lines  of  flow  of  the  current  are  everywhere  at  right 
angles  to  the  equipotential  surfaces,  and  the  rate  of  flow  is  pro- 
portional to  the  number  of  equipotential  surfaces  which  would  be 
cut  by  a  line  of  unit  length  drawn  in  the  direction  of  the  current. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  this  case  of  a  conducting  medium 
through  which  an  electric  current  is  passing  has  certain  points 
of  analogy  with  that  of  a  dielectric  medium  bounded  by  electrified 
bodies. 

In  both  the  medium  is  divided  into  layers  by  a  series  of  equi- 
potential surfaces.  In  both  there  is  a  system  of  lines  which  are 
everywhere  perpendicular  to  these  surfaces.  In  the  one  case  these 


70.]  CURRENT.  55 

lines  are  called  current  lines  or  lines  of  flow ;  in  the  other  they 
are  called  lines  of  electric  force  or  electric  induction. 

An  assemblage  of  such  lines  drawn  from  every  point  of  a  given 
line  is  called  a  surface  of  flow.  Since  the  lines  of  which  this  sur- 
face is  formed  are  everywhere  in  the  direction  of  the  electric 
current,  no  part  of  the  current  passes  through  the  surface  of  flow. 
Such  a  surface  therefore  may  be  regarded  as  impervious  to  the 
current  without  in  any  way  altering  the  state  of  things. 

If  the  line  from  which  the  assemblage  of  lines  of  flow  is  drawn 
is  one  which  returns  into  itself,  which  we  shall  call  a  closed  curve, 
or,  more  briefly,  a  ring,  the  surface  of  flow  will  have  the  form  of  a 
tube  and  is  called  a  tube  of  flow.  Any  two  sections  of  the  same 
tube  of  flow  correspond  to  each  other  in  the  sense  defined  in 
Art.  54,  and  the  quantities  of  electricity  which  in  the  same  time 
flow  across  these  two  sections  are  equal. 

Here  then  we  have  the  analogue  of  Faraday's  law,  that  the 
quantities  of  electricity  upon  corresponding  areas  of  opposed  con- 
ducting surfaces  are  equal  and  opposite. 

Faraday  made  great  use  of  this  analogy  between  electrostatic 
phenomena  and  those  of  the  electric  current,  or,  as  he  expressed 
it,  between  induction  in  dielectrics  and  conduction  in  conductors, 
and  he  proved  that,  in  many  cases,  induction  and  conduction  are 
associated  phenomena.  Exf.  Res.  1320,  1326. 

We  must  remember,  however,  that  the  electric  current  cannot 
be  maintained  constant  through  a  conductor  which  resists  its 
passage  except  by  a  continual  expenditure  of  energy,  whereas 
induction  in  a  perfectly  insulating  dielectric  between  oppositely 
electrified  conductors  may  be  maintained  in  it  for  an  indefinitely 
long  time  without  any  expenditure  of  energy,  except  that  which 
is  required  to  produce  the  original  electrification.  The  element  of 
time  enters  into  the  question  of  conduction  in  a  way  in  which  it 
does  not  appear  in  that  of  induction. 

70.]  But  we  may  arrive  at  a  more  perfect  mental  representation 
of  induction  by  comparing  it,  not  with  the  instantaneous  state  of 
a  current,  but  with  the  small  displacements  of  a  medium  of  in- 
variable density. 

Returning  to  the  case  of  an  electric  current  through  a  solid 
conductor,  let  us  suppose  that  the  current,  after  flowing  for  a 
very  short  time,  ceases.  If  we  consider  a  surface  drawn  within 
the  solid,  then  if  this  surface  intersects  the  tubes  of  flow,  a  certain 
quantity  of  electricity  will  have  passed  from  one  side  of  the  surface 


53  TUBES   OF   INDUCTION   AND   LINES   OF   FORCE.        [71. 

to  the  other  during  the  time  when  the  current  was  flowing1.  This 
passage  of  electricity  through  the  surface  is  called  electric  dis- 
placement^ and  the  displacement  through  a  given  surface  is  the 
quantity  of  electricity  which  passes  through  it.  In  the  case  of 
a  continuous  current  the  displacement  increases  continuously  as 
long  as  the  current  is  kept  up,  but  if  the  current  lasts  for  a  finite 
time,  the  displacement  reaches  its  final  value  and  then  remains 
constant.  The  lines,  surfaces,  and  tuhes  of  flow  of  the  transient 
current  are  also  lines,  surfaces,  and  tubes  of  displacement.  The 
displacements  across  any  two  sections  of  the  same  tube  of  dis- 
placement are  equal.  At  the  beginning  of  each  unit  tube  of 
displacement  there  is  a  unit  of  positive  electricity,  and  at  the  end 
of  the  tube  there  is  a  unit  of  negative  electricity. 

At  every  point  of  the  medium  there  is  a  state  of  stress  con- 
sisting of  a  tension  in  the  direction  of  the  line  of  displacement 
through  the  point  and  a  pressure  in  all  directions  at  right  angles 
to  this  line.  The  numerical  value  of  the  tension  is  equal  to  that 
of  the  pressure,  namely,  the  square  of  the  intensity  of  the  electric 
force  divided  by  4  TT. 

71.]  By  the  consideration  of  the  properties  of  the  tubes  of 
induction  and  the  equipotential  surfaces  we  may  easily  prove 
several  important  general  theorems  in  the  theory  of  electricity, 
the  demonstration  of  which  by  the  older  methods  is  long  and 
difficult.  The  properties  of  a  tube  of  induction  have  already 
been  stated,  but  for  the  sake  of  what  follows  we  may  state  them 
again  :— 

(1)  If  a  tube  of  induction  is  cut  by  an  imaginary  surface,  the 
quantity  of  electricity  displaced  across  a  section  of  the  tube  is  the 
same  at  whatever  part  of  the  tube  the  section  be  made. 

(2)  In  every  part  of  the  course  of  a  line  of  electrostatic  force 
it  cuts  the  equipotential  surfaces  at  right  angles,  and  is  proceeding 
from  a  place  of  higher  to  a  place  of  lower  potential. 

Note.  This  statement  is  true  only  when  the  distribution  of 
electric  force  can  be  completely  represented  by  means  of  a  set  of 
equipotential  surfaces.  This  is  always  the  case  when  the  electricity 
is  in  equilibrium,  but  when  there  are  electric  currents,  though  in 
some  parts  of  the  field  it  may  be  possible  to  draw  a  set  of  equi- 
potential surfaces,  there  are  other  parts  of  the  field  where  the 
distribution  of  electric  force  cannot  be  represented  by  means  of 
such  surfaces.  For  an  electric  current  is  always  of  the  nature  of 
a  circuit  which  returns  into  itself,  and  such  a  circuit  cannot  in 


75-]   ELECTRIFICATION   AT  ENDS   OF   INDUCTION   TUBE.       57 

every  part  of  its  course  be  proceeding  from  places  of  higher  to 
places  of  lower  potential. 

72.]  It  may  be  observed  that  in  (l)  we  have  used  the  words 
'tube  of  induction,'  and  in  (2)  the  words  'line  of  electrostatic 
force.'  In  a  fluid  dielectric,  such  as  air,  the  line  of  electrostatic 
force  is  always  in  the  same  direction  as  the  tube  of  induction,  and 
it  may  seem  pedantic  to  maintain  a  distinction  between  them. 
There  are  other  cases,  however,  in  which  it  is  very  important  to 
remember  that  a  tube  of  induction  is  defined  with  respect  to  the 
phenomenon  which  we  have  called  electric  displacement,  while  a 
line  of  force  is  defined  with  respect  to  the  electric  force.  In  fluids 
the  electric  displacement  is  always  in  the  direction  of  the  electric 
force,  but  there  are  solid  bodies  in  which  this  is  not  the  case*,  and 
in  which,  therefore,  the  tubes  of  induction  do  not  coincide  in  direc- 
tion with  the  lines  of  force. 

73.]  It  follows  from  (l)  that  every  tube  of  induction  begins 
at  a  place  where  there  is  a  certain  quantity  of  positive  electricity 
and  ends  at  a  place  where  there  is  an  equal  quantity  of  negative 
electricity,  and  that,  conversely,  from  any  place  where  there  is  posi- 
tive electricity  a  tube  may  be  drawn,  and  that  wherever  there  is 
negative  electricity  a  tube  must  terminate. 

74.]  It  follows  from  (2)  that  the  potential  at  the  beginning  of  a 
tube  is  higher  than  at  the  end  of  it.  Hence,  no  tube  can  return 
into  itself,  for  in  that  case  the  same  point  would  have  two  different 
potentials,  which  is  impossible. 

75.]  From  this  we  may  prove  that  if  the  potential  at  every 
point  of  a  closed  surface  is  the  same,  and  if  there  is  no  electrified 
body  within  that  surface,  the  potential  at  any  point  within  the 
region  enclosed  within  the  closed  surface  is  the  same  as  that  at 
the  surface. 

For  if  there  were  any  difference  of  potential  between  one  point 
and  another  within  this  region,  there  would  be  lines  of  force  from 
the  places  of  higher  towards  the  places  of  lower  potential.  These 
lines,  as  'we  have  seen,  cannot  return  into  themselves.  Hence  they 
must  have  their  extremities  either  within  the  region  or  without  it. 
Neither  extremity  of  a  line  of  force  can  be  within  the  region,  for 
there  must  be  positive  electrification  at  the  beginning  and  negative 
electrification  at  the  end  of  a  line  of  force,  but  by  our  hypothesis 
there  is  no  electrification  within  the  region.  On  the  other  hand,  a 

*  See  the  experiments  of  Boltzmann  on  crystals  of  sulphur.  Vienna  Sitzungsb. 
9  Jan.  1873. 


58  NO  ELECTRIFICATION  WITHIN  A  HOLLOW  CONDUCTOR.  [76. 

line  of  force  within  the  region  cannot  have  its  extremities  without 
the  region,  for  in  that  case  it  must  enter  the  region  at  one  point 
of  the  surface  and  leave  it  at  another,  and  therefore  by  (2)  the 
potential  must  be  higher  at  the  point  of  entry  than  at  the  point 
of  issue,  which  is  contrary  to  our  hypothesis  that  the  potential  is 
the  same  at  every  point  of  the  surface. 

Hence  no  line  of  force  can  exist  within  the  region,  and  therefore 
the  potential  at  any  point  within  the  region  is  the  same  as  that  at 
the  surface  itself. 

76-.]  It  follows  from  this  theorem,  that  if  the  closed  surface  is 
the  internal  surface  of  a  hollow  conducting  vessel,  and  if  no  elec- 
trified body  is  within  the  surface,  there  is  no  electrification  on  the 
internal  surface.  For  if  there  were,  lines  of  force  would  proceed 
from  the  electrified  parts  of  the  surface  into  the  region  within, 
and  we  have  already  proved  that  there  are  no  lines  of  force  in 
that  region. 

We  have  already  proved  this  by  experiment  (Art.  20),  but  we 
now  see  that  it  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  properties  of 
lines  of  force. 


Superposition  of  electric  systems. 

77.]  We  have  already  (Art.  29)  given  some  examples  of  the 
superposition  of  electric  effects,  but  we  must  now  state  the  principle 
of  superposition  more  definitely. 

If  the  same  system  is  electrified  in  three  different  ways,  then  if  the 
potential  at  any  point  in  the  third  case  is  the  sum  of  the  potentials  in 
the  first  and  second  cases,  the  electrification  of  any  part  of  the  system 
in  the  third  case  will  be  the  sum  of  the  electrifications  of  the  same  part 
in  the  first  and  second  cases. 

By  reversing  the  sign  of  the  electrifications  and  potentials  in 
one  of  these  cases,  we  may  enunciate  the  principle  with  respect 
to  the  case  in  which  the  potential  and  the  electrification  are  at 
every  point  the  excess  of  what  they  are  in  the  first  case  over  what 
they  are  in  the  second. 

78.]  We  may  now  establish  a  theorem  which  is  of  the  greatest 
importance  in  the  theory  of  electricity. 

If  the  electric  field  under  consideration  consist  of  a  finite  portion 
of  a  dielectric  medium,  and  if  at  every  point  of  the  boundary  of 
this  region  the  potential  is  given,  and  if  the  distribution  of  electri- 
fication within  the  region  be  also  given,  then  the  potential  at  any 


8o.]  THOMSON'S  THEOREM.  59 

point  within  the  region  can  have  one  and  only  one  value  consistent 
with  these  conditions. 

One  value  at  least  of  the  potential  must  be  possible,  because  the 
conditions  of  the  theorem  are  physically  possible.  Again,  if  at 
any  point  two  values  of  the  potential  were  possible,  then  by 
taking  the  excess  of  the  first  value  over  the  second  for  every 
point  of  the  system,  a  third  case  might  be  formed  in  which  the 
potential  is  everywhere  the  excess  of  the  first  case  above  the  second. 
At  the  boundary  of  the  region  the  potential  in  the  third  case  is 
everywhere  zero.  Within  the  region  the  electrification  is  every- 
where zero.  Hence,  by  (Art.  75),  at  every  point  within  the  region 
the  potential  in  the  third  case  is  zero. 

There  is,  therefore,  no  difference  between  the  distribution  of 
potential  in  the  first  case  and  in  the  second,  or,  in  other  words, 
the  potential  at  any  point  within  the  region  can  have  only  one 
value. 

If  in  any  case  we  can  find  a  distribution  of  potential  which 
satisfies  the  given  conditions,  then  by  this  theorem  we  are  assured 
that  this  distribution  is  the  only  possible  solution  of  the  problem. 
Hence  the  importance  of  this  theorem  in  the  theory  of  electricity. 

79.]  For  instance,  let  A  be  an  electrified  body  and  let  B  be 
one  of  the  equipotential  surfaces  surrounding  the  body.  Let  the 
potential  of  the  surface  B  be  equal  to  P.  Now 
let  a  conducting  body  be  constructed  and  placed 
so  that  its  external  surface  coincides  with  the 
closed  surface  B,  and  let  it  be  so  electrified  that 
its  potential  is  P.  Then  the  conditions  of  the 
region  outside  B  are  the  same  as  when  it  was 
acted  on  by  the  body  A  only.  For  the  potential 
over  the  whole  bounding  surface  of  the  region  is  P,  the  same  as 
before,  and  whatever  electrified  bodies  exist  outside  of  B  remain 
unchanged.  Hence  the  potential  at  every  point  outside  of  B  may, 
consistently  with  the  conditions,  be  the  same  as  before.  By  our 
theorem,  therefore,  the  potential  at  every  point  outside  B  must  be 
the  same,  when,  instead  of  the  body  A,  we  have  a  conducting 
surface  B,  raised  to  the  potential  P. 

80.]  The  charge  of  every  part  of  the  surface  of  a  conductor  is 
of  the  same  sign  as  its  potential,  unless  there  is  another  body 
in  the  field  whose  potential  is  of  the  same  sign  but  numerically 
greater. 

Let  us  suppose  the  potential  of  the  body  to  be  positive  ;  then, 


60  INDUCED   ELECTRIFICATION.  [80. 

if  on  any  part  of  its  surface  there  is  negative  electricity,  lines  of 
force  must  terminate  on  this  part  of  the  surface,  and  these  lines 
offeree  must  begin  at  some  electrified  surface  whose  potential  is 
higher  than  that  of  the  body!  Hence,  if  there  is  no  other  body 
whose  potential  is  higher  than  that  of  the  given  body,  no  part 
of  the  surface  of  the  given  body  can  be  charged  with  negative 
electricity. 

If  an  uninsulated  conductor  is  placed  in  the  same  field  with  a 
charged  conductor,  the  charge  on  every  part  of  the  surface  of 
the  uninsulated  conductor  is  of  the  opposite  sign  to  the  charge  of 
the  charged  conductor. 

For  since  the  potential  of  the  uninsulated  body  is  zero,  there 
can  be  no  line  of  force  between  it  and  the  walls  of  the  room,  or 
infinite  space  where  the  potential  is  always  zero.  The  line  of  force 
which  has  one  end  at  any  point  of  the  surface  of  this  body  must 
therefore  have  its  other  end  at  some  point  of  the  charged  body, 
and  since  the  two  extremities  of  a  line  of  force  are  oppositely 
electrified,  the  electrification  of  the  surface  of  the  uninsulated  body 
must  be  everywhere  opposite  to  the  charge  of  the  charged  body. 

The  charged  body  in  this  experiment  is  called  the  Inductor,  and 
the  other  body  the  induced  body. 

When  the  induced  body  is  uninsulated,  the  electricity  spread 
over  every  part  of  its  surface  is,  as  we  have  just  proved,  of  the 
opposite  sign  to  that  of  the  inductor. 

The  total  charge,  EA ,  of  the  induced  body,  which  we  may  call  A, 
may  be  found  by.  multiply  ing  PB,  the  potential  of  the  inductor  £, 
by  QAB,  the  mutual  coefficient  of  induction  between  the  bodies, 
which  is  always  a  negative  quantity. 

This  electrification  induced  on  an  uninsulated  body  is  called 
by  some  writers  on  electricity  the  Induced  Electrification  of  the 
First  Species.  Since  the  potential  of  A  is  already  zero,  it  is 
manifest  that  if  any  part  of  its  surface  is  touched  by  a  fine  wire 
communicating  with  the  ground  there  will  be  no  discharge. 

Next,  let  us  suppose  that  the  body,  A>  instead  of  being  unin- 
sulated is  insulated,  but  originally  without  charge.  Under  the 
action  of  the  inductor  B  part  of  its  surface,  on  the  side  next  to  B, 
will  become  electrified  oppositely  to  B ;  but  since  the  algebraic 
sum  of  its  electrification  is  zero,  some  other  part  of  its  surface  must 
be  electrified  similarly  to  B. 

This  electrification,  of  the  same  name  as  that  of  B,  is  called  by 
writers  on  electricity  the  Induced  Electrification  of  the  Second 


£0.]  COEFFICIENTS   OF   CAPACITY.  61 

Species.  If  a  wire  connected  with  the  ground  be  now  made  to 
touch  any  part  of  the  surface  of  A,  electricity  of  the  same  name 
as  that  of  B  will  be  discharged,  its  amount  being  equal  and  op- 
posite to  the  negative  charge  (of  the  first  species)  which  remains 
on  the  body  A,  which  is  now  reduced  to  potential  zero. 

In  order  to  obtain  a  clearer  idea  of  the  distribution  of  electricity 
on  the  surface  of  A  under  various  conditions,  let  us  begin  by 
supposing  the  potential  of  A  to  be  zero  and  that*  of  B  to  be  unity. 
Let  the  surface-density  at  a  given  point  P  on  the  surface  of  A 
be  —  a-lt  and  let  the  whole  charge  of  A  be  —qAB>  The  negative 
sign  is  prefixed  to  the  symbols  of  these  quantities  because  the 
quantities  themselves  are  always  negative. 

The  charge  of  B  in  this  case  is  qB. 

Let  us  next  suppose  the  potential  of  A  to  be  unity  and  that  of  B 
to  be  zero,  and  let  the  surface  density  at  the  point  P  be  now  cr.2,  and 
the  whole  charge  on  A,  qA  . 

These  quantities  are  both  essentially  positive,  and  qA  is  called 
the  capacity  of  A.  The  value  of  both  is  increased  on  account  of 
the  presence  of  B  in  the  field. 

Let  us  now  suppose  that  the  potentials  of  A  and  B  are  PA  and 
PB  respectively  ;  then  the  surface  density  at  the  point  P  is 


and  the  charge  of  A  is         £A=  pAyA  -PBqAB) 
and  that  of  B  is  EB  =  PBqB—PAqAB-     [See  Art.  39.] 

If  A  is  insulated  and  without  charge  EA  =  0,  which  gives 


and  the  surface  density  at  P  is 


On  a  region  of  the  surface  of  A  next  to  B,  a-  will  be  of  the 
opposite  sign  from  PB ;  and  on  a  region  on  the  other  side  from  B, 
o-  will  be  of  the  same  sign  with  PB .  The  boundary  between  these 
two  regions  forms  what  is  called  the  neutral  line,  the  form  and 
position  of  which  depend  on  the  form  and  position  of  A  and  B. 


CHAPTEE  VI. 

PARTICULAR   CASES   OF   ELECTRIFICATION. 

81.]  A  SPHERICAL  conductor  is  electrified  and  insulated  within 
the  concentric  spherical  internal  surface  of  a  conducting  vessel. 

On  account  of  the  perfect  symmetry  of  this  system  in  all  direcr- 
tions,  it  is  manifest  that  the  distribution  of  electricity  will  be 
uniform  over  each  of  the  opposed  spherical  surfaces,  that  the  lines 
of  force  will  be  in  the  directions  passing  through  the  common 
centre  of  the  spheres,  and  that  the  equipotential  surfaces  will  be 
spheres  having  this  point  for  their  centre. 

If  e  is  the  quantity  of  electricity  on  the  inner  sphere  and  E  that  on 
the  internal  surface  of  the  outer  sphere,  then  by  Experiment  VIII 

E=-e  ...............................  (1) 

If  r  and  R  are  the  radii  of  the  spheres,  s  and  S  their  surfaces, 
and   <r   and   2   the   surface-densities   of  the   electricity  on  these 
surfaces,  then  by  geometry, 

*:=4Trr2,         S  =  47r^2,  .....................  (2) 

where  TT  denotes  the  ratio  of  the  circumference  of  a  circle  to  its 
diameter. 

The  whole  charge  on  either  sphere  is  found  by  multiplying  the 
surface  into  the  surface-density,  or 

e  =  scr,  E=S2  .........................  (3) 

XT 
Hence,  * 


and  by  (1), 


It  appears,  therefore,  that  when  the  charge,  et  of  the  inner 
sphere  is  given,  the  surface-density,  2,  on  the  internal  surface  of 
the  vessel  is  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  of  that  surface 
from  the  centre  of  the  electrified  sphere. 

Hence  by  Coulomb's  law  (Experiment  XIII,  Art.  47)  the  elec- 
tromotive force  at  the  outer  spherical  surface  is  inversely  as  the 
square  of  the  distance  from  the  centre  of  the  sphere. 


83.]  ELECTROSTATIC   UNIT    OF   ELECTRICITY.  63 

This  is  the  law  according-  to  which  the  electric  force  varies 
at  different  distances  from  a  sphere  uniformly  electrified.  The 
amount  of  the  force  is  independent  of  the  radius  of  the  inner 
electrified  sphere,  and  depends  only  on  the  whole  charge  upon  it. 
If  we  suppose  the  radius  of  the  inner  sphere  to  become  very  small 
till  at  last  the  sphere  cannot  be  distinguished  from  a  point,  we 
may  imagine  the  whole  charge  concentrated  at  this  point,  and 
we  may  then  express  our  result  by  saying  that  the  electric 
action  of  a  uniformly  electrified  sphere  at  any  point  outside  the 
sphere  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  whole  charge  of  the  sphere  would 
be  if  concentrated  at  the  centre  of  the  sphere. 

We  must  bear  in  mind,  however,  that  it  is  physically  impossible 
to  charge  the  small  sphere  with  more  than  a  certain  quantity  of 
electricity  on  each  unit  of  area  of  its  surface.  If  the  surface- 
density  exceed  this  limit,  electricity  will  fly  off  in  the  form  of  the 
brush  discharge.  Hence  the  idea  of  an  electrified  point  is  a  mere 
mathematical  fiction  which  can  never  be  realised  in  nature.  The 
imaginary  charge  concentrated  at  the  centre  of  the  sphere,  which 
produces  an  effect  outside  the  sphere  equivalent  to  that  of  the 
actual  distribution  of  electricity  on  the  surface,  is  called  the 
Electrical  Image  of  that  distribution.  See  Art.  100. 

Measurement  of  Electricity. 

82.]  We  have  already  described  methods  of  comparing  the 
quantity  of  electrification  on  different  bodies,  but  in  each  case  we 
have  only  compared  one  quantity  of  electricity  with  another, 
without  determining  the  absolute  value  of  either.  To  determine 
the  absolute  value  of  an  electric  charge  we  must  compare  it  with 
some  definite  quantity  of  electricity,  which  we  assume  as  a  unit. 

The  unit  of  electricity  adopted  in  electrostatics  is  that  quantity 
of  positive  or  vitreous  electricity  which,  if  concentrated  in  a  point, 
and  placed  at  the  unit  of  distance  from  an  equal  charge,  also 
concentrated  in  a  point,  would  repel  it  with  the  unit  of  mechanical 
force.  The  dielectric  medium  between  the  two  charged  points  is 
supposed  to  be  air. 

83.]  Let  us  now  suppose  two  bodies,  whose  dimensions  are  small 
compared  with  the  distance  between  them,  to  be  charged  with 
electricity.  Let  the  charge  of  the  first  body  be  e  units  of  electri- 
city and  that  of  the  second  e'  units,  and  let  the  distance  between 
the  bodies  be  r. 


64  ELECTROMOTIVE   FORCE   AT   A   POINT.  [84. 

Then,  since  the  force  varies  inversely  as  the  square  of  the 
distance,  the  force  with  which  each  unit  of  electricity  in  the 
first  body  repels  each  unit  of  electricity  in  the  second  body  will 

—a,  and  since  the  number  of  pairs  of  units,  one  in  each  body, 
is  ee,  the  whole  repulsion  between  the  bodies  will  be 


If  the  charge  of  the  first  or  the  second  body  is  negative  we 
must  consider  e  or  e'  negative.  If  the  one  charge  is  positive  and 
the  other  negative,  f  will  be  negative,  or  the  force  between  the 
bodies  will  be  an  attraction  instead  of  a  repulsion.  If  the  charges 
are  both  positive  or  both  negative,  the  force  between  the  bodies 
will  be  a  repulsion. 

84.]  Definition.  —  The  electric  or  electromotive  force  at  a  point 
is  the  force  which  would  be  experienced  by  a  small  body  charged 
with  the  unit  of  positive  electricity  and  placed  at  that  point,  the 
electrification  of  the  system  being  supposed  to  remain  undisturbed 
by  the  presence  of  this  unit  of  electricity. 

"We  shall  use  the  German  letter  (£  as  the  symbol  of  electric 
force. 

85.]  Let  us  now  return  to  the  case  of  a  sphere  whose  radius 
is  r,  the  external  surface  of  which  is  uniformly  electrified,  the 
surface  density  of  the  electrification  being  o-.  As  we  have  already 
proved,  the  whole  charge  of  the  sphere  is 

e  =  47T/t2cr. 

At  any  point  outside  the  sphere  such  that  the  distance  from 
the  centre  of  the  sphere  is  /  the  electromotive  force,  ($:,  is  directed 
from  the  centre,  and  its  value  is 


If  the  point  is  close  to  the  surface  of  the  sphere,  /  =  r,  and 


or  the  electric  force  close  to  the  surface  of  an  electrified  sphere  is 
at  right  angles  to  the  surface  and  is  equal  to  the  surface-density 
multiplied  by  4ir. 

We  have  already  seen  that  in  all  cases  the  electric  force  close 
to  the  surface  of  a  conductor  is  at  right  angles  to  that  surface,  and 
is  proportional  to  the  surface-density.  We  now,  by  means  of  this 


86.]  VALUE   OF   THE   POTENTIAL.  65 

particular  case,  find  that  the  constant  ratio  of  the  electric  force 
to  the  surface-density  is  4  TT  for  a  uniformly  electrified  sphere,  and 
therefore  this  is  the  ratio  for  a  conductor  of  any  form. 
The  equation  (J  =  4  >„& 

is  the  complete  expression  of  the  law  discovered  by  Coulomb  and 
referred  to  in  Arts.  47  and  81. 

.  Value  of  the  Potential. 

86.]  We  must  next  consider  the  values  of  the  potential  at 
different  distances  from  a  small  electrified  body. 

Definition.  The  electric  potential  at  any  point  is  the  work  which 
must  be  expended  in  order  to  bring  a  body  charged  with  unit 
of  electricity  from  an  infinite  distance  to  that  point. 

If  \jr  is  the  potential  at  A  and  \f/  that  at  B,  then  the  work 
which  must  be  spent  by  the  external  agency  in  overcoming 
electrical  force  while  carrying  a  unit  of  electricity  from  A  to  £ 
is  \jr' — \fr. 

The  quantity  \J/— \ff  would  also  represent  the  work  which  would 
be  done  by  the  electrical  forces  in  assisting  the  transfer  of  the  unit 
of  electricity  from  B  to  A  if  the  motion  were  reversed. 

If  the  force  from  £  to  A  were  constant  and  equal  to  (£,  then 

^r'— ^  =  BA-& 

In  general,  the  electric  force  varies  as  the  body  moves  from  B  to  A, 
so  that  we  cannot  at  once  apply  this  method  of  finding  the  differ- 
ence of  potentials.  But,  by  breaking  up  the  path  BA  into  a 
sufficient  number  of  parts,  we  may  make  these  parts  so  small  that 
the  electric  force  may  be  regarded  as  uniform  during  the  passage 
of  the  body  along  any  one  of  these  parts.  We  may  then  ascertain 
the  parts  of  the  work  done  in  each  part  of  the  path,  and  by  adding 
them  together,  obtain  the  whole  work  done  during  the  passage 
from  B  to  A. 


Fig.  19. 

Let  us  suppose  a  unit  of  electricity  placed  at  0,  and  let  the 
distances  of  the  points  A,  E,  C,  ...  Z  from  0  be  a,  b,  c,  ...  z.     The 

electric  force  at  A  is  —^ ,  at  B  —  >  an^  so  on,  all  in  the  direction 
from  0  to  A. 


60  POTENTIAL   AT    A   POINT.  [86. 

To  find  the  work  which  must  be  done  in  order  to  bring  a 
unit  of  electricity  from  A  to  £  we  must  multiply  the  distance  AB 
by  the  average  of  the  electromotive  force  at  the  various  points 

between  A  and  B.  The  least  value  of  the  force  is  -^-,  and  the 
greatest  value  is  -—-.  Hence  the  work  required  is  greater  than  — ^ 

and  less  than  -j^-.     Now  AB  is  a  —  b,  and  the  true  value  of  the 

work  is  the  excess  of  the  potential  at  B  over  that  at  A.  Hence 
if  we  now  write  A,  B,  C,  ...  Z  for  the  potentials  at  the  correspond- 
ing points,  we  may  express  the  work  required  to  bring  the  unit 
of  electricity  from  A  to  B  by  B  —  A.  This  quantity  therefore  is 
greater  than  a  —  b  A  l\b 

— 2"  or   (#  ~  ~)  ~ ' 

but  less  than  — ^-  or   (T r)  y- . 

b  \6       a/  b 

We  may  express  this  by  the  double  inequality 

A       l^b  A       l^a 

(7  -  -)  -  <  B-A  <  (-T  -  -)  y-  • 
^b       aj  a  \o      aj  b 

11  i          1      7 

Similarly  (---,)-<  C-£  <(-  -  7)  - , 

^c       b'  b  ^c       b'  c 

and  so  on.  The  ratios  =•  >  ->  &c.,  are  all  greater  than  unity.  Let 
us  suppose  that  the  greatest  of  these  ratios  is  equal  to  p.  The 

ratios  -,  &c.,  are  the  reciprocals  of  these;  they  are  therefore  all 
a  _ 

less  than  unity,  but  none  less  than  -  •      Hence 
A        1\1  /I        1\ 


^z      y'  p 
Adding  these  inequalities  we  find 


Ivl  A       K 

---  )-  <  Z—A  <  (  --- 

z      a'  p  ^z      y 


87.]  POTENTIAL   AT  A   POINT.  67 

By  increasing  the  number  of  points  between  A  and  Z  and  making 
the  intervals  between  them  smaller  we  may  make  the  greatest 
ratio,  j»,  as  near  to  unity  as  we  please,  and  we  may  therefore 
assert  that,  as  the  line  AZ  is  more  and  more  minutely  divided, 

the  quantity  p  and  its  reciprocal  -  approach  unity  as  their  com- 
mon limit.  In  the  limit,  therefore, 

Z    A-1       l 

Z/  —  £L  —  —  --  • 

z       a 

We  have  thus  found  the  difference  between  the  potentials  at 
A  and  Z.  To  determine  the  actual  value  of  the  potential,  say  at  Z> 
we  must  refer  to  the  definition  of  the  potential,  that  it  is  the 
work  expended  in  bringing  unit  of  electricity  from  an  infinite 
distance  to  the  given  point.  We  have  therefore  in  the  above 
expression  to  suppose  the  point  A  removed  to  an  infinite  distance 
from  0,  in  which  case  the  potential  A  is  zero,  and  the  reciprocal  of 

the  distance,  or  -  ,  is  also  zero.    The  equation  is  therefore  reduced  to 
a 

the  form  1 


or  in  words,  the  numerical  value  of  the  potential  at  a  given  point 
due  to  unit  of  electricity  at  a  given  distance  is  the  reciprocal  of  the 
number  expressing  that  distance. 

.  If  the  charge  is  e,  then  the  potential  at  a  distance  z  is  —  • 

The  potential  due  to  a  number  of  charges  placed  at  different 
distances  from  the  given  point  is  found  by  adding  the  potentials 
due  to  each  separate  charge,  regard  being  had  to  the  sign  of  each 
potential. 

87.]  Since,  as  we  have  seen,  the  electric  force  at  any  point 
outside  a  uniformly  electrified  spherical  surface  is  the  same  as  if  the 
electric  charge  of  the  surface  had  been  concentrated  at  its  centre, 
the  potential  due  to  the  electrified  surface  must  be,  for  points 
outside  it,  e 

*=7' 

where  e  is  the  whole  charge  of  the  surface,  and  r  is  the  distance  of 
the  given  point  from  the  centre. 

Let  a  be  the  radius  of  the  spherical  surface,  then  this  expression 
for  the  potential  is  true  as  long  as  r  is  greater  than  a.  At  the 

F  a 


68  CAPACITY   OF   TWO    CONCENTRIC   SPHERES.  [88. 

surface,  r  is  equal  to  a.     The  potential  at  the  surface  due  to  its 
own  electrification  is  therefore 


[since  there  can  be  no  discontinuity  in  the  value  of  the  potential 
between  the  surface  and  a  point  just  outside  it]. 

Within  the  surface  there  is  no  electromotive  force,  and  the 
potential  is  therefore  the  same  as  at  the  surface  for  all  points 
within  the  sphere. 

If  the  potential  of  the  spherical  surface  is  unity,  then 

e  =  a, 

or  the  charge  is  numerically  equal  to  the  radius. 

Now  the  electric  capacity  of  a  body  in  a  given  field  is  measured 
by  the  charge  which  raises  its  potential  to  unity.  Hence  the 
electric  capacity  of  a  conducting  sphere  placed  in  air  at  a  con- 
siderable distance  from  any  other  conductor  is  numerically  equal 
to  the  radius  of  the  sphere. 

If  by  means  of  an  electrometer  we  can  measure  the  potential  of 
the  sphere,  we  can  ascertain  its  charge  by  multiplying  this  potential 
by  the  radius  of  the  sphere.  This  method  of  measuring  a  quantity 
of  electricity  was  employed  by  Weber  and  Kohlrausch  in  their 
determination  of  the  ratio  of  the  unit  employed  in  electromagnetic 
to  that  employed  in  electrostatic  researches.  Since  there  is  no 
electric  force  within  a  uniformly  electrified  sphere  the  potential 

S) 

within  the  sphere  is  constant  and  equal  to  —  • 

88.]  We  are  now  able  to  complete  the  theory  of  the  electrifica- 
tion of  two  concentric  spherical  surfaces. 

Let  a  spherical  conductor  of  radius  a  be  insulated  within  a 
hollow  conducting  vessel,  the  internal  surface  of  which  is  a  sphere 
of  radius  b  concentric  with  the  inner  sphere.  Let  the  charge 
on  the  inner  sphere  be  £,  then,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the 
charge  on  the  interior  surface  of  the  vessel  will  be  —  e.  At  any 
point  outside  both  spherical  surfaces  and  distant  r  from  the 
centre  the  electric  potential  due  to  the  inner  sphere  will  be 

-,  and  that  due  to  the  outer  sphere  will  be  --  Since  these 
r  r 

two  quantities  are  numerically  equal,  but  of  opposite  sign,  they 
destroy  each  other,  and  the  potential  at  every  point  for  which  r 
is  greater  than  b  is  zero. 


88.]  LEYDEN   JAB^  69 

• 

Between  the  two  spherical  surfaces,  at  a  point  distant  r  from  the 
centre,  the  potential  due  to  the  inner  sphere  is  —  ,  and  that  due  to 

_____    p 

the  outer  sphere  is  —  —  .     Hence  the  whole  potential  in  this  inter- 


mediate space  is  e  (~  -  T) 


At  the  surface  of  the  inner  sphere  r  =  a  so  that  the  potential  of 

1  the  inner  sphere  is  e  (  --  vV 
\a       b' 

The  potential  at  all  points  within  the  inner  sphere  is  uniform  and 
equal  to  «(i-i). 

The  capacity  of  the  inner  sphere  is  numerically  equal  to  the  value 
of  e  when  the  potential  is  made  equal  to  unity.     In  this  case 

1  al 

1        ~' 


or,  the  capacity  of  a  sphere  insulated  within  a  concentric  spherical 
surface  is  a  fourth  proportional  to  the  distances  (b  —  a)  between  the 
surfaces  and  the  radii  (a,  6,)  of  the  surfaces. 

By  diminishing  the  interval,  b—  a,  between  the  surfaces,  the 
capacity  of  the  system  may  be  made  very  great  without  making 
use  of  very  large  spheres. 

This  example  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  principle  of  the  Leyden 
jar,  which  consists  of  two  metallic  surfaces  separated  by  insulating 
material.  The  smaller  the  distance  between  the  surfaces  and  the 
greater  the  area  of  the  surfaces,  the  greater  the  capacity  of  the  jar. 

Hence,  if  an  electrical  machine  which  can  charge  a  body  up  to  a 
given  potential  is  employed  to  charge  a  Leyden  jar,  one  surface  of 
which  is  connected  with  the  earth,  it  will,  if  worked  long  enough, 
communicate  a  much  greater  charge  to  the  jar  than  it  would  to  a 
very  large  insulated  body  placed  at  a  great  distance  from  any  other 
conductor. 

The  capacity  of  the  jar,  however,  depends  on  the  nature  of  the 
dielectric  which  is  between  the  two  metallic  surfaces  as  well  as  on 
its  thickness  and  area.  See  Art.  131  et  sqq. 


70  FORCE   BETWEEN   TWO   PARALLEL   PLANES.          [89. 


Two  PARALLEL  PLANES. 

89.  Another  simple  case  of  electrification  is  that  in  which  the 
electrodes  are  two  parallel  plane  surfaces  at  a  distance  c.  We  shall 
suppose  the  dimensions  of  these  surfaces  to  be  very  great  compared 
with  the  distance  between  them,  and  we  shall  consider  the  elec- 
trical action  only  in  that  part  of  the  space  between  the  planes 
whose  distance  from  the  edges  of  the  plates  is  many  times  greater 
than  c. 

Let  A  be  the  potential  of  the  upper  plane  in  the  figure,  and  B 
that  of  the  lower  plane.  Then 

the  electric  force  at  any  point  T^  ~~  A 

P  between  the  planes,  and  not  —  -  —  B 

near  the  edge  of  either  plane, 

is  -       —  ,  acting  from  A  to  B.     The  electric  density  on  the  upper 

0 

plane  is  found  by  Coulomb's  Law  by  dividing  this  quantity  by  4  TT. 
If  a-  be  the  surface  density 

A-B 

(1) 


The  surface  density  on  the  plane  B  is  equal  to  this  in  magnitude 
but  opposite  in  sign. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  quantity  of  electricity  on  an  area  S, 
which  we  may  suppose  cut  out  from  the  upper  plane  by  an 
imaginary  closed  curve.  Multiplying  S  into  <r,  we  find 

(2) 


The  quantity  of  electricity  on  an  equal  area  of  the  plane  B  taken 
exactly  opposite  to  8  will  be  —e.  The  energy  of  the  electrification 
of  these  two  portions  of  electricity  is,  by  Art.  31, 

Q=\{Ai  +  B(-e)}  =  \(A-E)*.  (3) 

Expressing  this  in  terms  of  e  it  becomes 


If  c,  the  distance  between  the  surfaces,  be  made  to  increase  to  c' 
the  charges  of  the  surfaces  remaining  the  same,  the  energy  will 
become  9 

3>«v.  (5) 


9I-]  ATTRACTED    DISK   ELECTROMETERS.  71 

The  augmentation  of  the  potential  energy  is 

Q'-Q  =  2-j^(c-c),  (6) 

and  this  is  the  work  done  by  external  agency  in  pulling  the-planes 
asunder  against  the  electric  attraction. 

If  F  is  the  electric  attraction  between  the  two  areas  S, 


or  jF=T^  (8) 

90.]  This  result  gives  us  the  best  experimental  method  of  measur- 
ing the  quantity  of  electricity  on  the  area  S,  for  by  this  equation 

'F8 


e  = 


(9) 


In  this  expression  F  is  the  force  of  attraction  on  the  area  S  deter- 
mined in  dynamical  measure  from  observation  of  its  effects.  S  is 
the  area  of  the  surface  and  ?r  is  the  ratio  of  the  circumference  of  a 
circle  to  its  diameter. 

The  difference  between  the  potentials,  A  and  B,  of  the  two  planes 
is  easily  found  in  terms  of  e  by  means  of  equation  (2),  thus, 


(10) 


91.]  In  Sir  William  Thomson's  attracted  disk  electrometers  a 
disk  is  so  arranged  that  when  in  its  proper  position  the  surface  of 
the  disk  forms  part  of  a  much  larger  plane  surface  extending  for  a 
considerable  distance  on  all  sides  of  the  disk.  The  part  of  the  sur- 
face outside  the  moveable  disk  is  called  the  Guard  Ring  and  the 
surface  of  the  disk  and  guard  ring  together  may  be  considered  as 
the  surface  of  a  large  disk,  part  of  which,  near  its  centre,  is 
moveable.  Opposite  this  disk  is  placed  another  disk  having  its 
surface  parallel  to  the  first  disk  and  much  larger  than  the  move- 
able  disk.  The  electrification  of  the  moveable  disk  is  then  the 
same  as  that  of  a  small  portion  of  one  of  the  large  opposed  planes 
taken  at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  edge  of  the  plane,  and 
only  very  small  corrections  are  needed  to  make  the  formulae  already 
given  apply  to  the  case  of  the  moveable  disk. 

The  distribution  of  electrification  and  of  electric  force  near  the 
edges  of  the  large  disks  is  by  no  means  so  simple.  It  is  calculated 


72        INVERSE  PROBLEM  OF  ELECTROSTATICS.     [92, 

in  Art.  202  of  my  larger  Treatise,  and  the  lines  of  force  and 
equipotential  surfaces  are  shown  in  Plate  V  at  the  end  of  this 
book. 

92.]  The  direct  problem  of  electrostatics — the  problem  which 
the  circumstances  of  every  electrostatic  experiment  present  to  us — 
may  be  stated  as  follows. 

A  system  of  insulated  conductors  is  given  in  form  and  position, 
and  the  electric  charge  of  each  conductor  is  given,  required  the 
distribution  of  electricity  on  each  conductor  and  the  electric  po- 
tential at  any  point  of  the  field. 

The  mathematical  difficulties  of  the  solution  of  this  problem  have 
been  overcome  hitherto  only  in  a  small  number  of  cases,  and  it  is 
only  by  a  study  of  what  we  may  call  the  inverse  problem  that  the 
results  we  possess  have  been  obtained. 

In  the  inverse  problem,  a  possible  distribution  of  potential 
being  given,  it  is  required  to  find  the  forms,  positions  and  charges 
of  a  system  of  conductors  which  shall  be  consistent  with  this  dis- 
tribution of  potential. 

Any  number  of  solutions  of  this  latter  problem  may  be  obtained 
by  taking,  instead  of  the  electrified  bodies  of  the  original  distribution, 
any  set  of  equipotential  surfaces  surrounding  them,  and  supposing 
these  surfaces  to  be  the  surfaces  of  conductors,  the  charge  of  each 
conductor  being  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  charges  of  all  the  bodies 
of  the  original  distribution  which  it  encloses. 

Every  electrical  problem  of  which  we  know  the  solution  has  been 
constructed  by  an  inverse  process  of  this  kind.  It  is  therefore  of 
great  importance  to  the  electrician  that  he  should  know  what  results 
have  been  obtained  in  this  way,  since  the  only  method  by  which  he 
can  expect  to  solve  a  new  problem  is  by  reducing  it  to  one  of  the 
cases  in  which  a  similar  problem  has  been  constructed  by  the 
inverse  process. 

This  historical  knowledge  of  results  can  be  turned  to  account  in 
two  ways.  If  we  are  required  to  devise  an  instrument  for  making 
electrical  measurements  with  the  greatest  accuracy,  we  may  select 
these  forms  for  the  electrified  surfaces  which  correspond  to  cases  of 
which  we  know  the  accurate  solution.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we 
are  required  to  estimate  what  will  be  the  electrification  of  bodies 
whose  forms  are  given,  we  may  begin  with  some  case  in  which 
one  of  the  equipotential  surfaces  takes  a  form  somewhat  resem- 
bling the  given  form,  and  then  by  a  tentative  method  we  may 
modify  the  problem  till  it  more  nearly  corresponds  to  the  given 


93-]  DIAGRAMS   OF   EQUIPOTENT1AL   SURFACES.  73 

case.  This  method  is  evidently  very  imperfect,  considered  from  a 
mathematical  point  of  view,  but  it  is  the  only  one  we  have,  and  if 
we  are  not  allowed  to  choose  our  conditions,  we  can  make  only  an 
approximate  calculation  of  the  electrification.  It  appears,  therefore, 
that  what  we  want  is  a  knowledge  of  the  forms  of  equipotential 
surfaces  and  lines  of  induction  in  as  many  different  cases  as  we  can 
collect  together  and  remember.  In  certain  classes  of  cases,  such 
as  those  relating  to  spheres,  we  may  proceed  by  mathematical 
methods.  In  other  cases  we  cannot  afford  to  despise  the  humbler 
method  of  actually  drawing  tentative  figures  on  paper,  and  select- 
ing that  which  appears  least  unlike  the  figure  we  require. 

This  latter  method,  I  think,  may  be  of  some  use,  even  in  cases 
in  which  the  exact  solution  has  been  obtained,  for  I  find  that  an 
eye  knowledge  of  the  forms  of  the  equipotential  surfaces  often  leads 
to  a  right  selection  of  a  mathematical  method  of  solution. 

I  have  therefore  drawn  several  diagrams  of  systems  of  equipo- 
tential surfaces  and  lines  of  force,  so  that  the  student  may  make 
himself  familiar  with  the  forms  of  the  lines. 

93.]  In  the  first  plate  at  the  end  of  this  volume  we  have  the 
equipotential  surfaces  surrounding  two  points  electrified  with  quan- 
tities of  electricity  of  the  same  kind  and  in  the  ratio  of  20  to  5. 

Here  each  point  is  surrounded  by  a  system  of  equipotential 
surfaces  which  become  more  nearly  spheres  as  they  become  smaller, 
but  none  of  them  are  accurately  spheres.  If  two  of  these  surfaces, 
one  surrounding  each  sphere,  be  taken  to  represent  the  surfaces 
of  two  conducting  bodies,  nearly  but  not  quite  spherical,  and  if 
these  bodies  be  charged  with  the  same  kind  of  electricity,  the 
charges  being  as  4  to  1,  then  the  diagram  will  represent  the 
equipotential  surfaces,  provided  we  expunge  all  those  which  are 
drawn  inside  the  two  bodies.  It  appears  from  the  diagram  that 
the  action  between  the  bodies  will  be  the  same  as  that  between 
two  points  having  the  same  charges,  these  points  being  not  exactly 
in  the  middle  of  the  axis  of  each  body,  but  somewhat  more  remote 
than  the  middle  point  from  the  other  body. 

The  same  diagram  enables  us  to  see  what  will  be  the  distribu- 
tion of  electricity  on  one  of  the  oval  figures,  larger  at  one  end 
than  the  other,  which  surround  both  centres.  Such  a  body,  if  elec- 
trified with  a  charge  25  and  free  from  external  influence,  will 
have  the  surface-density  greatest  at  the  small  end,  less  at  the  large 
end,  and  least  in  a  circle  somewhat  nearer  the  smaller  than  the 
larger  end. 


74  DIAGRAMS   OF   EQUIPOTENTIAL   SURFACES  [94. 

There  is  one  equipotential  surface,  indicated  by  a  dotted  line, 
which  consists  of  two  lobes  meeting  at  the  conical  point  P.  That 
point  is  a  point  of  equilibrium,  and  the  surface-density  on  a  body 
of  the  form  of  this  surface  would  be  zero  at  this  point. 

The  lines  of  force  in  this  case  form  two  distinct  systems,  divided 
from  one  another  by  a  surface  of  the  sixth  degree,  indicated  by  a 
dotted  line,  passing  through  the  point  of  equilibrium,  and  some- 
what resembling  one  sheet  of  the  hyperboloid  of  two  sheets. 

This  diagram  may  also  be  taken  to  represent  the  lines  of  force 
and  equipotential  surfaces  belonging  to  two  spheres  of  gravitating 
matter  whose  masses  are  as  4  to  1. 

94.]  In  the  second  Plate  we  have  again  two  points  whose  charges 
are  as  4  to  1,  but  the  one  positive  and  the  other  negative.  In  this 
case  one  of  the  equipotential  surfaces,  that,  namely,  corresponding 
to  potential  zero,  is  a  sphere.  It  is  marked  in  the  diagram  by  the 
dotted  circle  Q.  The  importance  of  this  spherical  surface  will  be 
seen  when  we  come  to  the  theory  of  Electrical  Images. 

We  may  see  from  this  diagram  that  if  two  round  bodies  are 
charged  with  opposite  kinds  of  electricity  they  will  attract  each 
other  as  much  as  two  points  having  the  same  charges  but  placed 
somewhat  nearer  together  than  the  middle  points  of  the  round 
bodies. 

Here,  again,  one  of  the  equipotential  surfaces,  indicated  by  a 
dotted  line,  has  two  lobes,  an  inner  one  surrounding  the  point 
whose  charge  is  5  and  an  outer  one  surrounding  both  bodies,  the 
two  lobes  meeting  in  a  conical  point  P  which  is  a  point  of  equili- 
brium. 

If  the  surface  of  a  conductor  is  of  the  form  of  the  outer  lobe,  a 
roundish  body  having,  like  an  apple,  a  conical  dimple  at  one  end  of 
its  axis,  then,  if  this  conductor  be  electrified,  we  shall  be  able  to 
determine  the  superficial  density  at  any  point.  That  at  the  bottom 
of  the  dimple  will  be  zero. 

Surrounding  this  surface  we  have  others  having  a  rounded 
dimple  which  flattens  and  finally  disappears  in  the  equipotential 
surface  passing  through  the  point  marked  M. 

The  lines  of  force  in  this  diagram  form  two  systems  divided  by  a 
surface  which  passes  through  the  point  of  equilibrium. 

If  we  consider  points  on  the  axis  on  the  further  side  of  the  point 
B,  we  find  that  the  resultant  force  diminishes  to  the  double  point  P, 
where  it  vanishes.  It  then  changes  sign,  and  reaches  a  maximum 
at  M,  after  which  it  continually  diminishes. 


96.]  AND   LINES   OF   INDUCTION.  75 

This  maximum,  however,  is  only  a  maximum  relatively  to  other 
points  on  the  axis,  for  if  we  draw  a  surface  perpendicular  to  the 
axis,  M  is  a  point  of  minimum  force  relatively  to  neighbouring 
points  on  that  surface. 

95.]  Plate  III  represents  the  equipotential  surfaces  and  lines 
of  force  due  to  an  electrified  point  whose  charge  is  10  placed  at 
A,  and  surrounded  by  a  field .  of  force,  which,  before  the  intro- 
duction of  the  electrified  point,  was  uniform  in  direction  and 
magnitude  at  every  part.  In  this  case,  those  lines  of  force  which 
belong  to  A  are  contained  within  a  surface  of  revolution  which 
has  an  asymptotic  cylinder,  having  its  axis  parallel  to  the  un- 
disturbed lines  of  force. 

The  equipotential  surfaces  have  each  of  them  an  asymptotic 
plane.  One  of  them,  indicated  by  a  dotted  line,  has  a  conical 
point  and  a  lobe  surrounding  the  point  A.  Those  below  this  surface 
have  one  sheet  with  a  depression  near  the  axis.  Those  above  have 
a  closed  portion  surrounding  A  and  a  separate  sheet  with  a  slight 
depression  near  the  axis. 

If  we  take  one  of  the  surfaces  below  A  as  the  surface  of  a  con- 
ductor, and  another  a  long  way  below  A  as  the  surface  of  another 
conductor  at  a  different  potential,  the  system  of  lines  and  surfaces 
between  the  two  conductors  will  indicate  the  distribution  of  electric 
force.  If  the  lower  conductor  is  very  far  from  A  its  surface  will 
be  very  nearly  plane,  so  that  we  have  here  the  solution  of  the 
distribution  of  electricity  on  two  surfaces,  both  of  them  nearly 
plane  and  parallel  to  each  other,  except  that  the  upper  one  has 
a  protuberance  near  its  middle  point,  which  is  more  or  less  pro- 
minent according  to  the  particular  equipotential  line  we  choose  for 
the  surface. 

96.]  Plate  IV  represents  the  equipotential  surfaces  and  lines 
of  force  due  to  three  electrified  points  A,  B  and  C,  the  charge  of  A 
being  15  units  of  positive  electricity,  that  of  B  12  units  of  negative 
electricity,  and  that  of  C  20  units  of  positive  electricity.  These 
points  are  placed  in  one  straight  line,  so  that 

AB  =9,     £0=16,     AC  =25. 

In  this  case,  the  surface  for  which  the  potential  is  unity  consists 
of  two  spheres  whose  centres  are  A  and  C  and  their  radii  1 5  and  20. 
These  spheres  intersect  in  the  circle  which  cuts  the  plane  of  the 
paper  in  D  and  D',  so  that  B  is  the  centre  of  this  circle  and  its 
radius  is  12.  This  circle  is  an  example  of  a  line  of  equilibrium,  for 
the  resultant  force  vanishes  at  every  point  of  this  line. 


76  LINES   OF   INDUCTION.  [97. 

If  we  suppose  the  sphere  whose  centre  is  A  to  be  a  conductor 
with  a  charge  of  3  units  of  positive  electricity,  and  placed  under 
the  influence  of  20  units  of  positive  electricity  at  C,  the  state  of 
the  case  will  be  represented  by  the  diagram  if  we  leave  out  all  the 
lines  within  the  sphere  A.  The  part  of  this  spherical  surface  within 
the  small  circle  DD'  will  be  negatively  electrified  by  the  influence 
of  C.  All  the  rest  of  the  sphere  will  be  positively  electrified,  and 
the  small  circle  DD'  itself  will  be  a  line  of  no  electrification. 

"We  may  also  consider  the  diagram  to  represent  the  electrification 
of  the  sphere  whose  centre  is  (7,  charged  with  8  units  of  positive 
electricity,  and  influenced  by  15  units  of  positive  electricity  placed 
at^. 

The  diagram  may  also  be  taken  to  represent  the  case  of  a 
conductor  whose  surface  consists  of  the  larger  segments  of  the 
two  spheres  meeting  in  Dlf^  charged  with  23  units  of  positive 
electricity. 

97.]  I  am  anxious  that  these  diagrams  should  be  studied  as 
illustrations  of  the  language  of  Faraday  in  speaking  of  '  lines  of 
force/  the  '  forces  of  an  electrified  body,'  &c. 

In  strict  mathematical  language  the  word  Force  is  used  to  signify 
the  supposed  cause  of  the  tendency  which  a  material  body  is  found 
to  have  towards  alteration  in  its  state  of  rest  or  motion.  It  is 
indifferent  whether  we  speak  of  this  observed  tendency  or  of  its 
immediate  cause,  since  the  cause  is  simply  inferred  from  the  effect, 
and  has  no  other  evidence  to  support  it. 

Since,  however,  we  are  ourselves  in  the  practice  of  directing  the 
motion  of  our  own  bodies,  and  of  moving  other  things  in  this  way, 
we  have  acquired  a  copious  store  of  remembered  sensations  relating 
to  these  actions,  and  therefore  our  ideas  of  force  are  connected  in 
our  minds  with  ideas  of  conscious  power,  of  exertion,  and  of  fatigue, 
and  of  overcoming  or  yielding  to  pressure.  These  ideas,  which  give 
a  colouring  and  vividness  to  the  purely  abstract  idea  of  force,  do 
not  in  mathematically  trained  minds  lead  to  any  practical  error. 

But  in  the  vulgar  language  of  the  time  when  dynamical  science 
was  unknown,  all  the  words  relating  to  exertion,  such  as  force, 
energy,  power,  &c.,  were  confounded  with  each  other,  though  some 
of  the  schoolmen  endeavoured  to  introduce  a  greater  precision  into 
their  language. 

The  cultivation  and  popularization  of  correct  dynamical  ideas 
since  the  time  of  Galileo  and  Newton  has  effected  an  immense 
change  in  the  language  and  ideas  of  common  life,  but  it  is  only 


98.]  CONSTRUCTION   OF   DIAGRAMS.  77 

within  recent  times,  and  in  consequence  of  the  increasing  im- 
portance of  machinery,  that  the  ideas  of  force,  energy,  and  power 
have  become  accurately  distinguished  from  each  other.  Very  few, 
however,  even  of  scientific  men,  are  careful  to  observe  these  dis- 
tinctions; hence  we  often  hear  of  the  force  of  a  cannon-ball  when 
either  its  energy  or  its  momentum  is  meant,  and  of  the  force  of  an 
electrified  body  when  the  quantity  of  its  electrification  is  meant. 

Now  the  quantity  of  electricity  in  a  body  is  measured,  according 
to  Faraday's  ideas,  by  the  number  of  lines  of  force,  or  rather  of 
induction,  which  proceed  from  it.  These  lines  of  force  must  all 
terminate  somewhere,  either  on  bodies  in  the  neighbourhood,  or  on 
the  walls  and  roof  of  the  room,  or  on  the  earth,  or  on  the  heavenly 
bodies,  and  wherever  they  terminate  there  is  a  quantity  of  elec- 
tricity exactly  equal  and  opposite  to  that  on  the  part  of  the  body 
from  which  they  proceeded.  By  examining  the  diagrams  this  will 
be  seen  to  be  the  case.  There  is  therefore  no  contradiction  between 
Faraday's  views  and  the  mathematical  result  of  the  old  theory, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  the  idea  of  lines  of  force  throws  great  light 
on  these  results,  and  seems  to  afford  the  means  of  rising  by  a  con- 
tinuous process  from  the  somewhat  rigid  conceptions  of  the  old 
theory  to  notions  which  may  be  capable  of  greater  expansion,  so 
as  to  provide  room  for  the  increase  of  our  knowledge  by  further 
researches. 

98.]  These  diagrams  are  constructed  in  the  following  manner : — 
First,  take  the  case  of  a  single  centre  of  force,  a  small  electrified 

V 

body  with  a  charge  E.     The  potential  at  a  distance  r  is  T  =  —  ; 

E? 

hence,  if  we  make  r  =  -~  >  we  shall  find  r,  the  radius  of  the  sphere 

for  which  the  potential  is  T.  If  we  now  give  to  V  the  values 
1,  2,  3,  &c.,  and  draw  the  corresponding  spheres,  we  shall  obtain 
a  series  of  equipotential  surfaces,  the  potentials  corresponding  to 
which  are  measured  by  the  natural  numbers.  The  sections  of  these 
spheres  by  a  plane  passing  through  their  common  centre  will  be 
circles,  which  we  may  mark  with  the  number  denoting  the  potential 
of  each.  These  are  indicated  by  the  dotted  circles  on  the  right 
hand  of  Fig.  21. 

If  there  be  another  centre  of  force,  we  may  in  the  same  way  draw 
the  equipotential  surfaces  belonging  to  it,  and  if  we  now  wish  to 
find  the  form  of  the  equipotential  surfaces  due  to  both  centres 
together,  we  must  remember  that  if  Ft  be  the  potential  due  to  one 


78  EQUIPOTENTIAL   SVEFACES  [98. 

centre,  and  T2  that  due  to  the  other,  the  potential  due  to  both  will  be 
F1+72  =  V.  Hence,  since  at  every  intersection  of  the  equipotential 
surfaces  belonging  to  the  two  series  we  know  both  V^  and  F~2,  we 
also  know  the  value  of  V.  If  therefore  we  draw  a  surface  which 
passes  through  all  those  intersections  for  which  the  value  of  V  is 
the  same,  this  surface  will  coincide  with  a  true  equipotential  surface 
at  all  these  intersections,  and  if  the  original  systems  of  surfaces 
be  drawn  sufficiently  close,  the  new  surface  may  be  drawn  with 
any  required  degree  of  accuracy.  The  equipotential  surfaces  due  to 
two  points  whose  charges  are  equal  and  opposite  are  represented  by 
the  continuous  lines  on  the  right  hand  side  of  Fig.  2 1 . 

This  method  may  be  applied  to  the  drawing  of  any  system  of 
equipotential  surfaces  when  the  potential  is  the  sum  of  two  po- 
tentials, for  which  we  have  already  drawn  the  equipotential  surfaces. 

The  lines  of  force  due  to  a  single  centre  of  force  are  straight 
lines  radiating  from  that  centre.  If  we  wish  to  indicate  by  these 
lines  the  intensity  as  well  as  the  direction  of  the  force  at  any  point, 
we  must  draw  them  so  that  they  mark  out  on  the  equipotential 
surfaces  portions  over  which  the  surface-integral  of  induction  has 
definite  values.  The  best  way  of  doing  this  is  to  suppose  our 
plane  figure  to  be  the  section  of  a  figure  in  space  formed  by  the 
revolution  of  the  plane  figure  about  an  axis  passing  through  the 
centre  of  force.  Any  straight  line  radiating  from  the  centre  and 
making  an  angle  0  with  the  axis  will  then  trace  out  a  cone, 
and  the  surface-integral  of  the  induction  through  that  part  of  any 
surface  which  is  cut  off  by  this  cone  on  the  side  next  the  positive 
direction  of  the  axis,  is  2  77^(1  —  cos  6). 

If  we  further  suppose  this  surface  to  be  bounded  by  its  inter- 
section with  two  planes  passing  through  the  axis,  and  inclined  at 
the  angle  whose  arc  is  equal  to  half  the  radius,  then  the  induction 
through  the  surface  so  bounded  is 

.0(1— cos 0)  =  2*,  say; 

^  \ 
and     6  =  cos~1(l  —  2 -^)  • 

If  we  now  give  to  ^  a  series  of  values  1 ,  2,  3...U,  we  shall  find 
a  corresponding  series  of  values  of  6,  and  if  E  be  an  integer,  the 
number  of  corresponding  lines  of  force,  including  the  axis,  will  be 
equal  to  E. 

We  have  therefore  a  method  of  drawing  lines  of  force  so  that 
the  charge  of  any  centre  is  indicated  by  the  number  of  lines  which 
converge  to  it,  and  the  induction  through  any  surface  cut  off1  in  the 


of  Jvrce . 


£quipotenlial/  Surfaces 


Method  of* 
of  force  and  EyuipotentiaZ  Surfaces. 


For  the,  Delegates  of  the-  Clarendon  Press. 


98.]  AND   LINES   OF  INDUCTION.  79 

way  described  is  measured  by  the  number  of  lines  of  force  which 
pass  through  it.  The  dotted  straight  lines  on  the  left  hand  side 
of  Fig.  21  represent  the  lines  offeree  due  to  each  of  two  electrified 
points  whose  charges  are  1 0  and  — 10  respectively. 

If  there  are  two  centres  of  force  on  the  axis  of  the  figure  we 
may  draw  the  lines  of  force  for  each  axis  corresponding  to  values 
of  ¥j_  and  ^ ,  and  then,  by  drawing  lines  through  the  consecutive 
intersections  of  these  lines,  for  which  the  value  of  ^  +  #2  is  the 
same,  we  may  find  the  lines  of  force  due  to  both  centres,  and  in 
the  same  way  we  may  combine  any  two  systems  of  lines  of  force 
which  are  symmetrically  situated  about  the  same  axis.  The  con- 
tinuous curves  on  the  left  hand  side  of  Fig.  21  represent  the  lines 
of  force  due  to  the  two  electrified  points  acting  at  once. 

After  the  equipotential  surfaces  and  lines  of  force  have  been 
constructed  by  this  method  the  accuracy  of  the  drawing  may  be 
tested  by  observing  whether  the  two  systems  of  lines  are  every- 
where orthogonal,  and  whether  the  distance  between  consecutive 
equipotential  surfaces  is  to  the  distance  between  consecutive  lines 
of  force  as  half  the  distance  from  the  axis  is  to  the  assumed  unit  of 
length. 

In  the  case  of  any  such  system  of  finite  dimensions  the  line  of 
force  whose  index  number  is  ^  has  an  asymptote  which  passes 
through  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system,  and  is  inclined  to  the 

^ 
axis  at  an  angle  whose  cosine  is  1  —  2  -^- ,  where  E  is  the  total 

electrification  of  the  system,  provided  *  is  less  than  E.     Lines  of 
force  whose  index  is  greater  than  E  are  finite  lines. 

The  lines  of  force  corresponding  to  a  field  of  uniform  force  parallel 
to  the  axis  are  lines  parallel  to  the  axis,  the  distances  from  the 
axis  being  the  square  roots  of  an  arithmetical  series. 


CHAPTEE   VII. 


THEORY   OF   ELECTRICAL   IMAGES. 

99.]  THE  calculation  of  the  distribution  of  electrification  on  the 
surface  of  a  conductor  when  electrified  bodies  are  placed  near  it  is  in 
general  an  operation  beyond  the  powers  of  existing  mathematical 
methods. 

AVhen  the  conductor  is  a  sphere,  and  when  the  distribution  of 
electricity  on  external  bodies  is  given,  a  solution,  depending  on 
an  infinite  series  was  obtained  by  Poisson.  This  solution  agrees 
with  that  which  was  afterwards  given  in  a  far  simpler  form  by 
Sir  W.  Thomson,  and  which  is  the  foundation  of  his  method  of 
Electric  Images. 

By  this  method  lie  has  solved  problems  in  electricity  which 
have  never  been  attempted  by  any  other  method,  and  which,  even 
after  the  solution  has  been  pointed  out,  no  other  method  seems 
capable  of  attacking.  This  method  has  the  great  advantage  of 
being  intelligible  by  the  aid  of  the  most  elementary  mathematical 
reasoning,  especially  when  it  is  considered  in  connection  with  the 
diagrams  of  equipotential  surfaces  described  in  Arts.  93-96. 

100.]  The  idea  of  an  image  is  most  easily  acquired  by  considering 
the  optical  phenomena  on  account  of  which  the  term  image  was 
first  introduced  into  science. 

We  are  accustomed  to  make  use  of  the  visual  impressions  we 
receive  through  our  eyes  in  order  to  ascertain  the  positions  of 
distant  objects.  We  are  doing  this  all  day  long  in  a  manner 
sufficiently  accurate  for  ordinary  purposes.  Surveyors  and  astro- 
nomers by  means  of  artificial  instruments  and  mathematical  de- 
ductions do  the  same  thing  with  greater  exactness.  In  whatever 
way,  however,  we  make  our  deductions  we  find  that  they  are 
consistent  with  the  hypothesis  that  an  object  exists  in  a  certain 
position  in  space,  from  which  it  emits  light  which  travels  to  our 
eyes  or  to  our  instruments  in  straight  lines. 


1 01.]  ELECTRICAL   IMAGES.  81 

But  if  we  stand  in  front  of  a  plane  mirror  and  make  observations 
on  the  apparent  direction  of  the  objects  reflected  therein,  we  find 
that  these  observations  are  consistent  with  the  hypothesis  that 
there  is  no  mirror,  but  that  certain  objects  exist  in  the  region 
beyond  the*  plane  of  the  mirror.  These  hypothetical  objects  are 
geometrically  related  to  certain  real  objects  in  front  of  the  plane  of 
the  mirror,  and  they  are  called  the  images  of  these  objects. 

We  are  not  provided  with  a  special  sense  for  enabling  us  to 
ascertain  the  presence  and  the  position  of  distant  bodies  by  means 
of  their  electrical  effects,  but  we  have  instrumental  methods  by 
which  the  distribution  of  potential  and  of  electric  force  in  any  part 
of  the  field  may  be  ascertained,  and  from  these  data  we  obtain  a 
certain  amount  of  evidence  as  to  the  position  and  electrification  of 
the  distant  body. 

If  an  astronomer,  for  instance,  could  ascertain  the  direction  and 
magnitude  of  the  force  of  gravitation  at  any  desired  point  in  the 
heavenly  spaces,  he  could  deduce  the  positions  and  masses  of  the 
bodies  to  which  the  force  is  due.  When  Adams  and  Leverrier 
discovered  the  hitherto  unknown  planet  Neptune,  they  did  so  by 
ascertaining  the  direction  and  magnitude  of  the  gravitating  force 
due  to  the  unseen  planet  at  certain  points  of  space.  In  the  elec- 
trical problem  we  employed  an  electrified  pith  ball,  which  we 
moved  about  in  the  field  at  pleasure.  The  astronomers  employed 
for  a  similar  purpose  the  planet  Uranus,  over  which,  indeed,  they 
had  no  control,  but  which  moved  of  itself  into  such  positions  that 
the  alterations  of  the  elements  of  its  orbit  served  to  indicate  the 
position  of  the  unknown  disturbing  planet. 

101.]  In  one  of  the  electrified  systems  which  we  have  already 
investigated,  that  of  a  spherical  conductor  A  within  a  concentric 
spherical  conducting  vessel  jfr,  we  have  one  of  the  simplest  cases  of 
the  principle  of  electric  images. 

The  electric  field  is  in  this  case  the  region  which  lies  between 
the  two  concentric  spherical  surfaces.  The  electric  force  at  any 
point  P  within  this  region  is  in  the  direction  of  the  radius  OP 
and  numerically  equal  to  the  charge  of  the  inner  sphere,  A,  divided 
by  the  square  of  the  distance,  OP,  of  the  point  from  the  common 
centre.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  force  within  this  region 
will  be  the  same  if  we  substitute  for  the  electrified  spherical  sur- 
faces, A  and  J3,  any  other  two  concentric  spherical  surfaces,  C  and 
I),  one  of  them,  (?,  lying  within  the  smaller  sphere,  A,  and  the 
other,  D,  lying  outside  of  £,  the  charge  of  C  being  equal  to  that 

G 


82 


CONCENTRIC    SPHERES. 


[l02. 


of  A  in  the  former  case.  The  electric  phenomena  in  the  region 
between  A  and  B  are  therefore  the  same  as  before,  the  only  differ- 
ence between  the  cases  is  that  in  the  region  between  A  and  C  and 
also  in  the  region  between  B  and  D  we  now  find  electric  forces 

acting  according  to  the  same  law 
as  in  the  region  between  A  and 
£,  whereas  when  the  region  was 
bounded  by  the  conducting  sur- 
faces A  and  B  there  was  no  elec- 
trical force  whatever  in  the  regions 
beyond  these  surfaces.  We  may 
even,  for  mathematical  purposes, 
suppose  the  inner  sphere  C  to  be 
reduced  to  a  physical  point  at  0, 
and  the  outer  sphere  D  to  expand 
to  an  infinite  size,  and  thus  we 
assimilate  the  electric  action  in 
the  region  between  A  and  B  to  that  due  to  an  electrified  point  at 
0  placed  in  an  infinite  region. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  when  a  spherical  surface  is  uniformly 
electrified,  the  electric  phenomena  in  the  region  outside  the  sphere 
are  exactly  the  same  as  if  the  spherical  surface  had  been  removed, 
and  a  very  small  body  placed  at  the  centre  of  the  sphere,  having 
the  same  electric  charge  as  the  sphere. 

This  is  a  simple  instance  in  which  the  phenomena  in  a  certain 
region  are  consistent  with  a  false  hypothesis  as  to  what  exists 
beyond  that  region.  The  action  of  a  uniformly  electrified  spherical 
surface  in  the  region  outside  that  surface  is  such  that  the  phenomena 
may  be  attributed  to  an  imaginary  electrified  point  at  the  centre  of 
the  sphere. 

The  potential,  \l/>  of  a  sphere  of  radius  a,  placed  in  infinite  space 


Fig.  22. 


and  charged  with  a  quantity  e  of  electricity,  is  -  . 


Hence  if  ^  is 
the  potential  of  the  sphere,  the  imaginary  charge  at  its  centre 


102.]  Now  let  us  calculate  the  potential  at  a  point  P  in  a 
spherical  surface  whose  centre  is  C  and  radius  CP,  due  to  two 
electrified  points  A  and  B  in  the  same  radius  produced,  and  such 
that  the  product  of  their  distances  from  the  centre  is  equal  to  the 
square  of  the  radius.  Points  thus  related  to  one  another  are  called 
inverse,  points  with  respect  to  the  sphere. 


102.] 


IMAGE   OF   A   POINT. 


83 


Let  a  =  CP  be  the  radius  of  the  sphere.    Let  CA  =  ma>  then  CB 

will  be  —  • 
m 

Also  the  triangle  APC  is  similar  to  PCS,  and 

AP:PB::AC:PC, 

or  AP  =  mBP.     See  Euclid  vi.  prop.  E. 

Now  let  a  charge  of  electricity  equal  to  e  be  placed  at  A  and  a 

charge  e'  =  —  —  of  the  opposite  kind  be  placed  at  B.     The  poten- 
tial due  to  these  charges  at  P  will  be 

v=       -L> 

AP      BP 


mBP 


Fig.  23. 


mBP 
=  0; 

or  the  potential  due  to  the  charges  at  A  and  B  at  any  point  P  of  the 
spherical  surface  is  zero. 

We  may  now  suppose  the  spherical 
surface  to  be  a  thin  shell  of  metal. 
Its  potential  is  already  zero  at  every 
point,  so  that  if  we  connect  it  by  a 
fine  wire  with  the  earth  there  will 
be  no  alteration  of  its  potential,  and 
therefore  the  potential  at  every 
point,  whether  within  or  without 
the  surface,  will  remain  unaltered,  and  will  be  that  due  to  the  two 
electrified  points  A  and  B. 

If  we  now  keep  the  metallic  shell  in  connection  with  the  earth 
and  remove  the  electrified  point  B,  the  potential  at  every  point 
within  the  sphere  will  become  zero,  but  outside  it  will  remain  as 
before.  For  the  surface  of  the  sphere  still  remains  of  the  same 
potential,  and  no  change  has  been  made  in  the  distribution  of 
electrified  bodies  in  the  region  outside  the  sphere. 

Hence,  if  an  electrified  point  A  be  placed  outside  a  spherical  con- 
ductor which  is  at  potential  zero,  the  electrical  action  at  all  points 
outside  the  sphere  will  be  equivalent  to  that  due  to  the  point  A 
together  with  another  point,  B,  within  the  sphere,  which  is  the 
inverse  point  to  A,  and  whose  charge  is  to  that  of  A  as  —  1  is  to  m. 
The  point  B  with  its  imaginary  charge  is  called  the  electric  image  of  A. 

In  the  same  way  by  removing  A  and  retaining  B,  we  may  shew 

G  2 


84  ELECTRICAL   IMAGES.  [103. 

that  if  an  electrified  point  B  be  placed  inside  a  hollow  conductor 
having  its  inner  surface  spherical,  the  electrical  action  within  the 
hollow  is  equivalent  to  that  of  the  point  B,  together  with  an 
imaginary  point,  A,  outside  the  sphere,  whose  charge  is  to  that 
of  B  as  m  is  to  —  1 . 

If  the  sphere,  instead  of  being  in  connection  with  the  earth,  and 
therefore  at  potential  zero,  is  at  potential  \^,  the  electrical  effects 
outside  the  sphere  will  be  the  same  as  if,  in  addition  to  the  image 
of  the  electrified  point,  another  imaginary  charge  equal  to  -fya  were 
placed  at  the  centre  of  the  sphere. 

Within  the  sphere  the  potential  will  simply  be  increased  by  \j/. 

103.]  As  an  example  of  the  method  of  electric  images  let  us 
calculate  the  electric  state  of  two  spheres  whose  radii  are  a  and  b 
respectively,  and  whose  potentials  are  Pa  and  Pb,  the  distance  be- 
tween their  centres  being  c.  We  shall  suppose  b  to  be  small  com- 
pared with  c. 


Fig.  24. 

We  may  consider  the  actual  electrical  effects  at  any  point  out- 
side the  two  spheres  as  due  to  a  series  of  electric  images. 

In  the  first  place,  since  the  potential  of  the  sphere  A  is  Pa  we 
must  place  an  image  at  the  centre  A  with  a  charge  aPa. 

Similarly  at  B,  the  centre  of  the  other  sphere,  we  must  place  a 
charge  bPb. 

Each  of  these  images  will  have  an  image  of  the  second  order  in 
the  other  sphere.  The  image  of  B  in  the  sphere  a  will  be  at  D, 
where  #2  a 

AD  =  —  >  and  the  charge  D  = •  6Pb. 

c  c 

The  image  of  A  in  the  sphere  I  will  be  at  E,  where 

72  Z. 

BE  —      ,  and  the  charge  E aPa. 


1  04.]  TWO    SPHERES.  85 

Each  of  these  will  have  an  image  of  the  third  order.     That  of  E 
in  a  will  be  at  F,  where 


a  ac 

AS  =  ?= 


That  of  D  in  b  will  be  at  G,  where 


The  images  of  the  fourth  order  will  be, 
of  G  in  a  at  H9  where 


c(c2—  a2— 
of  F  in  £  at  7,  where 


and  #  = 


- 

^7  =  FB  =  c(c*-a*-b*)  anC       =  *(*»-«*-**)  Pft' 
We  might  go  on  with  a  series  of  images  for  ever,  but  if  b  is  small 
compared  with  cy  the  images  will  rapidly  become  smaller  and  may 
be  neglected  after  the  fourth  order. 
If  we  now  write 


ab 


the  whole  charge  of  the  sphere  a  will  be 

•#a=  yaaPa  +  gab 

and  that  of  the  sphere  5  will  be 


104.]  From  these  results  we  may  calculate  the  potentials  of  the 
two  spheres  when  their  charges  are  given,  and  if  we  neglect 
terms  involving  b3  we  find 


The  electric  energy  of  the  system  is 


86  TWO    SPHERES. 

The  repulsion,  72,  between  the  two  spheres  is  measured  by  the 
rate  at  which  the  energy  diminishes  as  c  increases  ;  therefore, 


In  order  that  the  force  may  be  repulsive  it  is  necessary  that  the 
charges  of  the  spheres  should  be  of  the  same  sign,  and 

#3/2^2  _  a2) 
Ua  must  be  greater  than  Sb—~  -  ^  • 

Hence  the  force  is  always  attractive, 

1.  When  either  sphere  is  uninsulated  ; 

2.  When  either  sphere  has  no  charge  ; 

3.  When  the  spheres  are  very  nearly  in  contact,  if  their  poten- 
tials are  different. 

When  the  potentials  of  the  two  spheres  are  equal  the  force  is 
always  repulsive. 

105.]  To  determine  the  electric  force  at  any  point  just  outside  of 
the  surface  of  a  conducting  sphere  connected  with  the  earth  arising 
from  the  presence  of  an  electrified  point  A  outside  the  sphere. 

The  electrical  conditions  at  all  points  outside  the  sphere  are  equi- 
valent, as  we  have  seen,  to  those  due  to  the  point  A  together  with  its 
image  at  B.  If  e  is  the  charge  of  the  point  A  (Fig.  23),  the  force 

p 

due  to  it  at  P  is  -rp%  in  the  direction  AP.     Resolving  this  force  in 
a  direction  parallel  to  AC  and  along  the  radius,  its  components  are 

p  p 

,-...  AC  in  the  direction  parallel  to  AC  and    .n.,  OP  in  the  direc- 
AP*  AP*         cp 

tion  CP.     The  charge  of  the  image  of  A  at  B  is  —e  ^-,>and  the 

CP      I 

force  due  to  the  image  at  P  is  e  -^-  •  -~^  ^n  ^ne  direction  PB.  Re- 


solving  this  force  in  the  same  direction  as  the  other,  its  components 
e  —  •  pp3  in  a  direction  parallel  to  CA}  and 

O^a.     _D-£ 

GP* 

in  the  direction  PC. 


If  a  is  the  radius  of  the  sphere  and  if  CA  =/*  =  ma  and  AP  =  r, 

then  CB  =  —  a  and  BP  =  —  r  ;  and  if  e  is  the  charge  of  the  point 
m  m 

A,  the  charge  of  its  image  at  B  is  --  e. 

The  force  at  P  due  to  the  charge  e  at  A  is  -^  in  the  direction  AP. 


106.]  DENSITY   OF   INDUCED   CHARGE.  87 

Resolving  this  force  in  the  direction  of  the  radius  and  a  direction 
parallel  to  AC,  its  components  are 

f    ma  .,.,.,.  -, 

-s in  the  direction  AC,  and 

T*       T 

— T  •  -  in  the  direction  CP. 
i*    r 

The  force  at  P  due  to  the  image e  at  B  is  —  e  -         or  £  — 

m  m     BP*  r* 

in  the  direction  PB.     Resolving  this  in  the  same  directions  as  the 
other  force,  its  components  are 

m  BC       ema  .      .      ,.       . 
e  -5-  -JTJ;  =  — r-  in  the  direction  CA,  and 
ir  ±>r         r* 

m.CP        emza  .      .      ,.        .       ^^ 
£    2          or  in  the  direction  P£. 

The  components  in  the  direction  parallel  to  AC  are  equal  but  in 
opposite  directions.  The  resultant  force  is  therefore  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  radius,  which  confirms  what  we  have  already  proved, 
that  the  sphere  is  an  equipotential  surface  to  which  the  resultant 
force  is  everywhere  normal.  The  resultant  force  is  therefore  in  the 

direction  PC,  and  is  equal  to  -3  (m2—  1)  in  the  direction  PC,  that  is 

to  say,  towards  the  centre  of  the  sphere. 

From  this  we  may  ascertain  the  surface  density  of  the  electrifica- 
tion at  any  point  of  the  sphere,  for,  by  Coulomb's  law,  if  cr  is  the 
surface  density, 

47TO-  =  R,  where  R  is  the  resultant  force  acting  outwards. 

Hence,  as  the  resultant  force  in  this  case  acts  inwards,  the  surface 
density  is  everywhere  negative,  and  is 

1  ea  i   2     i  \ 
<T  =  —  --  —  (m2-l). 

477  r3 

Hence  the  surface  density  is  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  distance 
from  the  inducing  point  A. 

106.]  In  the  case  of  the  two  spheres  A  and  B  (Fig.  24),  whose 
radii  are  a  and  b  and  potentials  Pa  and  P6,  the  distance  between 
their  centres  being  c,  we  may  determine  the  surface  density  at  any 
point  of  the  sphere  A  by  considering  it  as  due  to  the  action  of  a 
charge  aPa  at  A,  together  with  that  due  to  the  pairs  of  points  B, 
D  and  E,  F  &c.,  the  successive  pairs  of  images. 


88  DENSITY   OF   INDUCED    CHARGE.  [106. 

Putting  r  =  PB,     T!  =  PE,     r2  =  PG,  &c., 

we  find 


«2)  1 

--  5  f  +  &c- 
c2}  J 


o  o        a 

4-Tr       L^r8  /'23(<?2—  <z2)  (^     c2  —  a2 

If  we  call  B  the  inducing'  body  and  A  the  induced  body,  then  we 
may  consider  the  electrification  induced  on  A  as  consisting  of  two 
parts,  one  depending  on  the  potential  of  B  and  the  other  on  its 
own  potential. 

The  part  depending  on  Pb  is  called  by  some  writers  on  electricity 
the  induced  electrification  of  the  first  species.  When  A  is  not  in- 
sulated it  constitutes  the  whole  electrification,  and  if  Pb  is  positive 
it  is  negative  over  every  part  of  the  surface,  but  greatest  in 
numerical  nature  at  the  point  nearest  to  B. 

The  part  depending  on  Pa  is  called  the  induced  electrification  of 
the  second  species.  It  can  only  exist  when  A  is  insulated,  and  it 
is  everywhere  of  the  same  sign  as  Pa  .  If  A  is  insulated  and  with- 
out charge,  then  the  induced  electrifications  of  the  first  and  second 
species  must  be  equal  and  opposite.  The  surface-density  is  negative 
on  the  side  next  to  B  and  positive  on  the  side  furthest  from  £,  but 
though  the  total  quantities  of  positive  and  negative  electrification 
are  equal,  the  negative  electrification  is  more  concentrated  than  the 
positive,  so  that  the  neutral  line  which  separates  the  positive  from 
the  negative  electrification  is  not  the  equator  of  the  sphere,  but  lies 
nearer  to  B. 

The  condition  that  there  shall  be  both  positive  and  negative  elec- 
trification on  the  sphere  is  that  the  value  of  or  at  the  points  nearest 
to  B  and  farthest  from  B  shall  have  opposite  signs.  If  a  and  I  are 
small  compared  with  c,  we  may  neglect  all  the  terms  of  the  co- 
efficients of  Pa  and  Pb  after  the  first.  The  values  of  r  lie  between 

c  -f  a  and  c  —  a.  Hence,  if  Pa  is  between  Pb  /  ""'j  and  Pb  ~^    ^  , 

(c  +  af  (e—a)2 

there  will  be  both  positive  and  negative  electrification  on  A,  divided 
by  a  neutral  line,  but  if  Pa  is  beyond  these  limits,  the  electrification 
of  every  part  of  the  surface  will  be  of  one  kind  ;  negative  if  Pa  is 
below  the  lower  limit,  and  positive  if  it  is  above  the  higher  limit. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


ON   ELECTROSTATIC   CAPACITY. 

107.]  THE  capacity  of  a  conductor  is  measured  by  the  charge  of 
electricity  which  will  raise  its  potential  to  the  value  unity,  the 
potential  of  all  other  conductors  in  the  field  being-  kept  at  zero. 
The  capacity  of  a  conductor  depends  not  only  on  its  own  form  and 
size,  but  on  the  form  and  position  of  the  other  conductors  in  the 
field.  The  nearer  the  uninsulated  conductors  are  placed  the  greater 
is  the  capacity  of  the  charged  conductor. 

An  apparatus  consisting  of  two  insulated  conductors,  each  pre- 
senting a  large  surface  to  the  other  with  a  small  distance  between 
them,  is  called  a  condenser -,  because  a  small  electromotive  force  is 
able  to  charge  such  an  apparatus  with  a  large  quantity  of  elec- 
tricity. 

The  simplest  form  of  condenser,  that  to  which  the  name  is  most 
commonly  applied,  consists  of  two  disks  placed  parallel  to  each 
other,  the  medium  between  them  being  air.  When  one  of  these 
disks  is  connected  to  the  zinc  and  the  other  to  the  copper  electrode 
of  a  voltaic  battery,  the  disks  become  charged  with  negative  and 
positive  electricity  respectively,  and  the  amount  of  the  charge  is 
the  greater  the  nearer  the  disks  are  placed  to  each  other,  being 
approximately  inversely  as  the  distance  between  them.  Hence  by 
bringing  the  disks  very  close  to  each  other,  connecting  them  with 
the  electrodes  of  the  battery  and  then  disconnecting  them  from  the 
battery,  we  have  two  large  charges  of  opposite  kinds  insulated  on 
the  disks.  If  we  now  remove  one  of  the  disks  from  the  other  we 
do  work  against  the  electric  attraction  which  draws  them  together, 
and  we  may  thus  increase  the  energy  of  the  system  so  much  that, 
though  the  original  electromotive  force  was  only  that  of  a  single 
voltaic  cell,  either  of  the  disks  when  separated  may  be  raised  to  so 


90  DISCHARGE    BY    ALTERNATE   CONTACTS.  [lo8. 

high  a  potential  that  the  gold  leaves  of  an  electrometer  connected 
with  it  are  deflected. 

It  was  in  this  way  that  Volta  demonstrated  that  the  electrifica- 
tion due  to  a  voltaic  cell  is  of  the  same  kind  as  that  due  to  friction, 
the  copper  electrode  being  positive  with  respect  to  the  zinc  elec- 
trode. In  this  condenser  the  capacity  of  each  disk  depends  prin- 
cipally on  the  distance  between  it  and  the  other  disk,  but  it  also 
depends  in  a  smaller  degree  on  the  nature  of  the  electric  field  at 
the  back  of  the  disk. 

There  are  other  forms  of  condensers,  however,  in  which  one  of 
the  conductors  is  almost  or  altogether  surrounded  by  the  other. 
In  this  case  the  capacity  of  the  inner  conductor  is  almost  or  alto- 
gether independent  of  everything  but  the  outer  conductor.  This  is 
the  case  in  the  Leyden  jar,  and  in  a  cable  with  a  copper  core  sur- 
rounded by  an  insulator  the  outside  of  which  is  protected  by  a 
sheathing  of  iron  wires. 

108.]  But  in  most  cases  the  charge  of  each  conductor  depends 
not  only  on  the  difference  between  its  potential  and  that  of  the 
other  conductor,  but  also  in  part  on  the  difference  between  its 
potential  and  that  of  some  other  body,  such  as  the  earth,  or  the 
walls  of  the  room  where  the  experiment  is  made.  The  charges  of 
the  two  conductors  may,  therefore,  in  the  simpler  cases  be  written 

.....................  (1) 

(2) 


where  P  and  p  are  the  potentials,  that  of  the  walls  of  the  room 
being  zero,  Q  and  q  the  charges  of  the  two  conductors  respectively, 
K  is  the  capacity  of  the  condenser  in  so  far  as  it  depends  on  the 
mutual  relation  of  the  two  conductors,  and  H  and  h  represent  those 
parts  of  the  capacity  of  each  conductor  which  depend  on  their  rela- 
tion to  external  objects,  such  as  the  walls  of  the  room. 

If  we  connect  the  second  conductor  with  the  earth  we  make  p 
zero  while  Q  remains  the  same,  and  we  get  for  the  new  values  of 
P,  Q,  and  q, 

£  =  -KP,  .......  (3) 


If  we  now  insulate  the  second  conductor  and  connect  the  first 
with  the  earth  we  make  P  zero,  and 

.......  (4) 


TIO.]  DISCHARGE   BY   ALTERNATE   CONTACTS.  91 

If  we  again  insulate  the  first  conductor  and  put  the  second  to 
earth, 


From  this  it  appears  that  if  we  connect  first  the  one  and  then 
the  other  conductor  with  the  earth  the  values  of  the  potentials  and 

K2 

charges  will  be  diminished  in  the  ratio  of  7^  -  -  n   to 

[&  +  &)(&+&) 
unity. 

Comparison  of  two  condensers. 

109.]  Let  us  suppose  the  condensers  to  be  Leyden  jars  having 
an  inner  and  an  outer  coating. 

Let  the  inner  coating  of  the  first  jar  and  the  outer  coating  of 
the  second  be  connected  with  a  source  of  electricity  and  brought  to 
the  potential  P,  while  the  outer  coating  of  the  first  and  the  inner 
coating  of  the  second  are  connected  with  the  earth. 

Then  if  Qt  and  Q2  are  the  charges  of  the  inner  coatings  of  the 
two  Jan.,  Q^^  +  ffJP,  Q2=-K,P  ...........  .....  (Z) 

Now  let  the  outer  coatings  of  both  jars  be  connected  with  the 
earth,  and  let  the  inner  coatings  be  connected  with  each  other. 
Required  the  common  potential  of  the  inner  coatings. 

Here  we  have  pf  _  ^  =  0} 


P^P^P-,     ..............................   (9) 

and  we  have  to  find  P'. 

Equation  (8)  becomes,  in  virtue  of  (9), 


If  Kl  +  ffl  =  K2  the  discharge  is  complete. 

110.]  The  following  method,  by  which  the  existence  of  a  deter- 
minate relation  between  the  capacities  of  four  condensers  may  be 
verified,  has  been  employed  by  Sir  W.  Thomson.*  It  corresponds 
in  electrostatics  to  Wheatstone's  Bridge  in  current  electricity. 

In  Fig.  2  5.  the  condensers  are  represented  as  Leyden  jars.  Two 
of  these,  P  and  Q,  are  placed  with  their  external  coatings  in  contact 
with  an  insulating  stand  /3;  the  other  two,  R  and  S,  have  their 

*  Gibson  and  Barclay. 


92 


COMPARISON   OF   TWO   CONDENSERS. 


[no. 

external  coatings  connected  to  the  earth.  The  inner  coatings  of  P 
and  R  are  permanently  connected ;  so  are  those  of  Q  and  S.  In 
performing  the  experiment  the  internal  coatings  of  P  and  R  are 
first  charged  to  a  potential,  A,  while  those  of  Q  and  S  are  charged 


Fig.  25. 

to  a  different  potential,  C.  During  this  process  the  stand  /3  is 
connected  to  the  earth.  The  stand  (3  is  then  disconnected  from  the 
earth  and  connected  to  one  electrode  of  an  electrometer,  the  other 


electrode  being  connected  to  earth.  Since  /3  is  already  reduced  to 
potential  zero  by  connection  with  the  earth,  there  will  be  no  dis- 
turbance of  the  electrometer  unless  there  is  leakage  in  some  of  the 
jars.  We  shall  assume,  however,  that  there  is  no  leakage,  and 
that  the  electrometer  remains  at  zero. 


III.]  COMPABISON   OF   TWO   CONDENSERS.  93 

The  inner  coatings  of  the  four  jars  are  now  made  to  communicate 
with  each  other  by  dropping  the  small  insulated  wire  w  so  as  to 
fall  on  the  two  hooks  connected  with  a  and  y.  Since  the  potentials 
of  a  and  y  arc  different  a  discharge  will  occur,  and  the  potential  of 
y3  will  in  general  be  affected,  and  this  will  be  indicated  by  the 
electrometer.  If,  however,  there  is  a  certain  relation  among  the 
capacities  of  the  jars  the  potential  of  /3  will  remain  zero. 

111.]  Let  us  ascertain  what  this  relation  must  be.  In  Fig.  26 
the  same  electrical  arrangement  is  represented  under  a  simpler 
form,  in  which  the  condensers  consist  each  of  a  pair  of  disks. 
Under  this  form  the  analogy  with  Wheatstone's  Bridge  becomes 
apparent  to  the  eye.  We  have  to  consider  the  potentials  and 
charges  of  four  conductors.  The  first  consists  of  the  inner  coatings 
of  P  and  R,  together  with  the  connecting  wire.  We  shall  call  this 
conductor  a,  its  charge  #,  and  its  potential  A.  The  second  consists 
of  the  outer  coatings  of  P  and  Q,  together  with  the  insulating  stand 
(3.  We  shall  call  this  conductor  /3,  its  charge  #,  and  its  potential 
B.  The  third  consists  of  the  inner  coatings  of  Q  and  S  and  the 
connecting  wire  y.  We  shall  call  this  y,  its  charge  c,  and  its 
potential  6.  The  fourth  consists  of  the  outer  coatings  of  E  and  S 
and  of  the  earth  with  which  they  are  kept  connected.  We  might 
use  the  letters  8,  dt  and  D  with  reference  to  this  conductor,  but  as 
its  potential  is  always  zero  and  its  charge  equal  and  opposite  to 
that  of  the  other  conductors  we  shall  not  require  to  consider  it. 

The  charge  of  any  one  of  the  conductors  depends  on  its  own 
potential  together  with  the  potentials  of  the  two  adjacent  con- 
ductors, and  also,  but  in  a  veiy  slight  degree,  on  that  of  the  oppo- 
site conductor. 

Let  the  coefficients  of  induction  between  the  different  pairs  of 
the  four  conductors  be  as  in  the  following  scheme, — • 


Fig.  27. 

in  which  £  and  r;  are  very  small  compared  with  P,  Q,  R,  and  S. 
The  coefficient  of  capacity  of  any  one  of  the  conductors  will  exceed 


94  COMPARISON    OF   CONDENSERS.  [ill. 

the  sum  of  its  three  coefficients  of  induction  by  a  quantity  which 
will  be  small  if  the  capacity  of  the  knobs  of  the  jars  and  their 
connecting  wires  are  small  compared  with  the  whole  capacities  of 
the  jars.  Let  us  denote  this  excess  by  the  symbols  a,  /3,  y,  8,  which 
belong  to  the  conductors.  The  capacities  therefore  will  be, 


and  the  charges  will  therefore  be, 

fora,  a  =  (P  +  R  +  a  +r?)  A  -PB-RD—r]C, 

for/3,  t>  =  (P+Q  +  p  +  £)B-PA-QC-£D, 

fory,  c  =  (Q  +  S+y+r1)C-QB-SD-vA, 

for  8,  d  =  (R  +  S  +  8  +  f)  D-RA  -SC  ~£B. 

In  the  first  part  of  the  experiment  the  potentials  of  a  and  y  are 
A  and  C  respectively,  while  those  of  ft  and  5  are  zero.  Hence,  at 
first,  a  =  (P  +  £  +  a  +  r])A-'nC, 

l>  =  -PA-QC, 


We  need  not  determine  the  charge  of  8. 

Now  let  a  communication  be  made  between  a  and  y,  and  let  us 
denote  the  charges  and  potentials  of  the  conductors  after  the  dis- 
charge by  accented  letters.  The  potentials  of  a  and  y  will  become 
equal  ;  let  us  call  their  common  potential  y,  then 

A'=C'  =  y. 
The  sum  of  their  charges  remains  the  same,  or 

a'  +  <f  =  a+c. 

The  charge  of  /3  remains  the  same  as  before,  or 

V=b, 

but  its  potential  is  no  longer  zero,  but  B\  and  we  have  to  deter- 
mine the  value  of  B'  in  terms  of  A  and  C  by  eliminating  the  other 
quantities  entering  into  the  equations. 
After  discharge, 


III.]  COMPARISON   OF   CONDENSERS.  95 

Hence,  the  equation  a'  -f  c'  =  a  -f  c  becomes 


and  I'  =  6  becomes 

(P+Q  +  p+()3'-(P+Q)y  =  -PA-QC. 
Eliminating  y  from  these  equations,  we  find 


If,  therefore,  the  electrometer  is  not  disturbed  by  the  discharge, 
=  0,  and 


CHAPTER  IX. 


THE   ELECTRIC   CURRENT. 


Fig.  28. 


112.]  LET  A  and  B  be  two  metal  bodies  connected  respectively 
with  the  inner  and   outer  coatings  of  a  Leyden  jar,  the  inner 
coating1  of  the  jar  being  positive,  so  that  the 
potential  of  A  is  higher  than  that  of  B. 

Let  C  be  a  gilt  pith  ball  suspended  by  a  silk 
thread.  If  C  is  brought  into  contact  with  A  and 
B  alternately,  it  will  receive  a  small  charge  of 
positive  electricity  from  A  every  time  it  touches 
it,  and  will  communicate  positive  electricity  to  B 
when  it  touches  B. 

There  will  thus  be  a  transference  of  positive 
electricity  from  A  to  B  along  the  path  travelled 
over  by  the  pith  ball,  and  this  is  what  occurs 
in  every  electric  current,  namely,  the  passage  of  electricity  along  a 
definite  direction.  During  the  motion  of  the  pith  ball  from  A  to 
B  it  is  charged  positively,  and  the  electric  force  between  A  and 
B  tends  to  move  it  in  the  direction  from  A  to  B.  After  touching 
B,  it  becomes  charged  negatively,  so  that  the  electric  force,  during 
its  return  journey,  acts  from  B  to  A.  Hence  the  ball  is  acted 
on  by  the  electric  force  always  in  the  direction  in  which  it  is 
moving  at  the  time,  so  that  if  it  is  properly  suspended  the  electric 
force  will  not  only  keep  up  the  backward  and  forward  motion,  but 
will  communicate  to  the  moving  ball  an  amount  of  energy  which  it 
will  expend  in  a  series  of  rattling  blows  against  the  balls  A  and  B. 
The  current  of  positive  electricity  from  A  to  B  is  thus  kept  up  by 
means  of  the  electromotive  force  from  A  to  B. 

113.]  The  phenomenon  we  have  been  describing  may  be  called 
a  current  of  Convection.     The  motion  of  the  electrification  takes 


I  1 3.]        CONVECTION   AND   CONDUCTION    CURRENTS.  97 

place  in  virtue  of  the  motion  of  the  electrified  body  which  conveys 
or  carries  the  electricity  as  it  moves  from  one  place  to  another. 
But  if,  instead  of  the  pith  ball,  we  take  a  metal  wire  carried 
by  an  insulating  handle,  and  cause  the  two  ends  of  the  wire 
to  touch  A  and  B  respectively,  there  will  be  a  transference  of 
electricity  from  A  to  B  along  the  wire,  though  the  wire  itself  does 
not  move. 

What  takes  place  in  the  wire  is  called  a  current  of  Conduction. 
The  effects  of  the  current  of  conduction  on  the  electrical  state  of 
A  and  B  are  of  precisely  the  same  kind  as  those  of  the  current  of 
convection.  In  both  cases  there  is  a  transference  of  electrification 
from  one  place  to  another  along  a  continuous  path. 

In  the  case  of  the  convection  of  the  charge  on  the  pith  ball  we 
may  observe  the  actual  motion  of  the  ball,  and  therefore  in  this 
case  we  may  distinguish  between  the  act  of  carrying  a  positive 
charge  from  A  to  B  and  that  of  carrying  a  negative  charge  from 
B  to  A,  though  the  electrical  effects  of  these  two  operations  are 
identical.  We  may  also  distinguish  between  the  act  of  carrying  a 
number  of  small  charges  from  A  to  B  in  rapid  succession  and 
with  great  velocity,  and  the  act  of  carrying  a  single  great 
charge,  equivalent  to  the  sum  of  these  charges,  slowly  from  A  to 
B  in  the  time  occupied  by  the  whole  series  of  journeys  in  the  other 
case. 

But  in  the  case  of  the  current  of  conduction  through  a  wire  we 
have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  mode  of  transference  of  the 
charge  resembles  one  of  these  methods  rather  than  another.  All 
that  we  know  is  that  a  charge  of  so  much  electricity  is  conveyed 
from  A  to  B  in  a  certain  time,  but  whether  this  is  effected  by 
carrying  positive  electricity  from  A  to  J5,  or  by  carrying  negative 
electricity  from  B  to  A,  or  by  a  combination  of  both  processes,  is  a 
question  which  we  have  no  means  of  determining.  We  are  equally 
unable  to  determine  whether  the  '  velocity  of  electricity '  in  the 
wire  is  great  or  small.  If  there  be  a  substance  pervading  bodies, 
the  motion  of  which  constitutes  an  electric  current,  then  the  excess 
of  this  substance  in  connexion  with  a  body  above  a  certain  normal 
value  constitutes  the  observed  charge  of  that  body,  and  is  a 
quantity  capable  of  measurement.  But  we  have  no  means  of 
estimating  the  normal  charge  itself.  The  only  evidence  we  possess 
is  deduced  from  experiments  on  the  quantity  of  electricity  evolved 
during  the  decomposition  of  one  grain  of  an  electrolyte,  and  this 
quantity  is  enormous  when  compared  with  any  positive  or  negative 

H 


98  MEASURE    OF   CURRENT.  [lI4- 

charge  which  we  can  accumulate  within  the  space  occupied  by  the 
electrolyte.  If,  then,  the  normal  charge  of  a  portion  of  the  wire 
the  millionth  of  an  inch  in  length  is  equal  to  the  total  charge 
transferred  from  A  to  B,  the  transference  may  be  effected  by  the 
displacement  of  the  electricity  in  the  wire  whose  linear  extent  is 
only  the  millionth  of  an  inch. 

It  is  therefore  quite  possible  that  the  velocity  of  electricity  in  a 
telegraph  wire  may  be  exceedingly  small,  less,  say,  than  the 
hundredth  of  an  inch  in  an  hour,  though  signals,  that  is  to  say, 
changes  in  the  state  of  the  current,  may  be  propagated  along  the 
wire  many  thousands  of  miles  in  a  second. 

Since,  therefore,  we  are  ignorant  of  the  true  linear  velocity  of  an 
electric  current,  we  must  measure  the  strength  of  the  current  by  the 
quantity  of  electricity  discharged  through  any  section  of  the  con- 
ductor in  the  unit  of  time,  just  as  engineers  measure  the  discharge 
of  water  and  gas  through  pipes,  not  by  the  velocity  of  the  water  or 
gas,  but  by  the  quantity  which  passes  in  a  minute. 

114.]  In  many  cases  we  have  to  consider  the  whole  quantity  of 
electricity  which  passes  rather  than  the  rate  at  which  it  passes. 
This  is  especially  the  case  when  the  current  lasts  only  a  very  short 
time,  or  when  the  current  is  considered  merely  as  the  transition 
from  one  permanent  state  of  the  system  to  another.  In  these  cases 
it  is  convenient  to  speak  of  the  total  current  as  the  Electric 
Displacement,  the  word  displacement  indicating  the  final  result 
of  a  motion  without  reference  to  the  rate  at  which  it  takes  place. 
The  passage  of  a  given  quantity  of  electricity  along  a  given  path  is 
called  an  Electric  Discharge. 

Classification  of  bodies  according  to  their  relation  to  the 
transference  of  electricity. 

115.]  For  the  sake  of  distinction  we  shall  consider  a  portion  of 
matter  whose  ends  are  formed  by  two  equipotential  surfaces  having 
different  potentials,  and  whose  sides  are  formed  by  lines  of  electric 
current  or  displacement. 

The  ends  of  the  body  are  called  its  Electrodes,  that  at  which 
electricity  enters  is  called  the  Anode,  and  that  at  which  it  leaves 
the  body  is  called  the  Cathode. 

The  excess  of  the  potential  of  the  anode  over  that  of  the  cathode 
is  called  the  External  Electromotive  Force. 

The  fo^m  of  the  body  may  vary  from  that  of  a  long  wire  sur- 


IT;.]  OHM'S  LAW.  99 

rounded  by  air  or  other  insulating  matter  to  that  of  a  thin  sheet  of 
the  substance,  the  electricity  passing  through  the  thickness  of  the 
sheet. 

Bodies  may  be  divided  into  three  great  classes  according  to  the 
mode  in  which  they  are  acted  on  by  electromotive  force, — Metals, 
Electrolytes,  and  Dielectrics, 

FIRST  CLASS. — METALS,  &c. 

116.]  The  first  class  includes  all  the  metals,  whether  in  the  solid 
or  liquid  state,  together  with  some  other  substances  not  regarded 
by  chemists  as  metals.  In  these  the  smallest  external  electromotive 
force  is  capable  of  producing  an  electric  current,  and  this  current 
continues  to  flow  as  long  as  the  electromotive  force  continues  to 
act,  without  producing  any  change  in  the  chemical  properties  of  the 
substance.  The  strength  of  the  permanent  current  is  proportional 
to  the  electromotive  force.  The  ratio  of  the  numerical  value  of  the 
electromotive  force  to  that  of  the  current  is  called  the  Resistance 
of  the  conductor.  The  same  thing  may  be  otherwise  stated  by 
saying  that  the  flow  of  the  current  is  opposed  by  an  internal 
electromotive  force,  proportional  to  the  strength  of  the  current, 
and  to  a  quantity  called  the  Resistance  of  the  conductor,  depending 
on  its  form  and  nature.  When  the  strength  of  the  current  is  such 
that  this  internal  electromotive  force  balances  the  external  electro- 
motive force  the  current  neither  increases  nor  diminishes  in  strength. 
It  is  then  said  to  be  a  steady  current. 

These  relations  were  first  established  by  Dr.  G.  S.  Ohm,  in  a 
work  published  in  1827.  They  are  expressed  by  the  formula, 

Electromotive  force  =  Current  x  Resistance, 
which  is  called  Ohm's  Law. 

Generation  of  Heat  ly  the  current. 

117.]  During  the  flow  of  a  steady  current  through  a  conductor 
of  uniform  material  of  the  first  class  heat  is  generated  in  the 
conductor,  but  the  substance  of  the  conductor  will  not  be  affected 
in  any  way,  for  if  the  heat  is  allowed  to  escape  as  fast  as  it  is 
generated,  the  temperature  and  every  other  physical  condition  of 
the  conductor  remains  the  same. 

The  whole  work  done  by  the  external  electromotive  force  in 
urging  electricity  through  the  body  is  therefore  spent  in  generating 

H  3 


100  JOULE'S  LAW.  [118. 

heat.  The  dynamical  equivalent  of  the  heat  generated  is  therefore 
equal  to  the  electrical  work  spent,  that  is,  to  the  product  of  the 
electromotive  force  into  the  quantity  of  electricity  transmitted  by 
the  current. 

Now,  the  electromotive  force  is,  by  Ohm's  law,  the  product  of 
the  strength  of  the  current  into  the  resistance,  and  the  quantity 
of  electricity  is,  by  the  definition  of  a  current,  the  product  of  the 
current  into  the  time  during  which  it  flows,  so  that  we  find, 
Heat  generated  measured  in  dynamical  units 

=  Square  of  Current  x  Resistance  x  Time. 

This  relation  was  first  established  by  Dr.  Joule,  and  is  therefore 
called  Joule's  law.  It  was  also  established  independently  by  Lenz. 

SECOND  CLASS. — ELECTROLYTES. 

118.]  The  second  class  of  substances  consists  of  compound  bodies, 
generally  in  the  liquid  form,  called  Electrolytes. 

When  an  electric  current  passes  through  fused  chloride  of  silver, 
which  is  an  electrolyte,  chlorine  appears  at  the  anode  where  the 
current  enters,  and  silver  at  the  cathode  where  the  current  leaves 
the  electrolyte.  The  quantities  of  these  two  substances  are  such 
that  if  combined  they  would  form  chloride  of  silver.  The  com- 
position of  those  portions  of  the  electrolyte  which  lie  between  the 
electrodes  remains  unaltered.  Hence,  if  we  fix  our  attention  upon 
a  portion  of  the  electrolyte  between  two  fixed  planes  perpendicular 
to  the  direction  of  the  current,  the  quantity  of  silver  or  of  chlorine 
which  enters  the  portion  through  one  plane  must  be  equal  to  the 
quantity  which  leaves  it  through  the  other  plane.  It  follows  from 
this  that  in  every  part  of  the  electrolyte  the  silver  is  moving  in  the 
direction  of  the  current,  and  the  chlorine  in  the  opposite  direction. 

This  operation,  in  which  a  compound  body  is  decomposed  by  an 
electric  current,  is  called  Electrolysis,  and  the  mode  in  which  the 
current  is  transmitted  is  called  Electrolytic  Conduction.  The 
compound  body  is  called  an  Electrolyte,  and  the  components  into 
which  it  is  separated  are  called  Ions.  That  which  appears  at  the 
anode  is  called  the  Anion,  and  that  which  appears  at  the  cathode  is 
called  the  Cation. 

The  quantity  of  the  substance  which  is  decomposed  is  propor- 
tional to  the  total  quantity  of  electricity  which  passes  through  it, 
and  is  independent  of  the  time  during  which  the  electricity  is 
passing,  The  quantity  corresponding  to  the  passage  of  one  unit 


i      rf    *       .*  •* 

1 20.]          FARADAY'S  LAWS  or  ELECTROLYSIS.  101 


of  electricity  is  called  the  Electrochemical  Equivalent  of  the'  sub- 
stance. Thus,  when  one  unit  of  electricity  is  passed  through  fused 
chloride  of  silver,  one  electrochemical  equivalent  of  silver  appears 
at  the  cathode  and  one  electrochemical  equivalent  of  chlorine  at 
the  anode,  and  one  electrochemical  equivalent  of  chloride  of  silver 
disappears. 

119.]  The  electrochemical  equivalents  of  the  same  substance,  as 
deduced  from  experiments  on  different  electrolytes  which  contain 
it,  are  consistent  with  each  other.  Thus  the  electrochemical 
equivalent  of  chlorine  is  the  same,  whether  we  deduce  it  from 
experiments  on  chloride  of  silver,  or  from  experiments  on  hydro- 
chloric acid,  and  that  of  silver  is  the  same,  whether  we  deduce 
it  from  experiments  on  chloride  of  silver,  or  from  experiments  on 
nitrate  of  silver.  These  laws  of  electrolysis  were  established  by 
Faraday.*  If  they  are  strictly  true  the  conduction  of  electricity 
through  an  electrolyte  is  always  electrolytic  conduction,  that  is  to 
say,  the  electric  current  is  always  associated  with  a  flow  of  the 
components  of  the  electrolyte  in  opposite  directions. 

Such  a  flow  of  the  components  necessarily  involves  their  appear- 
ance in  a  separate  form  at  the  anode  and  the  cathode.  To  effect 
this  separation  a  certain  electromotive  force  is  required  depending 
on  the  energy  of  combination  of  the  electrolyte.  Thus  the  electro- 
motive force  of  one  of  Daniell's  cells  is  not  sufficient  to  decompose 
dilute  sulphuric  acid. 

If,  therefore,  an  electrolytic  cell,  consisting  of  a  vessel  of 
acidulated  water,  in  which  two  platinum  plates  are  placed  as 
electrodes,  is  inserted  in  the  circuit  of  a  single  Daniell's  cell,  along 
with  a  galvanometer  to  measure  the  current,  it  will  be  found  that 
though  there  is  a  transient  current  at  the  instant  the  circuit  is 
closed,  this  current  rapidly  diminishes  in  intensity,  so  as  to  become 
in  a  very  short  time  too  weak  to  be  measured  except  by  a  very 
sensitive  galvanometer. 

Neither  oxygen  nor  hydrogen,  the  chemical  components  of  water, 
appear  in  a  gaseous  form  at  the  electrodes,  but  the  electrodes  them- 
selves acquire  new  properties,  showing  that  a  chemical  action  has 
taken  place  at  the  surface  of  the  platinum  plates. 

120.]  If  the  Daniell's  cell  is  taken  out  of  the  circuit,  and  the 
circuit  again  closed,  the  galvanometer  indicates  a  current  passing 
through  the  electrolytic  cell  in  the  opposite  direction  to  the  original 

*  Exp.  Res.,  series  vii  and  viii. 


102"  \»a    ELECTROLYTIC   POLARIZATION.  [l2I. 

current.  This  current  rapidly  diminishes  in  strength  and  soon 
vanishes,  so  that  the  whole  quantity  of  electricity  which  is  trans- 
mitted by  it  is  never  greater  than  that  of  the  primitive  current. 
This  reverse  current  indicates  that  the  platinum  plates  have  ac- 
quired a  difference  of  properties  by  being  used  as  electrodes.  They 
are  said  to  be  polarized.  The  cathode  is  polarized  positively  and 
the  anode  negatively,  so  that  an  electromotive  force  is  exerted  in 
the  circuit  opposite  to  that  of  the  Daniell's  cell.  This  electromotive 
force,  which  is  called  the  electromotive  force  of  polarization,  is  the 
cause  of  the  rapid  diminution  in  the  strength  of  the  original  current, 
and  of  its  final  cessation. 

A  chemical  examination  of  the  platinum  plates  shows  that  a 
certain  quantity  of  hydrogen  has  been  deposited  on  the  cathode. 
This  hydrogen  is  not  in  the  ordinary  gaseous  form,  but  adheres  to 
the  surface  of  the  platinum  so  firmly  that  it  is  not  easy  to  remove 
the  last  traces  of  it. 

121.]  Faraday's  law  that  conduction  takes  place  in  electrolytes 
only  by  electrolysis  was  long  supposed  not  to  be  strictly  true. 
In  the  experiment  in  which  a  single  Daniell's  cell  furnishes  the 
electromotive  force  in  a  circuit  containing  an  electrolyte  and  a 
galvanometer,  it  is  found  that  the  current  soon  becomes  very  feeble 
but  never  entirely  vanishes,  so  that  if  the  electromotive  force  is 
maintained  long  enough,  a  very  considerable  quantity  of  electricity 
may  be  passed  through  the  electrolyte  without  any  visible  de- 
composition. 

Hence  it  was  argued  that  electrolytes  conduct  electricity  in  two 
different  ways,  by  electrolysis  in  a  very  conspicuous  manner  and 
also,  but  in  a  very  slight  degree,  in  the  manner  of  metals,  without 
decomposition.  But  Helmholtz  has  recently*  shown  that  the  feeble 
permanent  current  can  be  explained  in  a  different  manner,  and  that 
we  have  no  evidence  that  an  electrolyte  can  conduct  electricity 
without  electrolysis. 

122.]  In  the  case  of  platinum  plates  immersed  in  dilute  sulphuric 
acid,  if  the  liquid  is  carefully  freed  from  all  trace  of  oxygen  or 
of  hydrogen  in  solution,  and  if  the  surfaces  of  the  platinum  plates 
are  also  freed  from  adhering  oxygen  or  hydrogen,  the  current  con- 
tinues only  till  the  platinum  plates  have  become  polarized  and  no 
permanent  current  can  be  detected,  even  by  means  of  a  sensitive 
galvanometer.  When  the  experiment  is  made  without  these  pre- 

*  TJeber  galvanische  Polarisation  in  gusfreien  Flussigkeiten.  Monatsbericht  d.  K. 
Ahad.  d.  Berlin,  July  1873,  p.  587. 


1 2  3.]  ELECTROLYTIC    CONVECTION.  103 

cautions,  there  is  generally  a  certain  amount  of  oxygen  or  of  hydrogen 
in  solution  in  the  liquid,  and  this,  when  it  comes  in  contact  with 
the  hydrogen  or  the  oxygen  adhering  to  the  platinum  surface, 
combines  slowly  with  it,  as  even  the  free  gases  do  in  presence 
of  platinum.  The  polarization  is  thus  diminished,  and  the  electro- 
motive force  is  consequently  enabled  to  keep  up  a  permanent 
current,  by  what  Helmholtz  has  called  electrolytic  convection. 
Besides  this,  it  is  probable  that  the  molecular  motion  of  the  liquid 
may  be  able  occasionally  to  dislodge  molecules  of  oxygen  or  of 
hydrogen  adhering  to  the  platinum  plates.  These  molecules  when 
thus  absorbed  into  the  liquid  will  travel  according  to  the  ordinary 
laws  of  diffusion,  for  it  is  only  when  in  chemical  combination  that 
their  motions  are  governed  by  the  electromotive  force.  They  will 
therefore  tend  to  diffuse  themselves  uniformly  through  the  liquid, 
and  will  thus  in  time  reach  the  opposite  electrode,  where,  in  contact 
with  a  platinum  surface,  they  combine  with  and  neutralize  part  of 
the  other  constituent  adhering  to  that  surface.  In  this  way  a 
constant  circulation  is  kept  up,  each  of  the  constituents  travelling 
in  one  direction  by  electrolysis,  and  back  again  by  diffusion,  so  that 
a  permanent  current  may  exist  without  any  visible  accumulation 
of  the  products  of  decomposition.  We  may  therefore  conclude  that 
the  supposed  inaccuracy  of  Faraday's  law  has  not  yet  been  confirmed 
by  experiment. 

123.]  The  verification  of  Ohm's  law  as  applied  to  electrolytic 
conduction  is  attended  with  considerable  difficulty,  because  the 
varying  polarization  of  the  electrodes  introduces  a  variable  electro- 
motive force,  and  renders  it  difficult  to  ascertain  the  true  electro- 
motive force  at  any  instant.  By  using  electrodes  in  the  form  of 
plates,  having  an  area  large  compared  with  the  section  of  the 
electrolyte,  and  employing  currents  alternately  in  opposite  direc- 
tions, the  effect  of  polarization  may  be  diminished  relatively  to 
that  of  true  resistance.  It  appears  from  experiments  conducted 
in  this  way  that  Ohm's  law  is  true  for  electrolytes  as  well  as 
for  metals,  that  is  to  say,  that  the  current  is  always  proportional 
to  the  electromotive  force,  whatever  be  the  amount  of  that  force. 
The  reason  that  the  external  resistance  of  an  electrolyte  appears 
greater  for  small  than  for  large  electromotive  forces  is  that  the 
external  electromotive  force  between  the  metallic  electrodes  is  not 
the  true  electromotive  force  acting  on  the  electrolyte.  There  is, 
in  general,  a  force  of  polarization  acting  in  the  opposite  direction 
to  the  external  electromotive  force,  and  it  is  only  the  excess  of 


104  CLAUSIUS'    THEORY    OF  [124. 

the  external  force  above  the  force  of  polarization  that  really  acts  on 
the  electrolyte. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  very  smallest  electromotive  force, 
if  it  really  acts  on  the  electrolyte,  is  able  to  produce  conduction  by 
electrolysis.  How,  then,  is  this  to  be  reconciled  with  the  fact  that 
in  order  to  produce  complete  decomposition  a  very  considerable 
electromotive  force  is  required  ? 

124.]  Clausius*  has  pointed  out  that  on  the  old  theory  of 
electrolysis,  according  to  which  the  electromotive  force  was  sup- 
posed  to  be  the  sole  agent  in  tearing  asunder  the  components 
of  the  molecules  of  the  electrolyte,  there  ought  to  be  no  decom- 
position and  no  current  as  long  as  the  electromotive  force  is 
below  a  certain  value,  but  that  as  soon  as  it  has  reached  this 
value  a  vigorous  decomposition  ought  to  commence,  accompanied 
by  a  strong  current.  This,  however,  is  by  no  means  the  case, 
for  the  current  is  strictly  proportional  to  the  electromotive  force  for 
all  values  of  that  force. 

Clausius  explains  this  in  the  following  way : — 

According  to  the  theory  of  molecular  motion  of  which  he  has 
himself  been  the  chief  founder,  every  molecule  of  the  fluid  is 
moving  in  an  exceedingly  irregular  manner,  being  driven  first 
one  way  and  then  another  by  the  impacts  of  other  molecules  which 
are  also  in  a  state  of  agitation. 

This  molecular  agitation  goes  on  at  all  times  independently  of 
the  action  of  electromotive  force.  The  diffusion  of  one  fluid  through 
another  is  brought  about  by  this  molecular  agitation,  which  in- 
creases in  velocity  as  the  temperature  rises.  The  agitation  being 
exceedingly  irregular,  the  encounters  of  the  molecules  take  place 
with  various  degrees  of  violence,  and  it  is  probable  that  even  at 
low  temperature  some  of  the  encounters  are  so  violent  that  one 
or  both  of  the  compound  molecules  are  split  up  into  their  con- 
stituents. Each  of  these  constituent  molecules  then  knocks  about 
among  the  rest  till  it  meets  with  another  molecule  of  the  opposite 
kind  and  unites  witn  it  to  form  a  new  molecule  of  the  compound. 
In  every  compound,  therefore,  a  certain  proportion  of  the  mole- 
cules at  any  instant  are  broken  up  into  their  constituent  atoms. 
At  high  temperatures  the  proportion  becomes  so  large  as  to 
produce  the  phenomenon  of  dissociation  studied  by  M.  St.  Claire 
Deville.f 

*  Pogg.  Am.  CI.  338  (1857). 

t  [Lemons  su  la  Dissociation,  professees  devant  la  Societe  Chitnique.  L.  Hachette 
et  Cie.  1866.] 


126.]  ELECTROLYSIS.  105 

125.]  Now  Clausius  supposes  that  it  is  on  the  constituent  mole- 
cules in  their  intervals  of  freedom  that  the  electromotive  force  acts, 
deflecting-  them  slightly  from  the  paths  they  would  otherwise  have 
followed,  and  causing  the  positive  constituents  to  travel,  on  the 
whole,  more  in  the  positive  than  in  the  negative  direction,  and 
the  negative  constituents  more  in  the  negative  direction  than  in 
the  positive.  The  electromotive  force,  therefore,  does  not  produce 
the  disruptions  and  reunions  of  the  molecules,  but  finding  these 
disruptions  and  reunions  already  going  on,  it  influences  the  motion 
of  the  constituents  during  their  intervals  of  freedom.  The  amount 
of  this  influence  is  proportional  to  the  electromotive  force  when  the 
temperature  is  given.  The  higher  the  temperature,  however,  the 
greater  the  molecular  agitation,  and  the  more  numerous  are  the  free 
constituents.  Hence  the  conductivity  of  electrolytes  increases  as 
the  temperature  rises. 

This  effect  of  temperature  is  the  opposite  of  that  which  takes 
place  in  metals,  the  resistance  of  which  increases  as  the  temperature 
rises.  This  difference  of  the  effect  of  temperature  is  sometimes 
used  as  a  test  whether  a  conductor  is  of  the  metallic  or  the 
electrolytic  kind.  The  best  test,  however,  is  the  existence  of 
polarization,  for  even  when  the  quantity  of  the  free  ions  is  too 
small  to  be  observed  or  measured,  their  presence  may  be  indicated 
by  the  electromotive  force  which  they  excite. 

126.]  Kohlrausch*  finds  that  if  the  electromotive  force  is  one 
volt  per  centimetre  in  length  of  the  electrolyte,  then  if  the  electro- 
lyte differs  but  slightly  from  pure  water  at  1 8°  C  the  velocity  of 
hydrogen  is  about  0-0029  centimetres  per  second,  and  that  the 
actual  force  on  a  gramme  of  hydrogen  in  the  solution  required 
to  make  it  move  at  the  rate  of  one  centimetre  per  second 
through  the  solution  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  330,000,000  kilo- 
grammes. 

The  velocities  of  the  components  of  unibasic  acids  and  their  salts 
were  found  by  Kohlrausch  to  be  in  the  following  proportion  : — 

TABLE  I. 

H          K          NH4          Na          Li          |Ba          £  Sr          jCa          |  Mg 

273         48  46  30          19  31  28  24  21 

I  Br  Cl  F  N03          CIO,       C2H,0Z 

55  53  50          29  47  36  22 


*  Gottingen  Nachrichten,  5  Aug.,  1874,  17  May,  1876,  and  4  April,  1877. 


106  WATER   NOT   AN   ELECTROLYTE.  [127. 

127.]  The  specific  molecular  conductivity  (/)  of  an  electrolyte 
is  the  sum  of  the  velocities  of  its  components*,  and  the  actual 
conductivity  of  any  weak  solution  is  found  by  multiplying  the 
number  I  by  the  number  of  grammes  of  the  substance  in  a  litre 
and  dividing  by  the  molecular  weight  of  the  substance,  that  of 
hydrogen  being  1. 

128.]  We  have  reason  to  believe  that  water  is  not  an  electrolyte, 
and  that  it  is  not  a  conductor  of  the  electric  current.  It  is 
exceedingly  difficult  to  obtain  water  free  from  foreign  matter. 
Kohlrauschf,  however,  has  obtained  water  so  pure  that  its  resistance 
was  enormous  compared  with  ordinary  distilled  water.  When 
exposed  to  the  air  for  [4-3  hours  its  conductivity  rose  70  per  cent.], 
and  [in  1060  hours  it  was  increased  nearly  forty  fold.  After  long 
exposure  to  the  air  the  conductivity  was  more  than  doubled  in  4-5 
hours  by  the  action  of  tobacco  smoke.]  Water  kept  in  glass  vessels 
very  soon  dissolves  enough  of  foreign  matter  to  enable  it  to  con- 
duct freely. 

Kohlrausch  J  has  determined  the  resistance  of  water  containing  a 
very  small  percentage  of  different  electrolytes,  and  he  finds  that 
the  results  agree  very  well  with  the  hypothesis  that  the  velocity 
with  winch  each  ion  travels  through  the  liquid  is  proportional 
to  the  electromotive  force,  the  velocity  corresponding  to  unit  of 
electromotive  force  being  different  for  different  ions,  but  the  same 
for  the  same  ion,  whatever  the  other  ion  may  be  with  which  it  is 
combined.  The  velocities  of  different  ions  in  centimetres  per 
second,  corresponding  to  an  electromotive  force  of  one  volt,  are 
given  in  Table  II. 

TABLE  II. 

H     K     NH4    Na     Li     Ba     Sr     Ca     Mg 
•0029  -00051  -00049  -00032  -00020  -00033  -00030  -00025  -00022 

I     Br     Cl     F    N203   C12O3  C2H302 
-00058  -00056  -00053  -00031  -00050  -00038  -00023        J 

When  the  water  contains  a  large  percentage  of  foreign  matter 
the  velocities  of  the  ions  are  no  longer  the  same,  as  it  is  no  longer 
through  water,  but  through  a  liquid  of  quite  different  physical 
properties  that  they  have  to  make  their  way.  It  appears  from 

*  [Compare  Cavendish  Papers,  pp.  446,  447.] 
+  [Poggendor/,  Ergdnzungsband,  VIII  (1876),  pp.  7,  9,  11.] 

J  [Pogg.  Ann.  Vol.  CLIV  (1875),  p.  215  ;  Vol.  CLIX  (1876),  p.  242;  Phil.  Mag. 
June  1875.] 


50.] 


PROPERTIES  OF  DIELECTRICS. 


107 


Table  III  *  that  though  for  small  percentages  of  sulphuric  acid  in 
water  the  conducting  power  is  proportional  to  the  percentage  of 
acid,  yet  as  the  proportion  of  acid  increases  the  conducting  power 
increases  more  slowly  till  a  maximum  conducting  power  is  reached, 
after  which  the  addition  of  acid  diminishes  the  conducting  power  f. 


r                                   TABLE  III.                                   -, 

Conductivity  of  Sulphuric  Acid  at  IS°C  referred  to  that 

of  Mercury  at  Q°C  as  unity. 

Percentage  of 
H2SO4 

10*K 

Percentage  of 
H2S04 

10'K 

Percentage  of 
H2S04 

10?K 

1 

429 

60 

3487 

87 

944 

2-5 

1020 

65 

2722 

88 

965 

5 

1952 

70 

2016 

89 

986 

10 

3665 

75 

1421 

90 

1005 

15 

5034 

78 

1158 

91 

1022 

20 

6108 

80 

1032 

92 

1030 

25 

6710 

81 

985 

93 

1024 

30 

6912 

82 

947 

94 

1001 

35 

6776 

83 

924 

95 

958 

40 

6361 

84 

915 

96 

885 

45 

5766 

85 

916 

97 

750 

50 

5055 

86 

926 

99-4 

80 

L           55 

4280 

129.]  The  oxygen  and  hydrogen  which  are  given  off  at  the 
electrodes  in  so  many  experiments  on  water  containing  foreign 
ingredients  are,  therefore,  not  the  ions  of  water  separated  by  strict 
electrolysis,  but  secondary  products  of  the  electrolysis  of  the  matter 
in  solution.  Thus,  if  the  cation  is  a  metal  which  decomposes  water, 
it  unites  with  an  equivalent  of  oxygen  and  allows  the  two  equiva- 
lents of  hydrogen  to  escape  in  the  form  of  gas.  The  anion  may 
be  a  [compound  radicle]  which  cannot  exist  in  a  separate  state, 
[but  which  exists  in  the  nascent  condition,  and]  contains  one  equi- 
valent [or  more]  of  [some  electronegative  element  which  reacts 
upon  water  and  liberates  oxygen.] 

THIBD  CLASS. — DIELECTRICS. 

130.]  The  third  class  of  bodies  has  an  electric  resistance  so  much 
greater  than  that  of  metals,  or  even  of  electrolytes,  that  they  are 
often  called  insulators  of  electricity.  All  the  gases,  many  liquids, 
which  are  not  electrolytes,  such  as  spirit  of  turpentine,  naptha,  &c., 
and  many  solid  bodies,  such  as  gutta-percha,  caoutchouc  in  its 
various  forms,  amber  and  resins,  crystallized  electrolytes,  glass 
when  cold,  &c.,  are  insulators. 

*  [See  also  p.  201.] 

f  [A  similar  result  was  found  with  nitric  acid  and  some  viscous  saline  solutions.] 


108  SPECIFIC   INDUCTIVE   CAPACITY.  [131. 

They  are  called  insulators  because  they  do  not  allow  a  current 
of  electricity  to  pass  through  them.  They  are  called  dielectrics 
because  certain  electrical  actions  can  be  transmitted  through  them. 
According  to  the  theory  adopted  in  this  book,  when  an  electro- 
motive force  acts  on  a  dielectric  it  causes  the  electricity  to  be 
displaced  within  it  in  the  direction  of  the  electromotive  force,  the 
amount  of  the  displacement  being  proportional  to  the  electromotive 
force,  but  depending  also  on  the  nature  of  the  dielectric,  the  dis- 
placement due  to  equal  electromotive  forces  being  greater  in  solid 
and  liquid  dielectrics  than  in  air  or  other  gases. 

When  the  electromotive  force  is  increasing,  the  increase  of 
electric  displacement  is  equivalent  to  an  electric  current  in  the 
same  direction  as  the  electromotive  force.  When  the  electromotive 
force  is  constant  there  is  still  displacement,  but  no  current.  When 
the  electromotive  force  is  diminishing,  the  diminution  of  the  electric 
displacement  is  equivalent  to  a  current  in  the  opposite  direction. 

131.]  In  a  dielectric,  electric  displacement  calls  into  action  an 
internal  electromotive  force  in  a  direction  opposite  to  that  of  the 
displacement,  and  tending  to  reduce  the  displacement  to  zero. 
The  seat  of  this  internal  force  is  in  every  part  of  the  dielectric 
where  displacement  exists. 

To  produce  electric  displacement  in  a  dielectric  requires  an 
expenditure  of  work  measured  by  half  the  product  of  the  electro- 
motive force  into  the  electric  displacement.  This  work  is  stored 
up  as  energy  within  the  dielectric,  and  is  the  source  of  the 
energy  of  an  electrified  system  which  renders  it  capable  of  doing 
mechanical  work. 

The  amount  of  displacement  produced  by  a  given  electromotive 
force  is  different  in  different  dielectrics.  The  ratio  of  the  displace- 
ment in  any  dielectric  to  the  displacement  in  a  vacuum  due  to  the 
same  electromotive  force  is  called  the  Specific  Inductive  Capacity 
of  the  dielectric,  or  more  briefly,  the  Dielectric  Constant.  This 
quantity  is  greater  in  dense  bodies  than  in  a  so-called  vacuum,  and 
is  approximately  equal  to  the  square  of  the  index  of  refraction. 
Thus  Dr.  L.  Boltzmann*  finds  for  various  substances, 

Index  of 

D.  VD.  refraction. 

Sulphur  (cast)  3-84  1-960  2-040 

Colophonium  2-55  1-597  1-543 

Paraffin  2-32  1-523  1-536 

Ebonite  (Hartgummi)     3-15  1-775 

*  [Pogg.  Ann.  CLI.  (1874),  p.  482.] 


1 3 3.]  PROPERTIES    OF    A    DIELECTRIC.  109 

For  a  sphere  cut  from  a  crystal  of  sulphur  Boltzmann  finds  D 
by  electrical  experiments  for  the  three  principal  axes,  and  compares 
them  with  the  results  as  calculated  from  the  three  indices  of 
refraction. 

By  electrical  experiments     D,  =  4-773          D2  =  3-970          D3  =  3-811 
By  optical  measurements     Dx  =  4-596          D2  =  3-886          D,  =  3-591 

{Sitzungsb.  (Vienna),  9  Jan.,  1873.} 

132.]  Schiller  (Pogg.  Ann.  CLII.  535)  ascertained  the  time  of 
the  electrical  vibrations  when  a  condenser  is  discharged  through  an 
electromagnet.  He  finds  in  this  way  the  following  values  of  the 
dielectric  coefficients  of  various  substances,  and  compares  them  with 
those  found  by  Siemens  by  the  method  of  a  rapid  pommutator. 

Schiller.  Siemens.  /*2.  ft. 

Ebonite  (Hartgummi)  2-21  2-76 

Pure  rubber  2-12  2-34  2-25  1-50 

Vulcanized  grey,  do.  2-69  2-94 

Paraffin,  quick  cooled,  clear  1-68 

„        slow  cooled,  milk  white  1-81  1-92  2-19  1-48 

„        another  specimen  1-89  2-47  2-34  1-53 

Straw  coloured  glass  2-96  442 

„  „  3-66 

White  mirror  glass  5-83  6-34 

P.  Silow  {Pogg.  Ann.  CLVI  (1875),  [p.  395]}*  finds  for  oil  of 
turpentine 

D  =  2-21  VD  =  1-490  /ZQO  =  1-456. 

Faraday  did  not  succeed  in  detecting  any  difference  in  the 
dielectric  constants  of  different  gases.  Dr.  Boltzmann  f  however 
has  succeeded  by  a  very  ingenious  method  in  determining  it  for 
various  gases  at  0°C,  and  at  one  atmosphere  pressure. 

I>.  VIX  //. 

Air  L000590  1-000295  1-000294 

Carbonic  Acid  1-000946  1-000473  1-000449 

Hydrogen  1-000264  1-000132  1-000138 

Carbonic  Oxide  1-000690  1-000345  1-000340 

Nitrous  Oxide  1-000994  1-000497  1-000503 

OlefiantGas  1-001312  1-000656  1-000678 

Marsh  Gas  1-000944  1-000472  1-000443 


DISRUPTIVE  DISCHARGE. 

133.]  If  the  electromotive  force  acting  at  any  point  of  a  dielectric 
is  gradually  increased,  a  limit  is  at  length  reached  at  which  there 

*  [See  also  CLVIII.  (1876),  pp.  306  et  soa.] 
t  [Pogg.  Ann.  CLI.  (1875),  p.  403.] 


110  MECHANICAL   ILLUSTRATIONS    OF  [134. 

is  a  sudden  electrical  discharge  through  the  dielectric,  generally 
accompanied  with  light  and  sound.  The  dielectric,  if  solid,  is  often 
pierced,  cracked,  or  broken,  and  portions  of  it  are  often  dispersed  in 
the  form  of  vapour.  This  phenomenon  appears  to  be  analogous 
to  the  rupture  of  a  solid  body  when  exposed  to  a  continually 
increasing  stress.  This  analogy  is  so  complete  that  we  may  make 
use  of  the  same  terms  in  describing  the  behaviour  of  media  under 
the  action  of  electromotive  force  as  we  apply  to  bodies  under  the 
action  of  stress.  Thus  electromotive  force  and  electric  displacement 
correspond  to  ordinary  force  and  ordinary  displacement ;  the  electro- 
motive force  which  produces  disruptive  discharge  corresponds  to 
the  breaking  stress.  Conduction,  or  the  transmission  of  electricity, 
corresponds  to  permanent  bending. 

Thus  if  we  consider  the  twisting  of  a  wire  on  the  one  hand,  and 
the  transmission  of  electricity  through  a  body  on  the  other,  the 
moment  of  the  couple  which  twists  the  wire  will  correspond  to 
the  electromotive  force  acting  on  the  body,  and  the  angle  through 
which  the  wire  is  twisted  will  correspond  to  the  electric  displace- 
ment. If  the  wire,  when  the  force  is  removed,  returns  to  its 
former  shape  and  becomes  completely  untwisted  it  is  said  to  be 
elastic.  Such  a  wire  corresponds  to  a  dielectric  which  acts  as  a 
perfect  insulator  with  respect  to  the  electromotive  force  employed. 
If  the  twisting  couple  is  increased  up  to  a  certain  limit  the  wire 
gives  way  and  is  broken.  This  corresponds  to  disruptive  discharge, 
and  the  ultimate  strength  of  the  wire  corresponds  to  the  greatest 
electromotive  force  which  the  dielectric  can  support,  which  we  may 
call  its  electric  strength. 

If  before  rupture  takes  place  the  wire  yields  so  that  it  will  no 
longer  completely  untwist  itself  when  the  force  is  removed  it  is 
said  to  be  plastic.  It  corresponds  to  a  dielectric  which  conducts 
electricity  to  a  certain  extent. 

If  no  such  permanent  twist  can  be  given  to  the  wire  by  a  force 
which  is  not  sufficient  to  break  it,  the  wire  is  called  brittle.  In 
like  manner  we  may  speak  of  those  dielectrics  such  as  air,  which 
will  not  transmit  electricity  except  by  the  disruptive  discharge,  as 
electrically  brittle. 

134.]  Many  wires  after  being  kept  twisted  for  some  time  and 
then  set  free  immediately  untwist  themselves,  but  through  a  smaller 
angle  than  they  were  twisted.  In  the  course  of  time,  however,  they 
go  on  untwisting  themselves,  but  very  slowly,  the  process  some- 
times going  on  for  days  or  weeks.  In  like  manner  many  dielectrics 


THE   PROPERTIES    OF   A    DIELECTRIC. 


Ill 


such  as  the  glass  of  a  Leyden  jar  or  the  gutta  percha  of  a  submarine 
cable,  after  being  subjected  for  some  time  to  electromotive  force 
and  then  placed  in  a  closed  circuit  give  an  instantaneous  discharge 
which  is  less  than  the  original  charge.  After  this  discharge,  how- 
ever, they  are  capable  of  giving  residual  discharges  which  become 
more  and  more  feeble,  and  if  the  circuit  is  kept  closed  a  quantity  of 
electricity  will  slowly  ooze  out  through  the  circuit,  the  current 
becoming  feebler  and  feebler  as  the  charge  is  more  nearly 
exhausted. 


Mechanical  Illustration  of  the  Properties  of  a  Dielectric. 

135*.]  Five  tubes  of  equal  sectional  area  A,  B}  C,  D  and  P  are 
arranged  in  circuit  as  in  the  figure.  A,  B}  C  and  D  are  vertical 
and  equal,  and  P  is  horizontal. 

The  lower  halves  of  A,  B,  <?,  D 
are  filled  with  mercury,  their  upper 
halves  and  the  horizontal  tube  P  are 
filled  with  water. 

A  tube  with  a  stopcock  Q  con- 
nects the  lower  part  of  A  and  B 
with  that  of  C  and  D,  and  a  piston 
P  is  made  to  slide  in  the  horizontal 
tube. 

Let  us  begin  by  supposing  that 
the  level  of  the  mercury  in  the  four 
tubes  is  the  same,  and  that  it  is  in- 
dicated by  AQ,  _50,  <?0,  _#0,  that  the 
piston  is  at  P0,  and  that  the  stop- 
cock Q  is  shut. 

Now  let  the  piston  be  moved  from 
P0  to  P!  ,  a  distance  a.  Then,  since 
the  sections  of  all  the  tubes  are  equalt  the  level  of  the  mercury 
in  A  and  C  will  rise  a  distance  a,  or  to  AI  and  C19  and  the  mercury 
in  B  and  D  will  sink  an  equal  distance  a,  or  to  B1  and  J)19 

The  difference  of  pressure  on  the  two  sides  of  the  piston  will 
be  represented  by  4  a. 

This  arrangement  may  serve  to  represent  the  state  of  a  dielectric 
acted  on  by  an  electromotive  force  4  a. 

The  excess  of  water  in  the  tube  D  may  be  taken  to  represent  a 
positive  charge  of  electricity  on  one  side  of  the  dielectric,  and  the 


~A1~ 

f 

-  C  - 

1 

-A   - 

-B   - 

2 

2 

-A   - 

-  B    - 

-C  - 

-D   - 

0 

0 

0 

o 

"V 

-V- 

-S 

-D    - 

i 

Q 

Fig.  29. 


112  RESIDUAL   DISCHARGE.  [135. 

excess  of  mercury  in  the  tube  A  may  represent  the  negative  charge 
on  the  other  side.  The  excess  of  pressure  in  the  tube  P  on  the 
side  of  the  piston  next  D  will  then  represent  the  excess  of  potential 
on  the  positive  side  of  the  dielectric. 

If  the  piston  is  free  to  move  it  will  move  back  to  P0  and  be  in 
equilibrium  there.  This  represents  the  complete  discharge  of  the 
dielectric. 

During  the  discharge  there  is  reversed  motion  of  the  liquids 
throughout  the  whole  tube,  and  this  represents  that  change  of 
electric  displacement  which  we  have  supposed  to  take  place  in  a 
dielectric. 

I  have  supposed  every  part  of  the  system  of  tubes  filled  with 
incompressible  liquids,  in  order  to  represent  the  property  of  all 
electric  displacement  that  there  is  no  real  accumulation  of  elec- 
tricity at  any  place. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  effect  of  opening  the  stopcock  Q  while 
the  piston  P  is  at  Px. 

The  level  of  A±  and  D±  will  remain  unchanged,  but  that  of  B  and 
C  will  become  the  same,  and  will  coincide  with  J30  and  <?0. 

The  opening  of  the  stopcock  Q  corresponds  to  the  existence  of 
a  part  of  the  dielectric  which  has  a  slight  conducting  power,  but 
which  does  not  extend  through  the  whole  dielectric  so  as  to  form 
an  open  channel. 

The  charges  on  the  opposite  sides  of  the  dielectric  remain  in- 
sulated, but  their  difference  of  potential  diminishes. 

In  fact,  the  difference  of  pressure  on  the  two  sides  of  the  piston 
sinks  from  4  a  to  2  a  during  the  passage  of  the  fluid  through  Q. 

If  we  now  shut  the  stopcock  Q  and  allow  the  piston  P  to  move 
freely,  it  will  come  to  equilibrium  at  a  point  P2,  and  the  discharge 
will  be  apparently  only  half  of  the  charge. 

The  level  of  the  mercury  in  A  and  B  will  be  \a  above  its 
original  level,  and  the  level  in  the  tubes  C  and  D  will  be  \a 
below  its  original  level.  This  is  indicated  by  the  levels  A29  -#2> 

c»,  D*. 

If  the  piston  is  now  fixed  and  the  stopcock  opened,  mercury  will 
flow  from  £  to  C  till  the  level  in  the  two  tubes  is  again  at  J50  and 
C0.  There  will  then  be  a  difference  of  pressure  =  a  on  the  two 
sides  of  the  piston  P.  If  the  stopcock  is  then  closed  and  the  piston 
P  left  free  to  move,  it  will  again  come  to  equilibrium  at  a  point  P3, 
half  way  between  P2  and  P0.  This  corresponds  to  the  residual 
charge  which  is  observed  when  a  charged  dielectric  is  first  di&- 


136.]  ELECTRIC   STRENGTH   OF   AIR.  113 

charged  and  then  left  to  itself.  It  gradually  recovers  part  of  its 
charge,  and  if  this  is  again  discharged  a  third  charge  is  formed,  the 
successive  charges  diminishing  in  quantity.  In  the  case  of  the 
illustrative  experiment  each  charge  is  half  of  the  preceding,  and  the 
discharges,  which  are  J,  3,  &c.  of  the  original  charge,  form  a  series 
whose  sum  is  equal  to  the  original  charge. 

If,  instead  of  opening  and  closing  the  stopcock,  we  had  allowed  it 
to  remain  nearly,  but  not  quite,  closed  during  the  whole  experiment, 
we  should  have  had  a  case  resembling  that  of  the  electrification  of  a 
dielectric  which  is  a  perfect  insulator  and  yet  exhibits  the  phe- 
nomenon called  '  electric  absorption.' 

To  represent  the  case  in  which  there  is  true  conduction  through 
the  dielectric  we  must  either  make  the  piston  leaky,  or  we  must 
establish  a  communication  between  the  top  of  the  tube  A  and  the 
top  of  the  tube  D. 

In  this  way  we  may  construct  a  mechanical  illustration  of  the 
properties  of  a  dielectric  of  any  kind,  in  which  the  two  electricities 
are  represented  by  two  real  fluids,  and  the  electric  potential  is 
represented  by  fluid  pressure.  Charge  and  discharge  are  repre- 
sented by  the  motion  of  the  piston  P,  and  electromotive  force  by 
the  resultant  force  on  the  piston. 

136.]  The  electric  strength  of  a  dielectric  medium  depends  on  the 
nature  of  the  medium  and  its  density  and  temperature.  Thus  the 
electromotive  force  required  to  produce  a  disruptive  discharge  is 
greater  in  glass  or  ebonite  than  in  air. 

The  electric  strength  of  air  or  any  other  gas  may  be  tested  by 
causing  sparks  to  pass  through  a  portion  of  the  gas  between  two 
balls  of  metal.  If  the  experiment  is  conducted  in  a  glass  vessel 
from  which  the  air  may  be  exhausted  by  an  air  pump,  it  is  found 
that  the  electromotive  force  necessary  to  produce  the  discharge 
diminishes,  while  the  pressure  is  reduced  from  that  of  the  atmo- 
sphere to  that  of  about  3  millimetres  of  mercury.  If  the  supply  of 
electricity  is  kept  up  at  a  constant  rate,  the  sparks  become  smaller 
and  more  frequent,  till  at  last  there  appears  to  be  a  continuous  flow. 
If,  however,  the  exhaustion  be  carried  further,  the  electric  strength 
again  increases,  till  in  the  most  perfect  vacuum  hitherto  made  the 
electromotive  force  required  to  produce  a  spark  between  electrodes 
•6  centimetres  apart  is  so  great  that  the  discharge  does  not  take 
place  between  the  electrodes,  but  passes  round  the  outside  of  the 
vessel  through  a  distance  of  20  centimetres  of  air  at  the  ordinary 
pressure.  It  would  therefore  seem  as  if  a  perfect  vacuum  would 

I 


114 


ELECTRIC    STRENGTH   OF   AIR. 


present  an  almost  insuperable  resistance  to  the  passage  of  electricity. 
A  small  quantity  of  gas,  however,  introduced  into  the  empty  space 
renders  it  incapable  of  withstanding  even  a  small  electromotive 
force.  This  diminution  of  the  electric  strength,  however,  does  not 
go  on  when  the  density  of  the  gas  is  still  further  increased,  but  for 
pressures  of  a  centimetre  and  upwards  the  electric  strength  in- 
creases as  the  density  increases. 

137.]  The  electric  strength  of  air  diminishes  rapidly  as  the  tem- 
perature rises.  The  heated  air  which  rises  from  a  flame  conducts 
electricity  freely.  The  best  way  of  discharging  the  electrification 
of  the  surface  of  a  solid  dielectric  is  to  pass  the  electrified  body 
over  a  flame.  In  most  experiments  with  heated  air  the  air  is  in 
motion.  It  is  therefore  desirable  that  experiments  should  be  made 
on  the  conductivity  of  air  at  various  temperatures,  contained  in  a 
closed  vessel  and  free  from  currents. 

138.]  In  order  to  test  the  insulating  properties  of  air  and  other 
gases  I  made  the  following  experiment : — 

A  tube  half  an  inch  in  diameter,  CD,  is  supported  on  an  insulated 
stand  c.  A  rod  AJ3,  a  quarter  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  is  supported 
by  the  insulating  stand  a  so  that  about  6  inches  of  the  rod  is  within 
the  tube  with  a  cylindrical  shell  of  air  about  an  eighth  of  an  inch 
thick  between  it  and  the  inside  of  the  tube.  The  tube  is  connected 
with  one  electrode  of  a  battery  of  50  Leclanche  cells,  the  other 
electrode  being  connected  to  earth.  The  rod  is  connected  to  one 
electrode  of  Thomson's  quadrant  electrometer,  the  other  electrode 
being  connected  to  earth.  A  tube,  F,  which  is  fixed  so  as  not  to 
touch  the  tube  CD,  is  used  for  sending  a  current  of  hot  air  or  steam 
through  the  tube  CD.  The  part  of  the  tube  CD  which  contains  the 


To  Electrometer 


Fig.  30. 

rod  AB  is  surrounded  by  a  wider  tube  E  of  thick  brass  which  may 
be  heated  by  a  gas  furnace  so  as  to  keep  the  inner  tube  and  rod  hot 


1 39-] 


CONDUCTIVITY   OF   GASES. 


115 


without  exposing  them  to  the  current  of  the  products  of  combustion 
of  the  burner. 

The  sensitiveness  of  this  apparatus  was  shown  by  the  effect  of 
communicating  a  small  charge  to  the  tube  E.  The  electrometer 
was  immediately  deflected  on  account  of  induction  between  the 
tube  and  the  rod  A B.  The  rod  AB  was  then  discharged  to  earth 
so  that  the  electrometer  indicated  zero,  the  tube  remaining  at  a 
higher  potential.  If  any  conduction  were  now  to  take  place 
through  the  air  between  the  tube  and  the  rod  it  would  be  indicated 
by  the  electrometer.  No  conduction  however  could  be  observed 
even  after  the  lapse  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  when  hot  air  and 
steam  were  blown  through  the  tube.  At  the  end  of  the  experi- 
ment the  tube  was  discharged  to  earth,  when  a  negative  deflection 
of  the  electrometer  was  observed,  shewing  that  the  tube  had  re- 
mained charged  during  the  whole  experiment. 

139.]  Other  experiments  were  afterwards  made  in  which  mercury 
and  sodium  were  made  to  boil  in  a  bent  glass  tube  while  raised  to 
a  high  potential  by  a  battery  of  50  Leclanche  cells.  A  thick 
copper  wire  (Fig.  31)  was  placed  on  an  insulating  stand  so  that  the 
end  of  the  wire  was  within  the  glass  tube  and  surrounded  by  the 
vapour  of  the  metal.  It  was  necessary  that  the  wire  should  not 
be  allowed  to  touch  the  tube,  because  glass  at  a  high  tempera- 
ture is  a  good  conductor.  It  was  also  necessary  to  see  that  the 
products  of  combustion  from  the  Bunsen  burner  did  not  come 
in  contact  with  the  wire  after  becoming  electrified  by  the  hot 
tube. 


Fig.  3L 

The  wire  was  connected  with  the  electrometer,  but  no  evidence  of 
conduction  of  electricity  could  be  observed,  even  when  the  mercury 
was  boiling  briskly,  and  its  vapour  was  being  condensed  on  the 

I  2 


116  CONDUCTIVITY   OF   GASES.  [140. 

wire.  But  whenever  so  much,  mercury  had  collected  on  the  wire 
that  a  drop  fell  off  at  the  end  of  the  wire,  there  was  a  deflection 
of  the  electrometer  because  the  drop  had  become  charged  by  in- 
duction from  the  tube  and  the  removal  of  this  charge  affected 
the  electrometer.  This  however  was  no  evidence  of  conduction 
through  the  metallic  vapour,  but  only  indicated  that  the  apparatus 
was  in  such  a  state  of  electrification  that  any  conduction,  if  it  took 
place,  would  produce  a  sensible  indication  at  the  electrometer. 

It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  these  experiments  on  the  insulating 
power  of  hot  gases  and  vapours  with  the  well-known  phenomena 
of  the  communication  of  electricity  along  the  stream  of  heated 
matter  rising  from  a  flame  or  even  from  red-hot  metal.  This 
stream  acts  as  a  powerful  conductor  of  electricity  between  the  flame 
and  bodies  placed  at  a  foot  or  a  yard  above  it  where  the  temperature 
of  the  ascending  current  is  much  lower  than  it  was  in  the  experi- 
ment of  the  tube  and  rod. 

140.]  The  whole  theory  of  the  electric  properties  of  gases  is  in  a 
very  imperfect  state.  According  to  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases, 
their  molecules  are  in  a  state  of  agitation  so  that  they  are  con- 
tinually striking  against  each  other.  The  velocity  of  this  agitation 
is  greater  the  higher  the  temperature.  It  would  appear,  therefore, 
that  the  electric  conduction  of  gases  is  of  the  nature  of  convection. 
At  every  collision  the  whole  charge  of  two  of  the  molecules  would 
be  equally  divided  between  them,  and  thus  the  tendency  of  the 
agitation  would  be  to  equalize  the  charges  of  all  the  molecules. 

But  we  can  hardly  admit  a  theory  of  this  kind  when  we  consider 
that  we  have  hitherto  obtained  no  evidence  of  the  conduction  of 
electricity  through  air  at  the  ordinary  pressure  and  temperature 
under  a  feeble  electromotive  force. 

Whenever  a  body  free  from  projecting  points  and  sharp  edges 
and  charged  to  a  low  potential  is  found  to  lose  its  charge,  the 
result  can  always  be  traced  to  conduction  through  the  substance 
or  along  the  surface  of  the  apparatus  which  is  required  to  support 
it.  The  more  perfectly  insulating  we  make  this  apparatus  the 
more  slowly  does  the  electrified  body  lose  its  charge,  so  that  it 
is  probable  that  if  we  could  support  an  electrified  body  on  a  per- 
fectly insulating  stand  so  that  it  could  lose  its  charge  only  by 
conduction  through  the  air,  it  would  never  lose  its  charge. 


141.]  PYRO-ELECTBIC   PHENOMENA.  117 

Electric  Phenomena  of  Tourmaline. 

141.]  Certain  crystals  of  tourmaline  and  of  other  minerals 
possess  what  may  be  called  Electric  Polarity.  Suppose  a  crystal 
of  tourmaline  to  be  at  a  uniform  temperature,  and  apparently 
free  from  electrification  on  its  surface.  Let  its  temperature  be 
now  raised,  the  crystal  remaining1  insulated.  One  end  will  be 
found  positively  and  the  other  end  negatively  electrified.  Let  the 
surface  be  deprived  of  this  apparent  electrification  by  means  of  a 
flame  or  otherwise,  then  if  the  crystal  be  made  still  hotter,  electrifi- 
cation of  the  same  kind  as  before  will  appear,  but  if  the  crystal  be 
cooled  the  end  which  was  positive  when  the  crystal  was  heated  will 
become  negative. 

These  electrifications  are  observed  at  the  extremities  of  the  crys- 
tallographic  axis.  Some  crystals  are  terminated  by  a  six-sided 
pyramid  at  one  end  and  by  a  three-sided  pyramid  at. the  other. 
In  these  the  end  having  the  six-sided  pyramid  becomes  positive 
when  the  crystal  is  heated. 

Sir  W.  Thomson  supposes  every  portion  of  these  and  other  hemi- 
hedral  crystals  to  have  a  definite  electric  polarity,  the  intensity 
of  which  depends  on  the  temperature.  When  the  surface  is  passed 
through  a  flame,  every  part  of  the  surface  becomes  electrified  to 
such  an  extent  as  to  exactly  neutralize,  for  all  external  points, 
the  effect  of  the  internal  polarity.  The  crystal  then  has  no  ex- 
ternal electrical  action,  nor  any  tendency  to  change  its  mode  of 
electrification.  But  if  it  be  heated  or  cooled  the  interior  polariza- 
tion of  each  particle  of  the  crystal  is  altered,  and  can  no  longer 
be  balanced  by  the  superficial  electrification,  so  that  there  is  a 
resultant  external  action. 

In  tourmaline  and  other  pyroelectric « crystals  it  is  probable 
that  a  state  of  electric  polarization  exists,  which  depends  upon 
temperature,  and  does  not  require  an  external  electromotive  force 
to  produce  it.  If  the  interior  of  a  body  were  in  a  state  of 
permanent  electric  polarisation,  the  outside  would  gradually  become 
charged  in  such  a  manner  as  to  neutralize  the  action  of  the  internal 
electrification  for  all  points  outside  the  body.  This  external  super- 
ficial charge  could  not  be  detected  by  any  of  the  ordinary  tests, 
and  could  not  be  removed  by  any  of  the  ordinary  methods  for 
discharging  superficial  electrification.  The  internal  polarization 
of  the  substance  would  therefore  never  be  discovered  unless  by 
some  means,  such  as  change  of  temperature,  the  amount  of  the 


118  THE   ELECTRIC   GLOW.  [142. 

internal  polarization  could  be  increased  or  diminished.  The  ex- 
ternal electrification  would  then  be  no  longer  capable  of  neutralizing 
the  external  effect  of  the  internal  polarization,  and  an  apparent 
electrification  would  be  observed,  as  in  the  case  of  tourmaline. 


The  Electric  Glow. 

142.]  It  can  be  proved  by  the  mathematical  theory  of  electricity 
that  if  a  conductor  having  on  its  surface  a  sharp  conical  point 
is  placed  in  a  perfectly  insulating-  medium  and  electrified,  the 
surface-density  of  the  electricity  will  increase  without  limit  for 
points  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  conical  point,  so  that  at  the  conical 
point  itself  the  surface- density,  and  therefore  the  electromotive 
force,  would  be  infinite.  But  this  result  depends  on  the  hypothesis 
that  the  air  or  other  surrounding  dielectric  has  an  invincible 
insulating  power,  which  is  not  the  case,  and  therefore  as  soon 
as  the  electromotive  force  at  the  conical  point  reaches  a  certain 
limiting  value  the  insulating  power  of  the  air  gives  way,  and 
there  is  a  disruptive  discharge  of  electricity  into  the  air.  A  small 
portion  of  air  close  to  the  conical  point  thus  becomes  electrified. 
The  electrified  system  now  consists  of  the  metal  conductor  with 
its  conical  point,  together  with  a  rounded  mass  of  electrified  air, 
which  covers  the  point  and  acts  as  a  sort  of  sheath  to  it,  so  that 
the  boundary  of  the  electrified  system  is  no  longer  pointed. 

This  electrified  system,  if  it  were  solid,  would  retain  its  charge, 
for  the  electromotive  force  is  not  great  enough  at  any  place  to 
produce  disruptive  discharge,  but  since  the.  air  is  fluid,  and  since 
the  electromotive  force  is  greatest  in  the  line  of  prolongation  of 
the  conical  point,  the  electrified  pur  tides  of  air  move  off  in  that 
direction.  When  they  are  gone  other  unelectrified  particles  take 
their  place  round  the  point,  and  the  point  being  no  longer 
protected  by  electrified  air,  there  is  another  discharge,  as  at  first. 

Thus  there  is  continually  kept  up  an  influx  of  uncharged  air 
to  the  point,  a  luminous  discharge  of  electricity  from  the  point, 
called  the  Electric  Glow,  and  a  stream  of  charged  air  in  the 
direction  of  the  prolongation  of  the  axis  of  the  cone  called  the 
Electric  Wind.  By  checking  the  influx  of  air  behind  the  point 
we  may  weaken  the  glow  and  by  increasing  the  current  of  air  by 
blowing  we  may  make  the  glow  stronger. 

143.]  The  electric  wind  which  blows  from  the  conical  point 
may  be  made  to  drive  a  little  windmill,  or  if  the  conductor  is 


145-]  THE    ELECTRIC   WIND.  119 

made  of  two  wires  crossed  and  having  their  sharpened  ends  bent 
backwards,  as  in  Fig.  32,  and  supported  so  as  to  be  capable  of 
rotating,  the  reaction  of  the  electric 
wind  will  make  the  cross  rotate  in 
the  direction  of  the  arrows. 

It  is  only  close  to  the  electrified 
point  that  the  motion  of  the  elec- 
trified air  is  in  any  degree  influenced 
by  its  electrification.  At  a  short  dis- 
tance from  the  point  the  electrified 
air  becomes  mixed  with  other  air,  and 
is  carried  about  by  the  ordinary  currents  of  the  atmosphere  as  an 
invisible  electric  cloud. 

If  we  calculate  the  force  due  to  the  electrification  of  a  large 
body  of  air  at  a  considerable  distance  from  other  electrified  bodies, 
we  shall  find  that  it  is  not  capable  of  producing  effects  on  the 
motion  of  so  large  a  mass  which  are  at  all  comparable  to  the 
effects  of  the  slight  variations  of  density  and  other  causes  which 
produce  the  movements  of  the  atmosphere.  Hence  the  motion  of 
thunder  clouds  is  due  almost  entirely  to  atmospheric  currents  and 
is  not  sensibly  affected  by  their  electrification. 

144.]  When  an  electrified  portion  of  air  comes  near  the  surface 
of  a  conductor,  it  induces  on  that  surface  an  electrification  opposite 
to  its  own  and  is  attracted  towards  the  surface,  but  since  the 
electromotive  force  is  small  the  electrified  particles  may  remain  for 
a  long  time  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  conductor  without  being 
drawn  into  contact  with  it  and  discharged. 

To  detect  the  presence  of  this  electrified  atmosphere  clinging 
to  a  conductor  we  have  only  to  insulate  the  conductor  and  connect 
it  with  an  electrometer.  If  we  now  blow  away  the  electrified  air 
from  its  surface,  the  electrometer  will  indicate  the  electrification 
of  the  conductor  itself,  which  is  of  course  of  the  opposite  kind 
to  that  of  the  electrified  air.  Thus,  if  we  hold  in  the  hand  a 
hollow  metal  cylinder  over  an  electrified  point,  we  may  electrify 
the  air  within  it.  If  we  then  place  it  on  an  insulated  stand  in 
connexion  with  the  electrometer  the  electrometer  will  remain  at 
zero  till  the  electrified  air  is  removed,  which  may  be  done  by 
blowing  air  through  the  cylinder.  The  electrometer  will  then 
indicate  the  electrification  of  the  cylinder,  which  is  of  the  opposite 
kind  from  that  of  the  electrified  air. 

145.]  The  glow  is  more  easily  formed  in  rare  air  than  in  dense 


120  ACTION   OF   POINTS.  [146. 

air,  and  more  easily  when  the  point  is  positive  than  when  it  is 
negative.  This  and  many  other  differences  between  positive  and 
negative  electrification  seem  to  depend  upon  a  condition  analogous 
to  electrolytic  polarization  in  the  stratum  of  air  in  contact  with 
the  electrode.  It  appears  that  the  electromotive  force  required 
to  cause  an  electric  discharge  to  take  place  is  somewhat  smaller 
where  the  electrode  at  which  the  discharge  begins  is  negative,  but 
that  the  quantity  of  electricity  in  each  discharge  is  greatest  when 
the  electrode  at  which  the  discharge  begins  is  positive. 

146.]  A  fine  point  may  be  used  instead  of  a  proof  plane  to  deter- 
mine the  nature  of  the  electrification  of  any  part  of  the  surface  of 
a  conductor  when  electricity  is  induced  upon  it  in  presence  of 
another  electrified  body.  For  this  purpose  the  point  is  fixed  to  the 
conductor  so  as  to  project  a  few  millimetres  from  its  surface.  If 
the  part  of  the  surface  to  which  it  is  fixed  is  electrified  positively 
the  point  gives  off  positive  electricity  to  the  air,  and  the  conductor 
loses  positive  electricity  or  gains  negative  electricity.  This  may 
be  ascertained  either  by  removing  or  discharging  the  inductor  and 
ascertaining  the  character  of  the  charge  of  the  induced  body,  or  by 
connecting  the  induced  body  with  the  electrometer  and  observing 
the  change  of  potential  as  the  point  throws  off  its  electricity. 

It  has  been  found  that  some  vegetable  thorns,  prickles,  or  spines 
act  more  perfectly  in  throwing  off  electricitj^  than  the  finest  pointed 
needles  which  can  be  procured. 

The  action  of  the  point  may  be  assisted  by  blowing  air  from 
a  blowpipe  over  the  point,  and  in  this  way  we  may  prevent  the 
electrified  air  from  discharging  itself  on  the  surface  of  the  inductor. 


The  Electric  Brush. 

147.]  The  electric  brush  is  a  phenomenon  which  may  be  pro- 
duced by  electrifying  a  blunt  point  or  a  small  ball  in  air  so  as  to 
produce  an  electric  field  in  which  the  tension  diminishes  as  the 
distance  from  the  ball  increases,  but  not  so  rapidly  as  in  the  case  of 
a  sharp  point.  The  brush  consists  of  a  succession  of  discharges, 
ramifying  as  they  diverge  from  the  ball  into  the  air,  and  termin- 
ating either  by  charging  portions  of  air  or  by  reaching  some  other 
conductor.  The  brush  produces  a  sound,  the  pitch  of  which  depends 
on  the  interval  between  the  successive  discharges,  and  there  is  no 
current  of  air  as  in  the  case  of  the  glow. 


1 49-]  DISRUPTIVE   DISCHARGE.  121 

The  Electric  Spark. 

148.]  When  the  tension  in  the  space  between  the  two  electrodes 
is  considerable  all  the  way  between  them,  as  in  the  case  of  two  balls 
whose  distance  is  not  very  great  compared  with  their  radii,  the 
discharge,  when  it  occurs,  usually  takes  the  form  of  a  spark,  by 
which  nearly  the  whole  electrification  is  discharged  at  once. 

In  this  case,  when  any  part  of  the  dielectric  has  given  way,  the 
part  next  to  it  in  the  direction  of  the  electric  force  is  put  into 
a  state  of  greater  tension,  so  that  it  also  gives  way,  and  so  the 
discharge  proceeds  right  through  the  dielectric.  We  may  compare 
this  breaking  down  of  the  dielectric  to  what  occurs  when  we  make 
a  little  rent  perpendicular  to  the  edge  of  a  piece  of  paper  and  then 
apply  tension  to  the  paper  in  the  direction  of  the  edge.  The  paper 
is  torn  through,  the  disruption  beginning  at  the  little  rent,  but 
diverging  occasionally  so  as  to  take  in  weak  places  in  the  paper. 
The  electric  spark  in  the  same  way  begins  at  the  point  where  the 
electric  tension  first  overcomes  the  '  electric  strength '  of  the  dielec- 
tric, and  proceeds  from  that  point,  in  an  apparently  irregular  path, 
so  as  to  take  in  other  weak  points,  such  as  particles  of  dust  floating 
in  the  air. 

149.]  The  investigation  of  the  phenomena  of  the  luminous 
electric  discharge  has  been  greatly  assisted  by  the  use  of  the  spec- 
troscope. The  light  of  the  spark  or  other  discharge  is  made  to  fall 
on  the  slit  of  the  collimator  of  the  spectroscope,  and  after  being 
analysed  by  the  prisms  is  observed  through  the  telescope.  The 
light  as  thus  analysed  is  found  to  consist  of  a  great  number  of 
bright  lines  and  bands  forming  what  is  called  the  spectrum  of  the 
light.  By  comparing  light  from  different  sources  it  is  found  that 
these  bright  lines  may  be  divided  into  groups,  each  group  being 
due  to  the  presence  of  a  particular  substance  in  the  medium  through 
which  the  discharge  takes  place. 

By  using  the  method  introduced  by  Mr.  Lockyer  of  forming 
an  image  of  the  spark  upon  the  slit  by  means  of  a  lens,  we  may 
obtain  at  one  view  a  comparison  of  the  constituents  of  the  medium 
which  are  rendered  luminous  by  the  dielectric  discharge  at  the 
different  points  of  its  path.  Close  to  either  electrode  the  lines  are 
principally  due  to  the  metal  or  metals  of  which  that  electrode 
consists.  At  greater  distances  these  lines  become  fainter,  thinner, 
and  less  numerous,  but  the  spectrum  belonging  to  the  gas  through 
which  the  discharge  takes  place  remains  visible. 


122  SPECTRUM   OF   THE   ELECTRIC   SPARK.  [*5O*- 

Some  of  the  lines  due  to  the  metals  appear  longer  than  others, 
shewing  that  they  can  be  formed  in  regions  of  the  spark  where 
others  are  no  longer  visible,  owing  either  to  a  deficiency  in  the 
amount  of  the  metallic  vapour  or  to  a  want  of  vigour  in  the  electric 
disturbance.  It  thus  appears  that  the  electric  discharge  separates 
an  appreciable  amount  of  matter  even  from  the  hardest  metals  and 
carries  the  particles  through  the  air  to  a  distance  of  several  milli- 
metres from  the  surface  of  the  metal.  It  also  appears  by  a  com- 
parison of  sparks  from  different  electrodes  and  through  different 
gases  that  no  part  of  the  light  is  emitted  by  any  substance  common 
to  all  the  different  cases,  but  that  every  line  is  due  to  one  or  other 
of  the  chemical  substances  present. 

It  follows  from  this  that  neither  the  electric  fluid,  if  there  be 
such  a  substance,  nor  any  etherial  medium  such  as  is  supposed 
to  pervade  all  ordinary  matter  is  rendered  luminous  during  the 
discharge,  for  if  it  were  so  its  spectrum  would  be  visible  in  all 
discharges. 

On  Steady  Currents. 

150*.]  In  the  case  of  the  current  between  two  insulated  con- 
ductors at  different  potentials  the  operation  is  soon  brought  to  an 
end  by  the  equalization  of  the  potentials  of  the  two  bodies,  and  the 
current  is  therefore  essentially  a  Transient  current. 

But  there  are  methods  by  which  the  difference  of  potential  of 
the  conductors  may  be  maintained  constant,  in  which  case  the 
current  will  continue  to  flow  with  uniform  strength  as  a  Steady 
Current. 

The  Voltaic  Battery. 

The  most  convenient  method  of  producing  a  steady  current  is  by 
means  of  the  Voltaic  Battery. 

For  the  sake  of  distinctness  we  shall  describe  Daniell's  Constant 
Battery : — 

A  solution  of  sulphate  of  zinc  is  placed  in  a  cell  of  porous  earthen- 
ware, and  this  cell  is  placed  in  a  vessel  containing  a  saturated 
solution  of  sulphate  of  copper.  A  piece  of  zinc  is  dipped  into  the 
sulphate  of  zinc,  and  a  piece  of  copper  is  dipped  into  the  sulphate 
of  copper.  Wires  are  soldered  to  the  zinc  and  to  the  copper  above 
the  surface  of  the  liquid.  This  combination  is  called  a  cell  or 
element  of  Daniell's  battery.  See  Art.  193. 


152*.]  DANIELL'S  BATTERY.  123 

151*.]  If  the  cell  is  insulated  by  being  placed  on  a  non-con- 
ducting stand,  and  if  the  wire  connected  with  the  copper  is  put 
in  contact  with  an  insulated  conductor  A,  and  the  wire  connected 
with  the  zinc  is  put  in  contact  with  B,  another  insulated  conductor 
of  the  same  metal  as  A,  then  it  may  be  shewn  by  means  of  a  deli- 
cate electrometer  that  the  potential  of  A  exceeds  that  of  B  by  a 
certain  quantity.  This  difference  of  potentials  is  called  the  Elec- 
tromotive Force  of  Daniell's  Cell. 

If  A  and  B  are  now  disconnected  from  the  cell  and  put  in 
communication  by  means  of  a  wire,  a  transient  current  passes 
through  the  wire  from  A  to  B,  and  the  potentials  of  A  and  B 
become  equal.  A  and  B  may  then  be  charged  again  by  the  cell, 
and  the  process  repeated  as  long  as  the  cell  will  work.  But  if 
A  and  B  be  connected  by  means  of  the  wire  C,  and  at  the  same 
time  connected  with  the  battery  as  before,  then  the  cell  will  main- 
tain a  constant  current  through  C,  and  also  a  constant  difference 
of  potentials  between  -A  and  B.  This  difference  will  not,  as  we 
shall  see,  be  equal  to  the  whole  electromotive  force  of  the  cell,  for 
part  of  this  force  is  spent  in  maintaining  the  current  through  the 
cell  itself. 

A  number  of  cells  placed  in  series  so  that  the  zinc  of  the  first 
cell  is  connected  by  metal  with  the  copper  of  the  second,  and  so 
on,  is  called  a  Voltaic  Battery.  The  electromotive  force  of  such  a 
battery  is  the  sum  of  the  electromotive  forces  of  the  cells  of  which 
it  is  composed.  If  the  battery  is  insulated  it  may  be  charged  with 
electricity  as  a  whole,  but  the  potential  of  the  copper  end  will 
always  exceed  that  of  the  zinc  end  by  the  electromotive  force  of 
the  battery,  whatever  the  absolute  value  of  either  of  these  potentials 
may  be.  The  cells  of  the  battery  may  be  of  very  various  construc- 
tion, containing  different  chemical  substances  and  different  metals, 
provided  they  are  such  that  chemical  action  does  not  go  on  when 
no  current  passes. 

152*.]  Let  us  now  consider  a  voltaic  battery  with  its  ends  in- 
sulated from  each  other.  The  copper  end  will  be  positivelv  or 
vitreously  electrified,  and  the  zinc  end  will  be  negatively  or  resin- 
ously  electrified. 

Let  the  two  ends  of  the  battery  be  now  connected  by  means 
of  a  wire.  An  electric  current  will  commence,  and  will  in  a  very 
short  time  attain  a  constant  value.  It  is  then  said  to  be  a  Steady 
Current. 


124  OERSTED'S  DISCOVERY.  [T53*- 


Magnetic  Action  of  the  Current. 

153*.]  Oersted  discovered  that  a  magnet  placed  near  a  straight 
electric  current  tends  to  place  itself  at  right  angles  to  the  plane 
passing  through  the  magnet  and  the  current. 

If  a  man  were  to  place  his  body  in  the  line  of  the  current  so 
that  the  current  from  copper  through  the  wire  to  zinc  should  flow 
from  his  head  to  his  feet,  and  if  he  were  to  direct  his  face  towards 
the  centre  of  the  magnet,  then  that  end  of  the  magnet  which  tends 
to  point  to  the  north  would,  when  the  current  flows,  tend  to  point 
towards  the  man's  right  hand.  Thus  we  see  that  the  electric 
current  has  a  magnetic  action  which  is  exerted  outside  the  current, 
and  by  which  its  existence  can  be  ascertained  and  its  intensity 
measured  without  breaking  the  circuit  or  introducing  anything 
into  the  current  itself. 

The  amount  of  the  magnetic  action  has  been  ascertained  to  be 
strictly  proportional  to  the  strength  of  the  current  as  measured 
by  the  products  of  electrolysis  in  the  voltameter,  and  to  be  quite 
independent  of  the  nature  of  the  conductor  in  which  the  current 
is  flowing,  whether  it  be  a  metal  or  an  electrolyte. 

154*.]  An  instrument  which  indicates  the  strength  of  an  electric 
current  by  its  magnetic  effects  is  called  a  Galvanometer. 

Galvanometers  in  general  consist  of  one  or  more  coils  of  silk- 
covered  wire  within  which  a  magnet  is  suspended  with  its  axis 
horizontal.  When  a  current  is  passed  through  the  wire  the  magnet 
tends  to  set  itself  with  its  axis  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the 
coils.  If  we  suppose  the  plane  of  the  coils  to  be  placed  parallel 
to  the  plane  of  the  earth's  equator,  and  the  current  to  flow  round 
the  coil  from  east  to  west  in  the  direction  of  the  apparent  motion 
of  the  sun,  then  the  magnet  within  will  tend  to  set  itself  with 
its  magnetization  in  the  same  direction  as  that  of  the  earth  con- 
sidered as  a  great  magnet,  the  north  pole  of  the  earth  being  similar 
to  that  end  of  the  compass  needle  which  points  south. 

The  galvanometer  is  the  most  convenient  instrument  for  measur- 
ing the  strength  of  electric  currents.  We  shall  therefore  assume 
the  possibility  of  constructing  such  an  instrument  in  studying  the 
laws  of  these  currents,  and  when  we  say  that  an  electric  current  is 
of  a  certain  strength  we  suppose  that  the  measurement  is  effected 
by  the  galvanometer. 


156*.]  OHM'S  LAW.  125 

On  Systems  of  Linear  Conductors. 

155*.]  Any  conductor  may  be  treated  as  a  linear  conductor  if  it 
is  arranged  so  that  the  current  must  always  pass  in  the  same  manner 
between  two  portions  of  its  surface  which  are  called  its  electrodes. 
For  instance,  a  mass  of  metal  of  any  form  the  surface  of  which  is 
entirely  covered  with  insulating  material  except  at  two  places,  at 
which  the  exposed  surface  of  the  conductor  is  in  metallic  contact 
with  electrodes  formed  of  a  perfectly  conducting  material,  may  be 
treated  as  a  linear  conductor.  For  if  the  current  be  made  to  enter 
at  one  of  these  electrodes  and  escape  at  the  other  the  lines  of  flow 
will  be  determinate,  and  the  relation  between  electromotive  force, 
current  and  resistance  will  be  expressed  by  Ohm's  Law,  for  the 
current  in  every  part  of  the  mass  will  be  a  linear  function  of  E. 
But  if  there  be  more  possible  electrodes  than  two,  the  conductor 
may  have  more  than  one  independent  current  through  it. 


0/im's  Law. 

156*.]  Let  E  be  the  electromotive  force  in  a  linear  conductor 
from  the  electrode  A±  to  the  electrode  A2.  (See  Art.  5.)  Let 
C  be  the  strength  of  the  electric  current  along  the  conductor,  that 
is  to  say,  let  C  units  of  electricity  pass  across  every  section  in 
the  direction  A^  A.2  in  unit  of  time,  and  let  R  be  the  resistance  of 
the  conductor,  then  the  expression  of  Ohm's  Law  is 

E=  CR (1) 

The  Resistance  of  a  conductor  is  defined  to  be  the  ratio  of 
the  electromotive  force  to  the  strength  of  the  current  which  it 
produces.  The  introduction  of  this  term  would  have  been  of  no 
scientific  value  unless  Ohm  had  shewn,  as  he  did  experimentally, 
that  it  corresponds  to  a  real  physical  quantity,  that  is,  that  it  has 
a  definite  value  which  is  altered  only  when  the  nature  of  the  con- 
ductor is  altered. 

In  the  first  place,  then,  the  resistance  of  a  conductor  is  indepen- 
dent of  the  strength  of  the  current  flowing  through  it. 

In  the  second  place  the  resistance  is  independent  of  the  electric 
potential  at  which  the  conductor  is  maintained,  and  of  the  density 
of  the  distribution  of  electricity  on  the  surface  of  the  conductor. 

It  depends  entirely  on  the  nature  of  the  material  of  which  the 
conductor  is  composed,  the  state  of  aggregation  of  its  parts  and  its 
temperature. 


126  RESISTANCE    OF   CONDUCTORS   IN    SERIES.        [15  7*. 

The  resistance  of  a  conductor  may  be  measured  to  within  one 
ten  thousandth  or  even  one  hundred  thousandth  part  of  its  value, 
and  so  many  conductors  have  been  tested  that  our  assurance  of  the 
truth  of  Ohm's  Law  is  now  very  high*". 

Linear  Conductors  arranged  in  Series. 

157*.]  Let  Al9  A2  be  the  electrodes  of  the  first  conductor  and  let 
the  second  conductor  be  placed  with  one  of  its  electrodes  in  contact 
with  A2)  so  that  the  second  conductor  has  for  its  electrodes  A2)  A3. 
The  electrodes  of  the  third  conductor  may  be  denoted  by  A3 
and  A±. 

Let  the  electromotive  force  along-  each  of  these  conductors  be 
denoted  by  E12,  E2%,  EM,  and  so  on  for  the  other  conductors. 

Let  the  resistance  of  the  conductors  be 

^12  >       -^235       ^34  >    &C- 

Then,  since  the  conductors  are  arranged  in  series  so  that  the  same 
current  C  flows  through  each,  we  have  by  Ohm's  Law, 

E12  =  CK12,     E23  =  CR23)     EM  =  CR,i  ..........  (2) 

If  E  is  the  resultant  electromotive  force,  and  R  the  resultant 
resistance  of  the  system,  we  must  have  by  Ohm's  Law, 

E=  CR  ...............................  (3) 

Now         E=E12  +  E22  +  E.3i,    .....................  ....  ...........  (4) 

the  sum  of  the  separate  electromotive  forces, 
=  (7(^2  +  ^23  +  ^34)     by  equations  (2). 
Comparing  this  result  with  (3),  we  find 

R  =  7^+^3  +  ^34  .........................     (5) 

Or,  the  resistance  of  a  series  of  conductors  is  the  sum  of  the  resistances 
of  the  conductors  taken  separately. 

Potential  at  any  Point  of  the  Series. 

Let  A  and  C  be  the  electrodes  of  the  series,  R  a  point  between 
them,  a,  c,  and  b  the  potentials  of  these  points  respectively.  Let 
Rl  be  the  resistance  of  the  part  from  A  to  R,  7?2  that  of  the  part 
from  B  to  C,  and  R  that  of  the  whole  from  A  to  (7,  then,  since 

a-b^R^C,     b-c  =  R2C,     and     a-c  =  RC, 
the  potential  at  B  is  -p 


t 

[See  Report  of  British  Association,  1876.] 


158*.]  RESISTANCE  OF  CONDUCTORS  IN  MULTIPLE  ARC.    127. 

which  determines  the  potential  at  B  when  those  at  A  and  C  are 
given. 

Resistance  of  a  Multiple  Conductor. 

158*.]  Let  a  number  of  conductors  ABZ,  ACZ,  ADZ  be  arranged 
side  by  side  with  their  extremities  in  contact  with  the  same  two 
points  A  and  Z.  They  are  then  said  to  be  arranged  in  multiple 
arc. 

Let  the  resistances  of  these  conductors  be  R^  R2,  R3  respect- 
ively, and  the  currents  C19'  C2,  C3,  and  let  the  resistance  of  the 
multiple  conductor  be  R,  and  the  total  current  C.  Then,  since  the 
potentials  at  A  and  Z  are  the  same  for  all  the  conductors,  they  have 
the  same  difference,  which  we  may  call  E.  We  then  have 

E  =  C^  =  C.2R2  =  CSR3  =  CR, 
but  0= 


Or,  the  reciprocal  of  the  resistance  of  a  multiple  conductor  is  the  sum 
of  the  reciprocals  of  the  component  conductors. 

If  we  call  the  reciprocal  of  the  resistance  of  a  conductor  the 
conductivity  of  the  conductor,  then  we  may  say  that  the  con- 
ductivity of  a  multiple  conductor  is  the  sum  of  the  conductivities  of 
the  component  conductors. 

Current  in  any  Branch  of  a  Multiple  Conductor. 

From  the  equations  of  the  preceding  article,  it  appears  that  if 
CL  is  the  current  in  any  branch  of  the  multiple  conductor,  and 
Rl  the  resistance  of  that  branch, 

n  ^  n (Q\ 

/? 

where  C  is  the  total  current,  and  R  is  the  resistance  of  the  multiple 
conductor  as  previously  determined. 

Kirchhoff  has  stated  the  conditions  of  a  linear  system  in  the 
following  manner,  in  which  the  consideration  of  the  potential  is 
avoided. 

(1)  (Condition  of  '  continuity.')     At  any  point  of  the  system  the 
sum  of  all  the  currents  which  flow  towards  that  point  is  zero. 

(2)  In  any  complete  circuit  formed  by  the  conductors  the  sum 
of  the  electromotive  forces  taken  round  the  circuit  is  equal  to  the 


128  RESISTANCE   OF   A   WIRE. 

sum  of  the  products  of  the  currents  in  each  conductor  multiplied 
by  the  resistance  of  that  conductor. 

Longitudinal  Resistance  of  Conductors  of  Uniform  Section. 

159*.]  Let  the  resistance  of  a  cube  of  a  given  material  to  a 
current  parallel  to  one  of  its  edges  be  p,  the  side  of  the  cube  being 
unit  of  length,  p  is  called  the  '  specific  resistance  of  that  material 
for  unit  of  volume.' 

Consider  next  a  prismatic  conductor  of  the  same  material  whose 
length  is  I,  and  whose  section  is  unity.  This  is  equivalent  to  I 
cubes  arranged  in  series.  The  resistance  of  the  conductor  is  there- 
fore lp. 

Finally,  consider  a  conductor  of  length  I  and  uniform  section  s. 
This  is  equivalent  to  s  conductors  similar  to  the  last  arranged  in 
multiple  arc.  The  resistance  of  this  conductor  is  therefore 


When  we  know  the  resistance  of  a  uniform  wire  we  can  determine 
the  specific  resistance  of  the  material  of  which  it  is  made  if  we  can 
measure  its  length  and  its  section. 

The  sectional  area  of  small  wires  is  most  accurately  determined 
by  calculation  from  the  length,  weight,  and  specific  gravity  of  the 
specimen.  The  determination  of  the  specific  gravity  is  sometimes 
inconvenient,  and  in  such  cases  the  resistance  of  a  wire  of  unit 
length  and  unit  mass  is  used  as  the  '  specific  resistance  per  unit  of 
weight.' 

If  /  is  this  resistance,  I  the  length,  and  m  the  mass  of  a  wire,  then 


CHAPTEE  X. 

PHENOMENA    OF   AN   ELECTRIC   CURRENT   WHICH   FLOWS 
THROUGH  HETEROGENEOUS  MEDIA. 

1.   Thermo-electric  phenomena. 

160.]  Seebeck,  in  1822,  discovered  that  if  a  circuit  is  formed  of 
two  different  metals,  and  if  the  two  junctions  of  the  metals  are 
kept  at  different  temperatures,  an  electric  current  tends  to  flow 
round  the  circuit.  If  the  metals  are  iron  and  copper  at  tempera- 
tures below  280°C.,  the  current  flows  from  copper  to  iron  through 
the  hotter  junction.  There  is  therefore,  in  general,  an  electro- 
motive force  acting  in  a  definite  direction  round  the  circuit,  whenever 
the  two  junctions  are  at  different  temperatures. 

In  a  circuit  formed  of  any  number  of  metals  all  at  the  same 
temperature,  there  can  be  no  current,  for  if  there  were  a  current 
it  might  be  constantly  employed  to  work  a  machine  or  to  generate 
heat  in  a  conductor,  and  this  without  any  energy  being  supplied 
to  the  system  from  without,  for  in  order  to  keep  the  circuit  at 
a  constant  temperature  nothing  is  required  except  to  prevent  heat 
from  entering  or  leaving  it.  Hence  at  any  given  temperature 
the  electromotive  force  in  a  circuit  of  three  metals,  A,  B,  C  must 
be  zero  for  the  whole  circuit.  Hence  if  the  electromotive  force 
from  C  to  A  is  a,  and  that  from  C  to  B  is  b,  and  that  from  B  to  A 
x,  then  in  the  circuit  A,  B,  C,  the  total  electromotive  force  is 
a  —  b—%  =  0,  so  that  #,  the  electromotive  force  from  B  to  A  is 
represented  by  a— b,  where  a  and  b  are  quantities  determined  by 
observation  of  the  electromotive  force  from  any  third  metal  C 
to  the  metals  A  and  B.  We  may  express  this  by  saying  that 
the  quantities  a  and  I  are  the  potentials  of  the  metals  A  and  B 
with  respect  to  a  third  metal  C  at  the  given  temperature.  The 
potential  of  A  with  respect  to  B  is  a—-b.  The  actual  determina- 
tion of  the  relative  potentials  of  the  metals  will  be  explained  in 
Art,  182. 


130  LAW   OF   MAGNUS.  [l6l. 

161.]  It  has  been  shewn  by  Magnus*  that  if  a  circuit  be  formed 
of  a  single  metal,  no  current  will  be  formed  in  it,  however  the 
temperature  and  the  section  of  the  conducting  circuit  may  vary 
in  different  parts.  Since  in  this  case  there  is  necessarily  con- 
duction of  heat,  and  consequently  dissipation  of  energy,  we  cannot, 
as  in  the  former  case,  consider  the  result  as  self-evident.  The 
electromotive  force,  for  instance,  between  two  portions  of  the 
circuit  at  given  temperatures  might  depend  on  the  length  or 
the  mode  of  variation  of  the  section  of  the  intermediate  portion 
of  the  circuit.  In  fact  the  experiments  of  Le  Roux  and  others 
have  shewn  that  the  law  of  Magnus  is  no  longer  applicable  in 
a  circuit  in  which  there  is  a  very  abrupt  variation  of  temperature, 
as  at  the  instant  when  the  circuit  is  closed  by  a  hot  wire  coming 
in  contact  with  a  cold  wire  of  the  same  metal.  Even  without 


Fig.  33. 

any  physical  discontinuity  of  the  circuit  such  as  is  implied  in 
the  contact  of  two  separate  pieces  of  wire,  a  sufficiently  abrupt 
variation  of  temperature  may  be  produced  by  taking  a  thick 
wire  and  filing  down  a  certain  length  of  it  till  it  is  very  thin. 
If  the  junction  of  the  thick  and  the  thin  portions  is  placed  in 
a  flame,  the  thin  portion  will  be  heated  so  much  more  rapidly 
than  the  thick  portion,  that  the  variation  of  temperature  will  be 
so  abrupt  that  the  law  of  Magnus  fails,  and  we  obtain  a  current 
in  a  circuit  of  one  metal ;  we  must  therefore  modify  the  statement 
of  the  law  of  Magnus  as  follows  : — 

The  electromotive  force  from  one  point  of  a  conductor  of  homogeneous 
metal  to  another  depends  only  on  the  temperature  of  these  points  unless 
at  any  part  of  the  conductor  a  sensible  variation  of  temperature  occurs 
between  points  whose  distance  is  within  the  limits  of  molecular  action. 

Thermo-electric  power  of  a  metal  at  a  given  temperature. 

162.]  Let  us  now  consider  a  linear  circuit  made  up  of  alternate 
pieces  of  two  metals,  say  lead  and  iron.  We  shall  assume  lead 
to  be  the  standard  metal,  and  study  the  properties  of  iron  in 
relation  to  lead. 

In  the  figure  the  pieces  of  iron  are  distinguished  by  shading. 
Let  the  temperatures  of  the  junctions  be  those  indicated  in  the 

nn.  1851.] 


163.]  THERMOELECTRIC   POWER.  131 

figure,  in  which  the  temperatures  of  the  extremities  of  each  piece 
of  iron  differ  by  one  degree,  but  the  temperatures  of  the  extremities 
of  each  of  the  intermediate  pieces  of  lead  are  equal.  The  total 
electromotive  force  round  the  circuit  is  the  sum  of  the  electromotive 


s 
_           A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

0° 

1° 

1° 

2° 

2° 

Fig.  34. 

forces  due  to  the  thermo-electric  action  of  the  different  pairs  of 
junctions.  Now  if  we  consider  the  pairs  A  and  .Z?,  C  and  D,  E 
and  F  belonging  to  the  pieces  of  iron  we  find  that  the  temperature 
rises  one  degree  in  each  piece,  but  if  we  take  the  pairs  B  and  (?, 
D  and  E  belonging  to  the  pieces  of  lead,  the  temperature  in 
each  piece  is  uniform  and  therefore  there  is  no  electromotive  force 
in  these  pieces.  We  may  therefore  leave  the  intermediate  pieces 
of  lead  out  of  account,  and  consider  the  electromotive  force  due 
to  the  junctions  A  and  F  as  equivalent  to  the  sum  of  the  electro- 
motive forces  of  the  three  pairs  of  junctions  A  and  £,  C  and  Dt 


Hence  if  a  diagram  is  constructed  in  which  the  axis  OZ  is 
marked  with  the  degrees  of  the  thermometric  scale  and  in  which 
the  area  Q°PQl°  represents  the  electromotive  force  when  the 
junctions  are  at  0°  and  1°  and  so  on,  then  the  electromotive  force 


O  0°  1°  2°  3°  4°  Z 

Fig.  35. 

when  the  junctions  are  at  any  given  temperatures  will  be  re- 
presented by  the  area  included  between  the  axis,  the  ordinates  at 
the  given  temperatures  and  the  line  PQ-K'ST. 

163.]   Any  ordinate  such  as  0°P,  1°Q,  &c.,  is  called  the  Thermo- 
electric Power  of  iron  with  respect  to  lead  at  0°,  1°,  &c.,  and  is 

K  2 


132 


THERMOELECTRIC   INVERSION. 


[l64. 


reckoned  positive  when,  for  a  small  difference  of  temperature,  the 
current  is  from  lead  to  iron  through  the  hot  junction. 

We  may  also  on  the  same  diagram  construct  other  lines,  the 
ordinates  of  which  represent  the  thermo-electric  powers  of  any 
other  metals  with  respect  to  lead,  being  reckoned  positive  and 
measured  upwards  when  for  a  small  difference  of  temperatures 
the  current  sets  from  lead  to  that  metal  through  the  hot  junction. 
Such  a  diagram  is  called  a  thermo-electric  diagram,  and  from  it 
we  can  deduce  the  electromotive  force  due  to  any  pair  of  metals 
with  their  junctions  at  any  given  temperatures. 

Thus  if  a  A  is  the  line  representing  the  metal  A,  and  IB  another 

representing  the  metal  B,  and  T,  t  the 

*>^^   A  temperatures    of  the  junctions,   the 

electromotive  force  of  the  circuit  is 
represented  by  the  area  ABbaA  and 
it  acts  in  the  direction  indicated, 
namely,  from  the  metal  A  to  the 
metal  B  through  the  hot  junction. 
If,  instead  of  lead,  we  had  assumed 
any  other  metal  as  the  standard 
metal,  the  diagram  would  have  been 
altered  in  form,  but  all  areas  measured 
on  the  diagram  would  have  remained 
the  same,  the  change  of  form  being 
due  to  a  shearing  strain  in  which  the  slipping  is  along  vertical 
lines. 

Thermo-electric  Inversion. 

164.]  Gumming  in  1823  discovered  several  cases  in  which  the 
thermo-electric  order  of  two  metals  as  observed  at  ordinary  tempera- 
tures becomes  inverted  at  high  temperatures.  The  lines  corre- 
sponding to  these  metals  on  the  thermo-electric  diagram  must 
therefore  cross  one  another  at  some  intermediate  temperature,  called 
the  Neutral  Temperature  for  these  metals. 

Tait  has  recently  investigated  the  lines  which  represent  a  con- 
siderable number  of  metals  in  the  thermo-electric  diagram,  and  he 
finds  that  for  most  metals  they  are  nearly  if  not  exactly  straight 
lines.  The  lines  for  iron  and  nickel  however  have  considerable 
sinuosities,  so  that  they  may  intersect  the  straight  lines  belonging 
to  another  metal  in  several  different  points  corresponding  to  several 
different  neutral  temperatures. 


Fig.  36. 


1 66.]  PELTIER  EFFECT.  133 


Thermal  effects  of  the  Current. 

165.]  By  applying  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy  to 
the  case  of  a  thermo-electric  current,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  certain 
thermal  effects  must  accompany  the  electric  current. 

Let  us  consider  what  takes  place  while  one  unit  of  electricity 
is  transmitted  across  any  section  of  the  circuit.  The  work  done 
on  the  electric  current  is  the  product  of  the  electromotive  force 
into  the  quantity  of  electricity  transmitted,  and  since  this  latter 
quantity  is  unity,  the  work  is  numerically  equal  to  the  electro- 
motive force,  and  is  represented  by  the  area  ABba  in  the  thermo- 
electric diagram.  If  the  current  is  allowed  to  flow  without 
anything  to  impede  it  except  the  resistance  of  the  circuit,  the 
whole  of  the  work  will  be  converted  into  heat,  but  if  the  resistance 
of  any  part  of  the  circuit  such  as  a  long  and  fine  wire  greatly 
exceeds  that  of  the  thermo-electric  couple,  the  heat  generated  in 
that  part  of  the  circuit  will  greatly  exceed  that  generated  in  the 
thermo-electric  couple  itself.  Instead  of  allowing  the  current  to 
generate  heat,  we  may  make  it  drive  a  magneto-electric  engine, 
and  so  convert  any  given  proportion  of  the  work  into  mechanical 
work. 

Thus  for  every  unit  of  electricity  which  is  transmitted,  a  certain 
amount  of  work  is  done  by  the  thermo-electric  forces  on  the  current. 
The  only  source  of  this  work  is  the  heat  of  the  thermo-electric 
couple,  and  therefore,  by  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy, 
we  conclude  that  an  amount  of  heat,  dynamically  equivalent  to  this 
work,  must  have  disappeared  in  some  part  of  the  circuit. 

166.]  Now  Peltier*  in  1834  found  that  when  an  electric  current 
is  made  to  pass  from  one  metal  to  another  which  has  a  higher 
thermo-electric  power,  the  junction  is  cooled,  or,  since  there  is  no 
permanent  change  in  the  metals,  there  is  a  disappearance  of  heat. 
When  the  current  is  made  to  flow  in  the  opposite  direction  the 
junction  is  heated,  indicating  a  generation  of  heat. 

This  thermal  effect  of  the  current  at  the  junction  is  of  quite 
a  different  kind  from  the  ordinary  generation  of  heat  by  the  current 
while  it  overcomes  the  resistance  of  a  conductor.  The  latter, 
which  we  may  call  with  Thomson  the  frictional  generation  of  heat, 
is  the  same  when  the  direction  of  the  current  is  reversed,  and 
varies  as  the  square  of  the  strength  of  the  current.  The  former, 

*  Annales  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique,  Ivi.  p.  371  (1834). 


THOMSON  EFFECT. 


[i67- 


which  we  shall  call  the  Peltier  effect,  is  reversed  when  the  current 
is  reversed,  and  depends  simply  on  the  strength  of  the  current. 

167.]  But  Thomson  has  shewn  that  besides  the  Peltier  effect, 
there  must  in  certain  metals  be  another  reversible  thermal  effect 
of  the  current.  The  current  must  generate  or  absorb  heat  when 
it  passes  from  hotter  to  colder  or  from  colder  to  hotter  parts  of 
the  same  metal.  Thus,  let  a  thermo-electric  couple  of  copper  and 
iron  be  kept  with  one  junction  AB  at  the  neutral  temperature 
which  is  about  280°C.,  and  the  other,  ab,  at  some  lower  temperature. 
The  thermo-electric  current  is  from  copper  to  iron  at  the  hot 
junction  AB  and  from  iron  to  copper  at  the  cold  junction  ab. 

Now  the  Peltier  effect  at  the  hot  junction,  AB,  is  zero,  for  that 
junction  is  at  the  neutral  temperature,  and  the  Peltier  effect  at  the 
cold  junction,  ab,  is  a  generation  of  heat,  for  the  current  is  there 

passing  from  the  metal  of 
higher  to  the  metal  of  lower 
thermo-electric  power.  Hence 
the  absorption  of  heat  which 
must  exist  in  order  to  account 
for  the  work  done  by  the  cur- 
rent must  take  place  in  some 
Fi  37  other  part  of  the  circuit,  either 

in  the  copper  where  the  cur- 
rent is  flowing  from  cold  to  hot,  or  in  the  iron  where  it  is  flowing 
from  hot  to  cold,  or  in  both  metals.  This  thermal  effect  of  the 
current  was  predicted  by  Thomson  as  the  result  of  reasoning 
similar  to  that  here  given.  He  afterwards  verified  this  pre- 
diction experimentally,  and  found  that  in  iron  unequally  heated 
a  current  from  hot  to  cold  cools  the  metal,  while  a  current  from 
cold  to  hot  heats  it,  and  that  the  reverse  thermal  effect  takes 
place  in  copper.  We  shall  refer  to  this  thermal  effect  as  the 
Thomson  effect. 

168.]  Thomson  has  shewn  that  a  very  close  analogy  subsists  be- 
tween these  thermo-electric  phenomena  and  those  of  a  fluid  circu- 
lating in  a  tube  consisting  of  two  vertical  branches  connected  by 
two  horizontal  branches.  A  fluid,  heated  in  one  part  of  the  circuit, 
and  passing  on  into  cooler  parts  of  the  system,  will  give  out  heat, 
and  when  it  passes  from  colder  to  warmer  parts  will  absorb  heat, 
the  amount  of  heat  emitted  or  absorbed  depending  on  the  specific 
heat  of  the  fluid.  According  to  this  analogy,  positive  or  vitreous 
electricity  carries  heat  with  it  in  copper  as  if  it  were  a  real  fluid, 


SPECIFIC   HEAT   OF   ELECTRICITY. 


135 


but  in  iron  it  behaves  as  if  its  specific  heat  were  a  negative  quan- 
tity which  cannot  be  the  case  in  a  real  fluid.  Hence  Thomson 
expresses  the  fact  by  saying  that  negative  or  resinous  electricity 
carries  heat  with  it  in  iron.  Neither  kind  of  electricity,  therefore, 
can  be  regarded  in  this  respect  as  a  real  fluid.  We  may  therefore 
adhere  to  the  usual  convention,  and  speaking  of  the  positive  elec- 
tricity only,  we  may  say  that  in  copper  it  behaves  as  if  its  specific 
heat  were  positive,  and  in  iron  as  if  it  were  negative. 

169.]  M.  Le  Roux,*  who  has  made  some  very  careful  experiments 
on  the  Thomson  effect,  finds  that  in  lead  the  specific  heat  of 
electricity  is  either  zero  or  very  small  indeed.  Professor  Tait  has 
therefore  adopted  lead  as  the  standard  metal  in  his  thermo-electric 
measurements. 

170.]  We  may  express  both  the  Peltier  and  the  Thomson  effects 
by  stating  that  when  an  electric  current  is  flowing  from  places  of 
smaller  to  places  of  greater  thermo-electric  power,  heat  is  absorbed, 
and  when  it  is  flowing  in  the  reverse  direction  heat  is  generated, 
and  this,  whether  the  difference  of  thermo-electric  power  in  the  two 
places  arises  from  a  difference  in  the  nature  of  the  metal  or  from  a 
difference  of  temperature  in  the  same  metal. 

171.]    The  amount  of  heat  absorbed  corresponding  to  a  given 


b 

Fig.  38. 


increase  of  thermo-electric  power,  must  depend  on  the  temperature 
as  well  as  on  the  amount  of  that  increase.  For  consider  a  circuit 
consisting  of  two  metals,  neither  of  which  exhibits  the  Thomson 
effect.  Such  a  circuit  would  be  represented  in  the  thermo-electric 
diagram  by  the  parallelogram  AabB  with  horizontal  and  vertical 
sides.  If  the  current  flows  in  the  direction  AalB  heat  is  absorbed 
in  IB  A  and  generated  on  ab,  and  no  reversible  thermal  effect  occurs 
elsewhere.  Also  the  heat  absorbed  in  BA  exceeds  that  generated 

*  Annales  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique  (4),  x.  p.  243  (1867). 


136  SECOND   LAW   OF  THERMODYNAMICS.  [172. 

in  ab  by  a  quantity  represented  by  the  parallelogram  BAab.  Hence 
if  we  produce  Aa  and  Bb  and  draw  the  vertical  line  a/3  at  such  a 
distance  that  the  heat  absorbed  at  the  junction  AB  is  represented 
by  the  parallelogram  BAa(3,  the  heat  generated  at  the  junction  ab> 
which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  less  than  this  by  the  parallelogram  BAab, 
will  be  represented  by  the  parallelogram  abfia.  The  Peltier  effect 
therefore  is  measured  by  the  product  of  the  increase  of  thermo- 
electric power  in  passing  from  the  first  metal  to  the  second  into 
the  temperature  reckoned  from  some  point  lower  than  any  observed 
temperature,  and  is  of  the  form  ($2— -</>i)  (t— tj,  when  the  current 
flows  from  a  metal  in  which  the  thermo-electric  power  is  fa  to 
a  metal  in  which  it  is  <£2 }  and  t  is  the  thermometer  reading,  and 
#!  is  a  constant,  the  value  of  which  can  be  ascertained  only  by 
experiment. 

172.]  Thus  far  we  are  led  by  the  principle  of  the  Conservation 
of  Energy.  It  is  a  consequence,  however,  of  the  Second  Law  of 
Thermodynamics,  that  in  all  strictly  reversible  operations  in  which 
heat  is  transformed  into  work  or  work  into  heat,  the  amount  of  heat 
absorbed  or  emitted  at  the  higher  temperature  is  to  that  emitted  or 
absorbed  at  the  lower  temperature  as  the  higher  temperature  is  to 
the  lower  temperature,  both  being  reckoned  from  absolute  zero  of 
the  thermodynamic  scale.  It  follows  that  the  line  a/3  must  be 
drawn  in  the  position  corresponding  to  the  absolute  zero  of  the 
thermodynamic  scale,  and  that  the  expression  for  the  heat  absorbed 
may  be  written  (<£2 — $>\)Q,  where  6  is  the  temperature  reckoned 
from  absolute  zero.  It  is  true  that  the  thermo-electric  operations 
cannot  be  made  completely  reversible,  as  the  conduction  of  heat, 
which  is  an  irreversible  operation,  is  always  going  on,  and  cannot 
be  prevented.  We  must  therefore  consider  the  application  of  the 
Second  Law  of  Thermodynamics  to  the  reversible  part  of  the 
phenomena  as  a  very  probable  conjecture  consistent  with  other 
parts  of  the  theory  of  heat,  and  verified  approximately  by  the 
measurements  of  the  Peltier  and  Thomson  effects  by  Le  Roux. 

173.]  We  are  now  able  to  express  all  the  thermal  and  electro- 
motive effects  in  terms  of  the  areas  in  the  thermo-electric  diagram. 
Let  li  be  the  line  for  one  metal,  say  iron,  Cc  that  for  another,  say 
copper.  Let  T  be  the  higher  temperature  and  t  the  lower,  and  let 
0  represent  the  position  of  absolute  zero.  Let  the  current  flow  in 
the  direction  die  till  one  unit  of  electricity  has  passed.  Then  the 
heat  absorbed  at  the  hot  junction  will  be  represented  by  the  area 
C2QE.  This  is  the  Peltier  effect. 


ENTROPY. 


137 


The  heat  absorbed  in  the  iron  is  represented  by  EPQ... Thomson 

effect. 

The  heat  generated  in  the  cold  junction,         by  icSP... Peltier 

effect. 

The  heat  absorbed  in  the  copper,  by  cCRS... Thomson 

effect. 


t  T 

Fig.  39. 

The  whole  heat  absorbed  is  therefore  represented  by  CliPSc,  and 
the  heat  generated  by  icSP,  leaving  Clic  for  the  heat  absorbed  as 
the  result  of  the  whole  operation.  This  heat  is  converted  into  the 
work  done  on  the  electric  current. 

174.]  Entropy*,  in  Thermodynamics,  is  a  quantity  relating  to 
a  body  such  that  its  increase  or  diminution  implies  that  heat  has 
entered  or  left  the  body.  The  amount  of  heat  which  enters  or 
leaves  the  body  is  measured  by  the  product  of  the  increase  or 
diminution  of  entropy  into  the  temperature  at  which  it  takes 
place. 

In  this  treatise  we  have  avoided  making  any  assumption  that 
electricity  is  a  body  or  that  it  is  not  a  body,  and  we  must  also  avoid 
any  statement  which  might  suggest  that,  like  a  body,  electricity 
may  receive  or  emit  heat. 

We  may,  however,  without  any  such  assumption,  make  use  of 
the  idea  of  entropy,  introduced  by  Clausius  and  Rankine  into  the 
theory  of  heat,  and  extend  it  to  certain  thermo-electric  phenomena, 
always  remembering  that  entropy  is  not  a  thing  but  a  mere  instru- 
ment of  scientific  thought,  by  which  we  are  enabled  to  express  in  a 

*  [Arts.  174-181  consist  principally  of  a  repetition  of  Arts.  167-173,  but  expressed 
in  the  language  of  the  doctrine  of  Entropy.  It  was  probably  the  intention  of  Pro- 
fessor Clerk  Maxwell  to  insert  them  or  some  modification  of  them  in  place  of  the 
foregoing  Articles,  but  it  has  been  thought  best  not  to  alter  the  continuous  MS.,  but 
simply  to  insert  the  separate  Articles  here  as  representing  a  slightly  different  method 
of  applying  the  Second  Law  of  Thermodynamics  to  thermo-electric  phenomena.] 


138  ELECTETC   ENTROPY.  [175. 

compact  and  convenient  manner  the  conditions  under  which  heat 
is  emitted  or  absorbed. 

175.]  When  an  electric  current  passes  from  one  metal  to  another 
heat  is  emitted  or  absorbed  at  the  junction  of  the  metals.  We  shall 
therefore  suppose  that  the  electric  entropy  has  diminished  or  in- 
creased when  the  electricity  passes  from  the  one  metal  to  the  other, 
the  electric  entropy  being  different  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
medium  in  which  the  electricity  is,  and  being  affected  by  its 
temperature,  stress,  strain,  &c.  It  is  only,  however,  during  the 
motion  of  electricity  that  any  thermo-electric  phenomena  are  pro- 
duced. 

176.]  It  is  proved  in  treatises  on  thermodynamics  that  in  all  re- 
versible thermal  operations,  what  is  called  the  entropy  of  the  system 
remains  the  same.  (Maxwell's  Theory  of  Heat,  5th  ed.  p.  190.) 

The  entropy  of  a  body  is  a  quantity  which  when  the  body  re- 
ceives (or  emits)  a  quantity  of  heat,  Ht  increases  (or  diminishes)  by 

TT 

a  quantity  — -  >  where  6  is  the  temperature  reckoned  on  the  ther- 

u 

modynamic  scale.  The  entropy  of  a  material  system  is  the  sum  of 
the  entropies  of  its  parts. 

177.]  The  thermal  effects  of  electric  currents  are  in  part  re- 
versible and  in  part  irreversible,  but  the  reversible  effects,  such  as 
those  discovered  by  Peltier  and  Thomson,  are  always  small  com- 
pared with  the  irreversible  effects — the  frictional  generation  of  heat 
and  the  diffusion  of  heat  by  conduction.  Hence  we  cannot  extend 
the  demonstration  of  the  theorem,  which  applies  to  completely  re- 
versible thermal  operations,  to  thermo-electric  phenomena. 

But,  as  Sir  Wm.  Thomson  has  pointed  out,  we  have  great 
reason  to  conjecture  that  the  reversible  portion  of  the  thermo-electric 
effects  are  subject  to  the  same  condition  as  other  reversible  thermal 
operations.  This  conjecture  has  not  hitherto  been  disproved  by  any 
experiments,  and  it  may  hereafter  be  verified  by  careful  electric  and 
calorimetric  measurements.  In  the  meantime  the  consequences  which 
flow  from  this  conjecture  may  be  conveniently'  described  by  an  ex- 
tension of  the  term  entropy  to  electric  phenomena. 

The  term  Electric  Entropy,  as  we  shall  use  it,  corresponds  to  the 
term  Thermo-electric  Power,  as  defined  by  Sir  W.  Thomson  in  his 
fifth  paper  on  the  Dynamical  Theory  of  Heat  (Trans.  R.  S.  E. 
1st  May,  1854  ;  Art.  140,  p.  151). 


THERMO-ELECTRIC  DIAGRAM. 


139 


Thermo-electric  Diagram. 

178.]  The  most  convenient  method  of  studying  the  theory  of 
thermo-electric  phenomena  is  by  means  of  a  diagram  in  which  the 
temperature  and  electric  entropy  of  a  metal  at  any  instant  are 
represented  by  the  horizontal  and  vertical  coordinates  of  a  point 
on  the  diagram.  Thus,  if  OC  represents  the  temperature,  reckoned 
from  absolute  zero  on  the  thermodynamie  scale,  of  a  piece  of  a 
certain  metal,  and  if  CA  represents  the  electric  entropy  corre- 
sponding to  the  same  piece  of  metal,  then  the  point  A  will  indicate 
by  its  position  in  the  diagram  the  thermo-electric  state  of  the  piece 
of  metal.  In  the  same  way  we  may  find  other  points  in  the 
diagram  corresponding  to  the  same  metal  under  other  conditions  or 
to  other  metals. 

If  in  the  path  of  an  electric  current  electricity  passes  from  one 
metal  to  another  or  from  one  portion  of  a  metal  to  another  at 
a  different  temperature,  the  different  points  of  the  electric  circuit 


Fig.  40. 

will  be  represented  by  corresponding  points  on  the  thermo-electric 
diagram.  The  path  of  the  current  will  thus  be  represented  by 
a  line  or  path  on  the  thermo-electric  diagram.  When  the  current 
flows  in  a  single  metal,  A,  from  a  point  at  a  temperature  OC  to 
another  at  a  temperature  Oc,  the  path  is  represented  by  the  line  Aa, 
the  points  of  which  represent  the  state  of  the  metal  at  intermediate 
temperatures.  The  form  of  the  path  depends  on  the  nature  of 
the  metal  and  on  the  other  influences  which  act  on  it  besides 
temperature,  such  as  stress  and  strain.  Professor  Tait,  however, 


140  SPECIFIC  HEAT   OF   ELECTRICITY.  [179. 

finds  that  for  most  of  the  metals  except  iron  and  nickel,  the  path 
on  the  thermo-electric  diagram  is  a  straight  line. 

When  the  current  flows  from  the  metal  A  to  another  metal  B 
at  the  same  temperature,  the  path  is  represented  by  AB>  a  vertical 
straight  line.  The  circuit  traversed  by  the  electric  current  will 
thus  be  represented  by  a  circuit  on  the  thermo-electric  diagram. 

The  heat  generated  while  a  unit  of  electricity  moves  along  the 
path  Aa  is  represented  by  the  area  of  the  figure  AaQPA,  bounded 
by  the  path  Aa,  the  horizontal  ordinate  at  a,  the  line  of  zero  tem- 
perature and  the  horizontal  ordinate  at  A.  If  this  area  lies  on  the 
right  of  the  path,  it  represents  heat  generated  ;  if  it  lies  to  the  left 
of  the  path  it  represents  heat  absorbed. 

179.]  If  electricity  were  a  fluid,  running  through  the  conductor 
as  water  does  through  a  tube,  and  always  giving  out  or  absorbing 
heat  till  its  temperature  is  that  of  the  conductor,  then  in  passing 
from  hot  to  cold  it  would  give  out  heat  and  in  passing  from  cold  to 
hot  it  would  absorb  heat,  and  the  amount  of  this  heat  would  depend 
on  the  specific  heat  of  the  fluid. 

In  the  diagram  the  specific  heat  of  the  fluid  at  A  would  be 
represented  by  the  line  aP,  where  a  is  the  point  where  the  tan- 
gent to  the  path  at  A  cuts  the  line  of  zero  temperature,  and  P 
is  the  intersection  with  the  same  line  of  the  horizontal  ordinate 
through  A. 

The  line  A  a  a  in  the  diagram  is  such  that  the  electric  entropy 
increases  as  the  temperature  rises.  This  is  the  case  with  copper, 
and  therefore  we  may  assert  that  the  specific  heat  of  electricity  in 
copper  is  positive. 

In  other  metals,  as  for  instance  iron,  the  electric  entropy 
diminishes  as  the  temperature  rises,  as  is  represented  by  the  line 
fibB.  The  specific  heat  of  electricity  in  such  metals  is  negative, 
and  at  B  is  represented  by  the  line  /3  T. 

180.]  Thomson,  who  discovered  first  from  theory  and  then  by 
experimental  verification  the  thermal  effect  of  an  electric  current  in 
an  unequally  heated  metal,  expresses  the  fact  by  saying  that 
vitreous  electricity  carries  heat  with  it  in  copper,  while  resinous 
electricity  carries  heat  with  it  in  iron. 

We  must  remember,  however,  that  these  phrases  are  not  in- 
tended by  Thomson,  and  must  not  be  understood  by  us,  to  imply 
that  electricity  either  positive  or  negative  is  a  fluid  which  can 
be  heated  or  cooled  and  which  has  a  definite  specific  heat.  Since, 
therefore,  the  whole  set  of  phrases  are  merely  analogical  we  shall 


1 8 1.]  ELECTROMOTIVE   FORCE.  141 

adhere  to  the  ordinary  convention  according  to  which  vitreous 
electricity  is  reckoned  positive,  and  we  shall  say  that  the  specific 
heat  of  electricity  is  positive  in  copper  but  negative  in  iron. 

The  obvious  fact  that  no  real  fluid  can  have  a  negative  specific 
heat  need  not  disturb  us,  for  we  do  not  assert  that  electricity  is  a 
real  fluid. 

181.]  Let  us  next  consider  a  circuit  consisting  of  two  linear 
conductors  of  the  metals  A  and  £  respectively,  the  two  junctions 
being  kept  at  different  temperatures,  represented  in  the  diagram 
by  OC  and  Oc.  This  electric  circuit  will  be  represented  in  the 
diagram  by  the  circuit  AabBA.  If  the  current  flows  in  the 
direction  AabB  till  one  unit  of  electricity  has  been  transmitted, 
the  following  thermal  effects  will  take  place. 

(1)  In  the  metal  A  heat  will  be  generated  as  the  electricity  flows 
from  the  hot  junction  to  the  cold  junction.     The  amount  of  this 
heat  is  represented  bythe  area  AaQPA. 

(2)  At  the  cold  junction,  where  the  electricity  passes  from  the 
metal  A  to  the  metal  B,  heat  will  be  generated.     The  amount  of 
this  heat  is  represented  by  the  area  abSQa. 

(3)  In  the  metal  B  heat  will  be  generated  as  the  electricity  flows 
from  the  cold  junction  to  the  hot  junction.     The  amount  of  this 
heat  is  represented  by  the  area  bBTSb. 

(4)  At  the  hot  junction,  where  the  electricity  passes  from  the 
metal  B  to  the  metal  A,  heat  will  be  absorbed.     The  amount  of 
this  heat  is  represented  by  the  area  BAPTB.     The  reverse  order  of 
the  letters  shews  that  this  area  is  to  be  taken  negatively. 

The  whole  heat  generated  is  therefore  represented  by  the  area 
AabBTPA,  and  the  whole  heat  absorbed  by  BAPTB.  The  total 
effect  is  therefore  an  absorption  of  heat  represented  by  the  area 
AabBA. 

The  energy  corresponding  to  this  heat  cannot  be  lost.  It  is 
transformed  into  electrical  work  spent  upon  the  current  by  an 
electromotive  force  acting  in  the  direction  of  the  current.  Since 
the  quantity  of  electricity  transmitted  by  the  current  is  supposed 
to  be  unity,  the  energy,  which  is  the  product  of  the  electromotive 
force  into  the  quantity  of  electricity  transmitted,  must  be  equal  to 
the  electromotive  force  itself. 

Hence  the  electromotive  force  is  represented  by  the  area  AabBA} 
and  it  acts  in  the  direction  represented  by  the  order  of  the  letters — 
that  is, 

Hot,  metal  J,  cold,  metal  B,  hot. 


142  MEASUREMENT   OF   ELECTROMOTIVE   FORCE.        [182. 

This  electromotive  force  will,  if  the  resistance  of  the  circuit  is 
finite,  produce  an  actual  current  *.  It  was  by  means  of  such  currents 
that  the  thermo-electric  properties  of  metallic  circuits  were  first 
discovered  by  Seebeck  in  1822. 

182.]  The  electrical  effects  due  to  heat  were  discovered  before 
the  thermal  effects  due  to  the  electric  current,  but  the  application 
of  the  thermal  effects  of  the  current  to  determine  the  electromotive 
forces  acting  along  different  portions  of  the  circuit  is  due  to  Sir 
W.  Thomson  f.  It  is  manifest  that  in  a  heterogeneous  circuit 
we  cannot  determine  the  electromotive  force  acting  from  the  point 
A  to  the  point  B  by  simply  connecting  these  points  by  wires  to  the 
electrodes  of  a  galvanometer  or  electrometer,  for  we  are  ignorant  of 
the  electromotive  forces  acting  at  the  junctions  of  these  wires  with 
the  matter  of  the  circuit  at  A  and.J?. 

But  if  we  cause  a  current  of  known  strength  to  flow  from  A  to  B, 
and  if  this  current  causes  the  generation  of  a  quantity  of  heat  equal 
to  H  in  that  portion  of  the  circuit,  and  if  no  chemical,  magnetic  or 
other  permanent  effect  takes  place  in  the  matter  of  the  conductor 
between  A  and  B,  then  we  "know  that  if  Q  is  the  total  quantity  of 
electricity  which  has  been  transmitted  from  A  to  B,  and  E  the 
electromotive  force  in  the  direction  from  B  to  A  which  the  current 
has  to  overcome,  then  the  work  done  by  the  current  is  QHJ.  This 
work  is  done  within  a  definite  region,  namely  the  portion  AB  of 
the  conductor,  and  it  is  entirely  expended  in  generating  heat  within 
that  region.  Hence,  if  the  quantity  of  heat  generated  in  the 
portion  AB  is  H,  as  expressed  in  dynamical  measure,  we  have  the 
equation  QE=H, 

and  since  Q  and  H  are  capable  of  being  measured  we  can  determine 
the  electromotive  force  E  acting  against  the  current.  When  the 
electromotive  force  acts  in  the  same  direction  as  the  current  is 
flowing,  the  quantity  of  heat  generated  is  negative ;  or,  in  other 
words,  there  is  an  absorption  of  heat. 

In  this  investigation  we  must  remember  that  E  represents  the 
whole  electromotive  force  acting  against  the  current.  Now  part  of 
this  electromotive  force  arises  from  the  electric  resistance  of  the 


*  [The  energy  expended  in  driving  the  current  will,  if  not  otherwise'  employed,  be 
ultimately  converted  into  heat  through  the  frictional  resistance  of  the  metals.  The 
heat  produced  by  this  irreversible  action  must  be  distinguished  from  the  Thomson 
and  Peltier  effects,  and  is  represented  on  the  Thermo-electric  diagram  by  the  area 
AJBbaA.] 

t  Trans.  E.  8.  Edin.  1854. 


184.]        MEASUREMENT   OF   ELECTROMOTIVE   FORCE.  143 

conductor.     This  part  always  acts  against  the  current,  and  is  pro- 
portional to  the  current  according  to  Ohm's  law. 

The  other  part  of  the  electromotive  force  acts  in  a  definite  direc- 
tion, either  from  A  to  B  or  from  B  to  A,  and  is  independent  of  the 
direction  of  the  current.  It  is  generally  this  latter  part  of  the 
electromotive  force  which  is  referred  to  as  the  electromotive  force 
from  A  to  B. 

It  is  easy  to  eliminate  the  part  due  to  resistance  by  making  two 
experiments  in  which  currents  of  equal  strength  are  made  to  flow 
in  one  case  from  A  to  B  and  in  the  other  from  B  to  A.  The  excess 
of  the  heat  generated  in  the  second  case  over  that  generated  in  the 
first  case,  per  unit  of  electricity  transmitted,  is  numerically  equal 
to  twice  the  electromotive  force  from  A  to  B. 

183.]  The  total  electromotive  force  round  any  circuit  is  easily 
measured  by  breaking  the  circuit  in  a  place  where  it  is  homo- 
geneous, and  determining  the  difference  of  potentials  of  the  two  ends. 
This  may  be  done  by  any  of  the  ordinary  methods  for  determining 
electromotive  force  or  difference  of  potentials,  because  in  this  case 
the  two  ends  are  of  the  same  substance  and  at  the  same  tempera- 
ture. But  we  cannot  by  this  method  determine  how  much  of  this 
electromotive  force  has  its  seat  in  a  particular  part  of  the  circuit, 
as  for  instance,  between  A  and  B,  where  A  and  B  are  of  different 
substances  or  at  different  temperatures.  The  only  method  by  which 
we  can  determine  where  the  electromotive  force  acts  is  that  of 
measuring  the  heats  generated  or  absorbed  during  the  transmission 
of  a  unit  of  electricity  from  A  to  B. 

184.]  In  the  cases  we  have  hitherto  considered  the  only  per- 
manent effect  of  the  current  has  been  the  generation  or  absorption 
of  heat,  for  metals  are  not  altered  in  any  respect  by  the  continuous 
flow  of  a  current  through  them.  But  when  the  current  flows  from 
a  metal  to  an  electrolyte  or  from  an  electrolyte  to  a  metal,  there 
are  chemical  changes,  and  in  applying  the  principle  of  the  conserva- 
tion of  energy  we  must  take  account  of  these  as  well  as  of  the 
thermal  effects. 

We  shall  consider  the  current  as  flowing  through  an  electrolyte 
from  the  anode  to  the  cathode.  The  fundamental  phenomenon  of 
electrolysis  is  the  liberation  of  the  components  or  ions  of  the  electro- 
lyte, the  anion  at  the  anode  and  the  cation  at  the  cathode.  This  is 
the  only  purely  electrolytic  effect ;  the  subsequent  phenomena 
depend  on  the  nature  of  the  ions,  the  electrodes  and  the  electrolyte, 
and  take  place  according  to  chemical  and  physical  laws  in  a  manner 


144  ELECTROMOTIVE    FORCE   BETWEEN  [185. 

apparently  independent  of  the  electric  current.  Thus  the  ion,  when 
liberated  at  the  electrode,  may  behave  in  several  different  ways, 
according  to  the  conditions  in  which  it  finds  itself.  It  may  be  in 
such  a  condition  that  it  acts  neither  on  the  electrode  nor  on  the 
electrolyte,  as  when  it  is  a  gas  which  escapes  in  bubbles,  or  sub- 
stance insoluble  in  the  electrolyte,  which  is  precipitated.  It  may 
be  deposited  on  the  surface  of  the  electrode,  as  hydrogen  is  on 
platinum,  and  may  adhere  to  it  with  various  degrees  of  tenacity, 
from  mere  juxtaposition  up  to  chemical  combination.  If  it  is 
soluble  in  the  electrolyte,  it  will  diffuse  through  the  electrolyte 
according  to  the  ordinary  law  of  diffusion,  and  the  rate  of  this 
diffusion  is  not,  so  far  as  we  know,  affected  by  the  existence  of  the 
electric  current  through  the  electrolyte,  for  it  is  only  when  in  com- 
bination, and  not  when  in  mere  solution,  that  the  current  produces 
the  electrolytic  transfer  of  the  ions.  Thus  when  hydrogen  is  an 
ion,  part  of  it  may  escape  in  bubbles,  part  of  it  may  be  condensed 
on  the  electrode,  and  part  of  it  may  be  absorbed  into  the  electro- 
lyte without  combination,  and  travel  through  it  by  ordinary 
diffusion. 

185.]  The  liberated  ion  may  also  act  chemically  on  the  electrode 
or  on  the  electrolyte.  The  results  of  such  action  are  called 
secondary  products  of  electrolysis,  and  these  secondary  products  may 
remain  at  the  surface  of  the  electrodes,  or  may  become  diffused 
through  the  electrolyte.  Thus,  when  the  same  current  is  passed, 
first  through  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  soda  between  platinum  elec- 
trodes, and  then  through  sulphuric  acid,  equal  volumes  of  oxygen 
are  given  off  at  the  anodes  of  the  two  electrolytes,  and  equal 
volumes  of  hydrogen,  each  equal  to  double  the  volume  of  oxygen, 
are  given  off"  at  the  cathodes. 

But  if  the  electrolysis  is  conducted  in  suitable  vessels,  such  as 
U-shaped  tubes  or  vessels  with  a  porous  diaphragm,  so  that  the 
substance  surrounding  each  electrode  may  be  examined,  it  is 
found  that  at  the  anode  of  the  sulphate  of  soda  there  is  an  equiva- 
lent of  sulphuric  acid  as  well  as  an  equivalent  of  oxygen,  and  at 
the  cathode  there  is  an  equivalent  of  soda  as  well  as  two  equivalents 
of  hydrogen.  It  would  at  first  sight  appear  as  if  (according  to  the 
old  theory  of  the  constitution  of  salts)  the  sulphate  of  soda  were 
electrolysed  into  its  constituents,  sulphuric  acid  and  soda,  while  the 
water  of  the  solution  is  electrolysed  at  the  same  time  into  oxygen 
and  hydrogen.  But  this  explanation  would  involve  the  assumption 
that  the  same  current  which  passing  through  dilute  sulphuric  acid 


1 86.]  A   METAL   AND   AN   ELECTROLYTE.  H5 

electrolyses  one  equivalent  of  water,  when  it  passes  through  so- 
lution of  sulphate  of  soda  electrolyses  two  equivalents,  one  of  the 
salt  and  one  of  water,  and  this  would  be  contrary  to  the  law  of 
electrochemical  equivalents.  But  if  we  suppose  that  the  com- 
ponents of  sulphate  of  soda  are  not  SO3  and  Na2O,  but  SO4  and  Na2 
— not  sulphuric  acid  and  soda  but  sulphion  and  sodium — then  an 
equivalent  of  sulphion  travels  to  the  anode  and  is  set  free,  but  being 
unable  to  exist  in  a  free  state,  it  breaks  up  into  sulphuric  anhydride 
and  oxygen,  one  equivalent  of  each.  At  the  same  time  [two]  equiva- 
lents of  sodium  are  set  free  at  the  cathode,  and  then  decompose  the 
water  of  the  solution,  forming  two  equivalents  of  soda  [NaHO] 
and  two  of  hydrogen. 

In  the  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  the  gases  collected  at  the  elec- 
trodes are  the  constituents  of  water,  namely  one  volume  of  oxy- 
gen and  two  volumes  of  hydrogen.  There  is  also  an  increase 
of  sulphuric  acid  at  the  anode,  but  its  amount  is  less  than  one 
equivalent. 

186.]  It  follows  from  these  considerations  that  in  order  to  ascer- 
tain the  electromotive  force  acting  from  a  metal  to  an  electrolyte, 
we  must  take  account  of  the  whole  permanent  effects  of  the  passage 
of  one  unit  of  electricity  from  the  metal  to  the  electrolyte.  Thus 
if  the  electrolyte  is  sulphate  of  zinc,  with  zinc  electrodes,  a  certain 
amount  of  heat  is  generated  at  the  anode  for  every  unit  of  elec- 
tricity and  at  the  same  time  one  equivalent  of  zinc  combines  with 
one  equivalent  of  sulphion  and  forms  sulphate  of  zinc.  Now  the 
quantity  of  heat  generated  when  one  equivalent  of  zinc  combines 
with  oxygen  is  known  from  the  experiments  of  Andrews  and  others, 
and  also  the  heat  generated  when  an  equivalent  of  oxide  of  zinc 
combines  with  sulphuric  acid,  and  is  dissolved  in  water  so  as  to 
form  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  zinc  of  the  same  strength  as  that 
which  surrounds  the  electrode.  The  sum  of  these  quantities  of 
heat,  which  we  may  call  Ht  is  equivalent  to  the  total  work  done  by 
the  chemical  action  at  the  anode,  which  is  therefore  JH  [where 
J  represents  Joule's  equivalent  or  the  mechanical  equivalent  of 
heat].  Let  h  be  the  quantity  of  heat  generated  at  the  anode  during 
the  passage  of  one  unit  of  electricity,  and  let  E  be  the  electromotive 
force  acting  from  the  zinc  to  the  electrolyte,  that  is,  in  the  direction 
of  the  current.  Then  the  work  done  in  generating  heat  is  Jh,  and 
the  work  done  in  driving  the  current  is  E  so  that  the  equation  of 
work  is  JH=Jk  +  E 

or  E  =  J(H-h). 

L 


146  MEASUREMENT   OF   ELECTROMOTIVE   FORCE.        [187. 

Of  these  quantities  H  is  known  very  accurately  but  it  is  some- 
what difficult  to  measure  ^,  the  quantity  of  heat  generated  at  the 
electrode,  because  the  electrode  must  be  in  contact  with  the  electro- 
lyte, and  therefore  a  large  and  unknown  fraction  of  the  heat 
generated  will  be  carried  away  by  conduction  and  convection 
through  the  electrolyte.  The  only  method  which  seems  likely 
to  succeed  is  to  compare  the  stationary  temperature  at  a  certain 
distance  from  the  electrode  with  the  temperature  at  the  same 
point  when  in  the  place  of  the  electrode  we  put  a  fine  wire  of 
known  resistance  through  which  we  pass  a  known  current  so  as 
to  generate  heat  at  a  known  rate.  If  the  temperatures  are  equal 
in  the  two  cases  we  may  conclude  that  the  heat  is  generated  at  the 
same  rate  in  the  zinc  electrode  and  in  the  wire.  But  if  the  current 
is  a  strong  one  a  very  sensible  portion  of  the  whole  heat  generated 
will  be  due  to  the  work  done  by  the  current  in  overcoming  the 
ordinary  resistance  of  the  electrode  and  the  electrolyte.  As  the  elec- 
trode is  generally  made  of  a  metal  whose  resistance  is  very  small 
compared  with  that  of  the  electrolyte,  this  frictional  generation  of 
heat  will/take  place  principally  in  the  electrolyte.  This  frictional 
generation  of  heat  may  be  made  very  small  compared  with  the 
reversible  part  by  diminishing  the  strength  of  the  current,  but  then 
the  rate  of  generation  of  heat  becomes  so  small  that  it  is  difficult 
to  measure  it  in  the  presence  of  unavoidable  thermal  disturbances, 
such  as  arise  from  changes  in  the  temperature  of  the  air,  &c.  The 
experimental  investigation  is  therefore  one  of  considerable  difficulty 
and  I  am  not  aware  that  the  electromotive  force  from  a  metal  to  an 
electrolyte  has  as  yet  been  measured  even  approximately.*  If,  how- 
ever, we  assume  that  the  electromotive  forces  from  the  metals  A 
and  B  to  the  electrolyte  C  are  A  and  B  respectively,  and  that  the 
thermo-electric  powers  of  these  metals  at  the  temperature  0  are  a 
and  b  respectively,  then  the  electromotive  force  from  A  to  B  at 
their  junction  is  (b  —  a)  9. 

The  total  electromotive  force  round  the  circuit  in  the  cyclical 
direction  ABC  is  (b-a)0  +  B  —  A. 

On  the  Conservation  of  Energy  in  Electrolysis. 

187.]   Consider  an  electric  current  flowing  in  a  circuit  consisting 
partly  of  metals  and  partly  of  electrolytes  placed  in  series. 

During  the  passage  of  one  unit  of  electricity  through  any  section 

*  [See  Art.  192  and  last  two  paragraphs  of  note,  p.  150.] 


1 88.]  JOULE'S  EXPERIMENTS.  147 

of  the  circuit  one  electrochemical  equivalent  of  each  of  the  electro- 
lytes is  electrolysed.  There  is  therefore  a  definite  amount  of 
chemical  action  corresponding1  to  a  definite  quantity  of  electricity 
passed  through  the  circuit.  The  energy  equivalent  to  any  chemical 
process  can  be  ascertained  either  directly  or  indirectly.  When  the 
process  is  such  that  it  will  go  on  of  itself  and  if  the  only  effect 
external  to  the  system  is  the  giving  off  of  heat  generated  during 
the  process,  then  the  intrinsic  energy  of  the  system  must  be 
diminished  during  the  process  by  a  quantity  of  energy  equivalent 
to  the  heat  given  out.  If  a  material  system  consisting  of  definite 
quantities  of  so  many  chemical  substances  is  capable  of  existing  in 
several  different  states,  and  if  the  system  will  not  of  itself  pass 
from  one  of  these  states  (A)  to  another  (B)  we  can  still  find  the 
relative  energy  of  the  state  ( A)  with  respect  to  the  state  (B) 
provided  we  can  cause  both  the  state  (A)  and  the  state  (B)  to 
pass  into  the  state  (C)  which  we  may  suppose  to  be  the  state 
in  which  all  the  energies  of  combination  of  the  system  have  been 
exhausted. 

Thus  if  the  substances  in  the  system  are  oxygen,  hydrogen  and 
carbon  and  if  the  states  (A)  and  (B)  consist  of  two  different 
hydrocarbons  with  free  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  we  cannot  in  general 
cause  the  state  (A)  to  pass  into  the  state  (B\  but  we  can  cause 
either  (A)  or  (B)  to  pass  into  the  state  (C)  in  which  all  the 
hydrogen  is  combined  with  oxygen  as  water  and  all  the  carbon 
is  combined  with  oxygen  as  carbonic  acid.  In  this  way  the 
energy  of  the  state  (A)  relatively  to  the  state  (B)  can  be  determined 
by  measurements  of  heat. 

188.]  It  has  been  proved  experimentally  by  Joule  that  the  heat 
developed  throughout  the  whole  electric  circuit  is  the  same  for  the 
same  amount  of  chemical  action  whatever  be  the  resistance  of  the 
circuit  provided  no  other  form  of  energy  than  heat  is  given  off  by 
the  system. 

Thus  in  a  battery  the  electrodes  of  which  are  connected  by  a 
short  thick  wire  the  current  is  very  strong  and  the  heat  is  gener- 
ated principally  in  the  cells  of  the  battery  and  to  a  much  smaller 
extent  in  the  wire ;  but  if  the  wire  is  long  and  thin,  the  heat 
generated  in  the  wire  is  far  greater  than  that  generated  in  the 
cells,  but  if  we  take  into  account  the  heat  generated  in  the  wire 
as  well  as  that  generated  in  the  cells,  we  find  that  the  whole 
heat  generated  for  each  grain  of  zinc  dissolved  is  the  same  in 
both  cases. 

L  2 


148  ELECTROMOTIVE   FOKCE   IN  [189. 

189.]  If,  however,  the  circuit  includes  a  cell  in  which  dilute 
acid  is  electrolysed  into  oxygen  and  hydrogen  the  heat  generated 
in  the  circuit  per  grain  of  zinc  dissolved,  is  less  than  before,  by  the 
quantity  of  heat  which  would  be  generated  if  the  oxygen  and 
hydrogen  evolved  in  the  electrolytic  cell  were  made  to  combine. 

Or  if  the  circuit  includes  an  electromagnetic  engine  which  is 
employed  to  do  work,  the  heat  generated  in  the  circuit  is  less  than 
that  corresponding  to  the  zinc  consumed  by  an  amount  equal  to 
the  heat  which  would  be  generated  if  the  work  done  by  the  engine 
were  entirely  expended  in  friction. 

190.]  If  the  arrangement  is  such  that  the  amount  of  chemical 
action  depends  entirely  on  the  quantity  of  electricity  transmitted 
we  can  determine  the  electromotive  force  of  the  circuit  by  the 
following  method,  first  given  by  Thomson  (Phil.  Mag.^  Dec.  1851). 
Let  the  resistance  of  the  circuit  be  made  so  great  that  the  heat 
generated  by  the  current  in  the  electrolytes  may  be  neglected. 
Let  E  be  the  electromotive  force  of  the  circuit ;  then  the  work 
done  in  driving  one  unit  of  electricity  through  the  circuit  is . 
numerically  equal  to  E.  But  during  this  process  one  electro- 
chemical equivalent  of  the  electrolyte  undergoes  the  chemical 
process  which  goes  on  in  the  cell.  Hence,  if  the  energy  given 
out  during  this  process  is  entirely  expended  in  maintaining  the 
current,  the  dynamical  value  of  the  process  must  be  numerically 
equal  to  E,  the  electromotive  force  of  the  circuit,  or,  as  Thomson 
stated  it, 

*  The  electromotive  force  of  an  electrochemical  apparatus  is  in 
absolute  measure  equal  to  the  mechanical  equivalent  of  the  chemical 
action  on  one  electrochemical  equivalent  of  the  substance.' 

EXAMPLES. 

191.]  If  the  action  in  the  cell  consists  in  part  of  irreversible 
processes,  such  as 

1.  The  frictional  generation  of  heat  by  resistance  in  the  elec- 

trolyte, 

2.  Diffusion  of  the  primary  or  secondary  products  of  electrolysis 

through  the  electrolyte,  or, 

3.  Any  other  action  which  is  not  reversed  when  the  direction  of 

the  current  is  reversed, 

there  will  be  a  certain  amount  of  dissipation  of  energy  and  the 
electromotive  force   of  the  circuit  will  be  less  than   the  loss  of 


192.]  A  VOLTAIC  cmcuiT.  149 

intrinsic  energy  corresponding  to  the  electrolysis  of  one  electro- 
chemical equivalent. 

It  is  only  the  strictly  reversible  processes  that  must  be  taken 
into  account  in  calculating  the  electromotive  force  of  the  circuit. 

192.]  The  determination  of  the  total  electromotive  force  in  an 
electrochemical  circuit  is  therefore  always  possible.  If,  however, 
we  wish  to  determine  the  precise  points  in  the  circuit  where  the 
different  portions  of  this  electromotive  force  are  exerted,  we  find 
the  investigation  much  more  difficult  than  in  the  case  of  a  purely 
metallic  circuit. 

For  the  chemical  action  at  the  junction  of  a  metal  with  an 
electrolyte  is  generally  of  such  a  kind  that  it  cannot  take  place 
by  itself,  that  is  to  say,  without  an  action  equivalent  to  that 
which  takes  place  at  the  other  electrode.  Thus,  when  a  current 
passes  between  silver  electrodes  through  fused  chloride  of  silver, 
chlorine  is  liberated  at  the  anode  which  immediately  acts  on  the 
electrode  so  as  to  form  chloride  of  silver  and  silver  is  deposited  on 
the  cathode. 

Now  we  know  the  amount  of  heat  given  out  when  an  equivalent 
of  free  chlorine  combines  with  an  equivalent  of  silver  and  this  is 
equivalent  to  the  energy  which  must  be  spent  in  electrolysing 
chloride  of  silver  into  free  chlorine  and  free  silver,  but  the  process 
that  takes  place  at  the  anode  is  the  combination  of  silver,  not  with 
free  chlorine,  but  with  chlorine  in  the  act  of  being  electrolysed  out 
of  chloride  of  silver.* 

*  [The  following  note  is  an  extract  from  Professor  Maxwell's  letter  on  Potential 
published  in  the  Electrician,  April  26th,  1879]. 

In  a  voltaic  circuit  the  sum  of  the  electromotive  forces  from  zinc  to  the  electrolyte, 
from  the  electrolyte  to  copper,  and  from  copper  to  zinc,  is  not  zero  but  is  what  is  called 
the  electromotive  force  of  the  circuit — a  measurable  quantity.  Of  these  three  electro- 
motive forces  only  one  can  be  separately  measured  by  a  legitimate  process,  that, 
namely,  from  copper  to  zinc. 

Now  it  is  found  by  thermoelectric  experiments  that  this  electromotive  .force  is  ex- 
ceedingly small  at  ordinary  temperatures,  being  less  than  a  microvolt,  and  that  it  is 
from  zinc  to  copper. 

Hence  the  statement  deduced  from  experiments  in  which  air  is  the  third  medium, 
that  the  electromotive  force  from  copper  to  zinc  is  -75  volts,  cannot  be  correct.  In 
fact,  what  is  really  measured  is  the  difference  between  the  potential  in  air  near  the 
surface  of  copper,  and  the  potential  in  air  near  the  surface  of  zinc,  the  zinc  and  copper 
being  in  contact.  The  number  -75  is  therefore  the  electromotive  force,  in  volts  of 
the  circuit  copper,  zinc,  air,  copper,  and  is  the  sum  of  three  electromotive  forces,  only 
one  of  which  has  as  yet  been  measured. 

Mr.  J.  Brown  has  shown  (Phil.  Mag.  Aug.  1878,  p.  142),  by  the  divided  ring  method 
of  Sir  W.  Thomson,  that  whereas  copper  is  negative  with  respect  to  iron  in  air  it  is 
positive  with  respect  to  iron  in  hydrogen  sulphide. 

It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  the  reason  why  the  results  of  the  comparison  of 
metals  by  the  ordinary  '  contact  force '  experiments  harmonise  so  well  with  the  com- 
parison by  dipping  both  metals  in  water  or  an  oxidizing  electrolyte  is  not  because  the 
electromotive  force  between  a  metal  and  a  gas  or  an  electrolyte  is  small,  but  because 


150  CONSTANT   BATTERIES.  [*93*- 


On  Constant  Voltaic  Elements. 

193*.]  When  a  series  of  experiments  is  made  with  a  voltaic 
battery  in  which  polarization  occurs,  the  polarization  diminishes 
during  the  time  that  the  current  is  not  flowing,  so  that  when 
it  begins  to  flow  again  the  current  is  stronger  than  after  it  has 
flowed  for  some  time.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  resistance  of  the 
circuit  is  diminished  by  allowing  the  current  to  flow  through  a 
short  shunt,  then,  when  the  current  is  again  made  to  flow  through 
the  ordinary  circuit,  it  is  at  first  weaker  than  its  normal  strength 
on  account  of  the  great  polarization  produced  by  the  use  of  the 
short  circuit. 

To  get  rid  of  these  irregularities  in  the  current,  which  are 
exceedingly  troublesome  in  experiments  involving  exact  measure- 
ments, it  is  necessary  to  get  rid  of  the  polarization,  or  at  least 
to  reduce  it  as  much  as  possible. 

It  does  not  appear  that  there  is  much  polarization  at  the  surface 
of  the  zinc  plate  when  immersed  in  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  zinc 
or  in  dilute  sulphuric  acid.  The  principal  seat  of  polarization  is 
at  the  surface  of  the  negative  metal.  When  the  fluid  in  which 
the  negative  metal  is  immersed  is  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  it  is  seen 
to  become  covered  with  bubbles  of  hydrogen  gas,  arising  from  the 
electrolytic  decomposition  of  the  fluid.  Of  course  these  bubbles, 
by  preventing  the  fluid  from  touching  the  metal,  diminish  the 
surface  of  contact  and  increase  the  resistance  of  the  circuit.  But 
besides  the  visible  bubbles  it  is  certain  that  there  is  a  thin  coating 
of  hydrogen,  probably  not  in  a  free  state,  adhering  to  the  metal, 
and  as  we  have  seen  that  this  coating  is  able  to  produce  an  elec- 
tromotive force  in  the  reverse  direction,  it  must  necessarily  diminish 
the  electromotive  force  of  the  battery. 

Various  plans  have  been  adopted  to  get  rid  of  this  coating  of 
hydrogen.  It  may  be  diminished  to  some  extent  by  mechanical 

the  properties  of  air  agree,  to  a  certain  extent,  with  those  of  oxidising  electrolytes. 
For,  if  the  active  component  of  the  electrolyte  is  sulphur,  the  results  are  quite  different, 
and  the  same  kind  of  difference  occurs  when  hydrogen  sulphide  is  substituted  for  air. 

We  know  so  little  about  the  nature  of  the  ions  as  they  exist  in  an  electrolyte  that, 
even  if  we  could  measure  the  quantity  of  heat  generated  or  absorbed  when  unit  of 
electricity  passes  from  a  metal  to  an  electrolyte,  or  from  an  electrolyte  to  a  metal,  we 
could  not  determine  from  this  the  value  of  the  electromotive  force  from  the  metal  to 
the  electrolyte. 

If  this  is  the  case  with  liquid  electrolytes,  we  have  still  less  hope  of  determining  the 
electromotive  force  from  a  metal  to  a  gas,  for  we  cannot  produce  a  current  from  the 
one  to  the  other  without  tumultuary  and  non-reversible  effects,  such  as  disintegration 
of  the  metal  and  violent  disturbance  of  the  gas  by  the  discontinuous  discharge, 


193*-]  CONSTANT  BATTERIES.  151 

means,  such  as  stirring  the  liquid,  or  rubbing  the  surface  of  the 
negative  plate.  In  Smee's  battery  the  negative  plates  are  ver- 
tical, and  covered  with  finely  divided  platinum  from  which  the 
bubbles  of  hydrogen  easily  escape,  and  in  their  ascent  produce  a 
current  of  liquid  which  helps  to  brush  off  other  bubbles  as  they 
are  formed. 

A  far  more  efficacious  method,  however,  is  to  employ  chemical 
means.  These  are  of  two  kinds.  In  the  batteries  of  Grove  and 
Bunsen  the  negative  plate  is  immersed  in  a  fluid  rich  in  oxygen, 
and  the  hydrogen,  instead  of  forming  a  coating  on  the  plate, 
combines  with  this  substance.  In  Grove's  battery  the  plate  is 
of  platinum  immersed  in  strong  nitric  acid.  In  Bunsen's  first 
battery  it  is  of  carbon  in  the  same  acid.  Chromic  acid  is  also  used 
for  the  same  purpose,  and  has  the  advantage  of  being  free  from  the 
acid  fumes  produced  by  the  reduction  of  nitric  acid. 

A  different  mode  of  getting  rid  of  the  hydrogen  is  by  using 
copper  as  the  negative  metal,  and  covering  the  surface  with  a  coat 
of  oxide.  This,  however,  rapidly  disappears  when  it  is  used  as 
the  negative  electrode.  To  renew  it  Joule  has  proposed  to  make 
the  copper  plates  in  the  form  of  disks,  half  immersed  in  the  liquid, 
and  to  rotate  them  slowly,  so  that  the  air  may  act  on  the  parts 
exposed  to  it  in  turn. 

The  other  method  is  by  using  as  the  liquid  an  electrolyte,  the 
cation  of  which  is  a  metal  highly  negative  to  zinc. 

In  Daniell's  battery  a  copper  plate  is  immersed  in  a  saturated 
solution  of  sulphate  of  copper.  When  the  current  flows  through 
the  solution  from  the  zinc  to  the  copper  no  hydrogen  appears  on 
the  copper  plate,  but  copper  is  deposited  on  it.  When  the  solution 
is  saturated,  and  the  current  is  not  too  strong,  the  copper  appears 
to  act  as  a  true  cation,  the  anion  SO4  travelling  towards  the  zinc. 

When  these  conditions  are  not  fulfilled  hydrogen  is  evolved  at 
the  cathode,  but  immediately  acts  on  the  solution,  throwing  down 
copper,  and  uniting  with  SO4  to  form  oil  of  vitriol.  When  this 
is  the  case,  the  sulphate  of  copper  next  the  copper  plate  is  replaced 
by  oil  of  vitriol,  the  liquid  becomes  colourless,  and  polarization  by 
hydrogen  gas  again  takes  place.  The  copper  deposited  in  this  way 
is  of  a  looser  and  more  friable  structure  than  that  deposited  by  true 
electrolysis. 

To  ensure  that  the  liquid  in  contact  with  the  copper  shall  be 
saturated  with  sulphate  of  copper,  crystals  of  this  substance  must 
be  placed  in  the  liquid  close  to  the  copper,  so  that  when  the  solution 


152  DANIELL'S  BATTERY.  [iQ3*» 

is  made  weak  by  the  deposition  of  the  copper,  more  of  the  crystals 
may  be  dissolved. 

We  have  seen  that  it  is  necessary  that  the  liquid  next  the  copper 
should  be  saturated  with  sulphate  of  copper.  It  is  still  more 
necessary  that  the  liquid  in  which  the  zinc  is  immersed  should  be 
free  from  sulphate  of  copper.  If  any  of  this  salt  makes  its  way 
to  the  surface  of  the  zinc  it  is  reduced,  and  copper  is  deposited 
on  the  zinc.  The  zinc,  copper,  and  fluid  then  form  a  little  circuit 
in  which  rapid  electrolytic  action  goes  on,  and  the  zinc  is  eaten 
away  by  an  action  which  contributes  nothing  to  the  useful  effect 
of  the  battery. 

To  prevent  this,  the  zinc  is  immersed  either  in  dilute  sulphuric 
acid  or  in  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  zinc,  and  to  prevent  the  solution 
of  sulphate  of  copper  from  mixing  with  this  liquid,  the  two  liquids 
are  separated  by  a  division  consisting  of  bladder  or  porous  earthen- 
ware, which  allows  electrolysis  to  take  place  through  it,  but 
effectually  prevents  mixture  of  the  fluids  by  visible  currents. 

In  some  batteries  sawdust  is  used  to  prevent  currents.  The 
experiments  of  Graham,  however,  shew  that  the  process  of  diffusion 
goes  on  nearly  as  rapidly  when  two  liquids  are  separated  by  a 
division  of  this  kind  as  when  they  are  in  direct  contact,  provided 
there  are  no  visible  currents,  and  it  is  probable  that  if  a  septum 
is  employed  which  diminishes  the  diffusion,  it  will  increase  in 
exactly  the  same  ratio  the  resistance  of  the  element,  because  elec- 
trolytic conduction  is  a  process  the  mathematical  laws  of  which 
have  the  same  form  as  those  of  diffusion,  and  whatever  interferes 
with  one  must  interfere  equally  with  the  other.  The  only  differ- 
ence is  that  diffusion  is  always  going  on,  while  the  current  flows 
only  when  the  battery  is  in  action. 

In  all  forms  of  Daniell's  battery  the  final  result  is  that  the 
sulphate  of  copper  finds  its  way  to  the  zinc  and  spoils  the  battery. 
To  retard  this  result  indefinitely,  Sir  W.  Thomson"*  has  constructed 
Daniell's  battery  in  the  form  shewn  in  Fig.  41. 

In  each  cell  the  copper  plate  is  placed  horizontally  at  the  bottom, 
and  a  saturated  solution  of  sulphate  of  zinc  is  poured  over  it.  The 
zinc  is  in  the  form  of  a  grating  and  is  placed  horizontally  near  the 
surface  of  the  solution.  A  glass  tube  is  placed  vertically  in  the 
solution  with  its  lower  end  just  above  the  surface  of  the  copper 
plate.  Crystals  of  sulphate  of  copper  are  dropped  down  this  tube, 
and,  dissolving  in  the  liquid,  form  a  solution  of  greater  density 
*  Proc.  R.  S.,  Jan.  19,  1871. 


DANIELLS   BATTERY. 


153 


than  that  of  sulphate  of  zinc  alone,  so  that  it  cannot  get  tolbhe 
zinc  except  by  diffusion.  To  retard  this  process  of  diffusion,  a 
siphon,  consisting  of  a  glass  tube  stuffed  with  cotton  wick,  is 
placed  with  one  extremity  midway  between  the  zinc  and  copper, 
and  the  other  in  a  vessel  outside  the  cell,  so  that  the  liquid  is 


ELECTROD£S 


LEVEL  orSIPHOH 

ZH 50+t  CttSO*. 
COPPER 


Fig.  41. 


very  slowly  drawn  off  near  the  middle  of  its  depth.  To  supply 
its  place,  water,  or  a  weak  solution  of  sulphate  of  zinc,  is  added 
above  when  required.  In  this  way  the  greater  part  of  the  sulphate 
of  copper  rising  through  the  liquid  by  diffusion  is  drawn  off  by  the 
siphon  before  it  reaches  the  zinc,  and  the  zinc  is  surrounded  by 
liquid  nearly  free  from  sulphate  of  copper,  and  having  a  very  slow 
downward  motion  in  the  cell,  which  still  further  retards  the  upward 
motion  of  the  sulphate  of  copper.  During  the  action  of  the  battery 
copper  is  deposited  on  the  copper  plate,  and  SO4  travels  slowly 
through  the  liquid  to  the  zinc  with  which  it  combines,  forming 
sulphate  of  zinc.  Thus  the  liquid  at  the  bottom  becomes  less  dense 
by  the  deposition  of  the  copper,  and  the  liquid  at  the  top  becomes 
more  dense  by  the  addition  of  the  zinc.  To  prevent  this  action 
from  changing  the  order  of  density  of  the  strata,  and  so  producing 
instability  and  visible  currents  in  the  vessel,  care  must  be  taken  to 
keep  the  tube  well  supplied  with  crystals  of  sulphate  of  copper, 
and  to  feed  the  cell  above  with  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  zinc  suffi- 
ciently dilute  to  be  lighter  than  any  other  stratum  of  the  liquid 
in  the  cell. 

Daniell's  battery  is  by  no  means  the  most  powerful  in  common 
use.  The  electromotive  force  of  Grove's  cell  is  192,000,000,  of 
Daniell's  107,900,000,  and  that  of  Bunsen's  188,000,000. 


154  ELECTROMOTIVE   FORCE   OF   BATTERIES.          [l93*. 

The  resistance  of  Daniell's  cell  is  in  general  greater  than  that  of 
Grove's  or  Bunsen's  of  the  same  size. 

These  defects,  however,  are  more  than  counterbalanced  in  all 
cases  where  exact  measurements  are  required,  by  the  fact  that 
Daniell's  cell  exceeds  every  other  known  arrangement  in  constancy 
of  electromotive  force.  It  has  also  the  advantage  of  continuing 
in  working  order  for  a  long  time,  and  of  emitting  no  gas. 


CHAPTER    XI. 


METHODS   OF   MAINTAINING  AN   ELECTRIC   CURRENT. 

194.]  THE  principal  methods  of  maintaining  a  steady  electric 
current  are — 

(1)  The  Frictional  Machine. 

(2)  The  Voltaic  Battery. 

(3)  The  Thermo-electric  Battery. 

(4)  The  Magneto-electric  Machine. 

( 1 )     The  Frictional  Electric  Machine. 

195.]  The  electrification  is  here  produced  between  the  surfaces  of 
two  different  substances,  such  as  glass  and  amalgam  or  ebonite  and 
fur.  By  the  motion  of  the  machine  one  of  these  electrified  surfaces 
is  carried  away  from  the  other,  and  both  are  made  to  discharge 
their  electrification  into  the  electrodes  of  the  machine,  from  which 
the  current  is  conveyed  along  any  required  circuit. 

In  the  ordinary  form  of  the  machine  a  circular  plate  or  a  cylinder 
of  glass  is  made  to  revolve  about  its  axis.  Let  us  suppose  that  the 
revolving  part  is  a  plate  of  glass.  The  rubber  is  fixed  so  that  it 
presses  against  the  surface  of  the  plate  as  it  rotates.  The  surface 
of  the  rubber  is  of  leather,  on  which  is  spread  an  amalgam  of  zinc 
and  mercury,  By  the  friction  between  the  glass  and  the  amalgam 
the  surface  of  the  glass  becomes  electrified  positively,  and  that  of 
the  rubber  negatively.  As  the  plate  revolves  the  electrified  surface 
of  the  glass  is  carried  away  from  under  the  rubber,  and  another 
part  of  the  surface  of  the  glass,  previously  unelectrified,  is  brought 
under  the  rubber  to  be  electrified.  As  long  as  the  oppositely 
electrified  surfaces  of  the  glass  and  the  rubber  remain  in  contact, 
the  electrical  effects  in  the  neighbourhood  are  very  small,  but  when 


156  FBICTIONAL  ELECTRIC   MACHINE.  [196. 

the  glass  is  removed  from  the  rubber,  strong  electrical  forces  are 
developed.  The  potential  of  the  rubber  becomes  negative,  and  as, 
on  account  of  the  amalgam,  it  conducts  freely  its  electrification  is 
at  once  carried  off  to  the  negative  electrode.  At  the  same  time  the 
potential  of  the  electrified  glass  becomes  highly  positive,  but  as  the 
glass  is  an  insulating  substance  it  does  not  so  readily  part  with  its 
electrification.  The  positive  electrode  of  the  machine  is  therefore 
furnished  with  a  comb,  consisting  of  a  number  of  sharp  pointed 
wires  terminating  near  the  electrified  surface  of  the  glass.  As  the 
potential  at  the  surface  of  the  glass  is  much  higher  than  that  of 
the  comb  there  is  a  great  accumulation  of  negative  electrification 
at  the  point  of  the  comb,  and  this  breaks  into  a  negative  electric 
glow  accompanied  by  an  electric  wind  blowing  from  the  comb  to 
the  glass.  The  negatively  electrified  particles  of  air  spread  them- 
selves over  the  positively  electrified  surface  of  the  glass,  and  cause 
the  electrification  of  the  glass  to  be  discharged.  It  is  possible, 
however,  that  part  of  them  may  be  carried  round  with  the  glass  till 
they  are  wiped  off  by  the  rubber,  though  I  have  not  been  able  to 
obtain  experimental  evidence  of  this. 

Thus  the  rotation  of  the  machine  carries  the  positive  electri- 
fication of  the  surface  of  the  glass  from  the  rubber  to  the  comb, 
and  the  negative  electric  wind  of  the  comb  either  neutralizes  the 
positively  electrified  surface,,  or  is  carried  round  with  it  to  the 
rubber,  so  that  there  is  a  continual  current  of  positive  electricity 
kept  up  from  the  rubber  to  the  comb,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing, 
of  negative  electricity  from  the  comb  to  the  rubber,  or,  since  the 
mode  of  expressing  the  fact  is  indifferent,  we  may,  if  we  please, 
describe  it  as  consisting  of  a  positive  current  in  the  one  direction 
combined  with  a  negative  current  in  the  other  the  arithmetical 
sum  of  these  two  imaginary  currents  being  the  actual  current 
observed.  The  action  of  the  machine  thus  depends  on  the  electri- 
fication of  the  surface  of  the  glass  by  the  rubber,  the  convection  of 
this  electrification,  by  the  motion  of  the  machine,  to  the  comb  and 
the  discharge  of  the  electrification  by  the  comb. 

196.]  The  strength  of  the  current  produced  depends  on  the 
surface-density  of  the  electrification,  the  area  of  the  electrified 
surface  and  the  number  of  turns  in  a  minute. 

The  electromotive  force  of  the  machine  is  the  excess  of  the 
potential  of  the  comb  above  that  of  the  rubber.  The  most  con- 
venient test  of  the  electromotive  force  of  an  electrical  machine  is 
the  length  of  the  sparks  which  it  will  give. 


196.]  ACTION   OF  THE   SILK  FLAPS.  157 

During1  the  passage  of  the  electrified  surface  from  the  rubber  to 
the  comb  it  is  passing  from  places  of  low  to  places  of  high  potential, 
and  is  therefore  acted  on  by  a  force  in  the  direction  opposite  to 
that  of  its  motion.  The  work  done  in  turning  the  machine  there- 
fore exceeds  that  necessary  to  overcome  the  friction  of  the  rubber, 
the  axle,  and  other  mechanical  resistances  by  the  electrical  work 
done  in  carrying  the  electricity  from  the  rubber  to  the  comb. 

At  every  point  of  its  course  the  electricity  on  the  surface  of  the 
glass  plate  is  acted  on  by  a  force  the  value  of  which  is  measured 
by  the  rate  at  which  the  potential  varies  from  one  point  to  another 
of  the  surface.  If  this  force  exceeds  a  certain  value  it  will  cause 
the  electrification  to  slide  along  the  surface  of  the  plate,  and  this 
will  take  place  under  the  action  of  a  much  smaller  force  than  that 
which  is  required  to  remove  the  electricity  from  the  surface.  This 
discharge  along  the  surface  of  the  plate  may  be  seen  when  the 
electric  machine  is  worked  in  a  dark  room,  and  it  is  evident  that 
the  electricity  which  thus  flashes  back  is  so  much  lost  from  the 
principal  current  of  the  machine. 

In  order  that  the  machine  may  work  to  the  best  advantage 
this  slipping  back  of  the  electricity  must  be  prevented.  The 
slipping  takes  place  whenever  the  rate  of  variation  of  the  potential 
from  point  to  point  of  the  surface  exceeds  a  certain  value.  If  by 
any  distribution  of  the  electrification  the  rate  of  variation  of  the 
potential  can  be  kept  just  below  this  value  all  the  way  from  the 
rubber  to  the  comb  the  electromotive  force  of  the  machine  will  have 
its  highest  possible  value. 

In  most  electrical  machines  flaps  of  oiled  silk  are  attached  to 
the  rubber  so  that  as  the  plate  revolves  the  electrified  surface  as 
it  leaves  the  rubber  is  covered  with  the  silk  flap  which  extends 
from  the  rubber  nearly  up  to  the  comb.  These  silk  flaps  become 
negatively  electrified  and  therefore  adhere  of  themselves  to  the 
surface  of  the  glass.  If  in  any  part  of  the  revolution  of  the  plate, 
the  rate  of  increase  of  the  potential  is  so  great  that  a  slipping 
back  of  the  electrification  occurs,  the  positive  electricity  which  so 
slips  back  neutralizes  part  of  the  negative  electrification  of  the 
silk  flap  and  so  raises  the  electric  potential  just  behind  the  place 
where  the  slipping  occurred.  In  this  way  the  slope  of  the  electric 
potential  is  equalized  and  the  electromotive  force  of  the  machine  is 
raised  to  its  highest  possible  value,  so  as  to  give  the  longest  sparks 
which  a  machine  of  given  dimensions  can  furnish. 

When  the  silk  flaps   are   removed   the  slope  of  the  potential 


158  THE  REVOLVING  DOUBLER. 

becomes  much  greater  close  to  the  rubber  than  at  any  other  place, 
the  electricity  slips  back  on  the  glass  just  as  it  leaves  the  rubber 
and  very  little  electricity  and  that  at  a  comparatively  low  potential 
reaches  the  comb. 

In  the  best  machines,  in  which  the  slope  of  the  potential  is 
uniform  from  the  rubber  to  the  comb,  the  length  of  the  spark 
must  depend  principally  on  the  distance  between  the  rubber  and 
the  comb.  Hence  a  machine  which,  like  Winter's,  has  the  rubber 
and  the  comb  at  opposite  extremities  of  a  diameter  of  the  plate  will 
give  a  longer  spark  than  one  from  a  machine  whose  plate  has  the 
same  diameter  but  which  like  Cuthbertson's  has  two  rubbers  and 
two  combs,  the  distance  between  each  rubber  and  its  comb  being  a 
quadrant. 

On  Machines  producing  Electrification  ly  Mechanical  Work. 

197"*.]  In  the  ordinary  frictional  electrical  machine  the  work  done 
in  overcoming  friction  is  far  greater  than  that  done  in  increasing 
the  electrification.  Hence  any  arrangement  by  which  the  elec- 
trification may  be  produced  entirely  by  mechanical  work  against 
the  electrical  forces  is  of  scientific  importance  if  not  of  practical 
value.  The  first  machine  of  this  kind  seems  to  have  been  Nicholson's 
Revolving  Doubler,  described  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for 
1788  as  fan  instrument  which  by  the  turning  of  a  Winch  produces 
the  two  states  of  Electricity  without  friction  or  communication  with 
the  Earth.' 

198*.]  It  was  by  means  of  the  revolving  doubler  that  Volta 
succeeded  in  developing  from  the  electrification  of  the  pile  an 
electrification  capable  of  affecting  his  electrometer.  Instruments 
on  the  same  principle  have  been  invented  independently  by  Mr. 
C.  F.  Varley*,  and  Sir  W.  Thomson. 

These  instruments  consist  essentially  of  insulated  conductors  of 
various  forms,  some  fixed  and  others  moveable.  The  moveable 
conductors  are  called  Carriers,  and  the  fixed  ones  may  be  called 
Inductors,  Receivers,  and  Regenerators.  The  inductors  and  receivers 
are  so  formed  that  when  the  carriers  arrive  at  certain  points  in 
their  revolution  they  are  almost  completely  surrounded  by  a  con- 
ducting body.  As  the  inductors  and  receivers  cannot  completely 
surround  the  carrier  and  at  the  same  time  allow  it  to  move  freely 
in  and  out  without  a  complicated  arrangement  of  moveable  pieces, 
the  instrument  is  not  theoretically  perfect  without  a  pair  of  re- 
*  Specification  of  Patent,  Jan.  27,  I860,  No.  206. 


198*.]         THE  REVOLVING  DOUBLED.  159 

generators,  which  store  up  the  small  amount  of  electricity  which 
the  carriers  retain  when  they  emerge  from  the  receivers. 

For  the  present,  however,  we  may  suppose  the  inductors  and 
receivers  to  surround  the  carrier  completely  when  it  is  within  them, 
in  which  case  the  theory  is  much  simplified. 

We  shall  suppose  the  machine  to  consist  of  two  inductors  A  and 
C,  and  of  two  receivers  B  and  D,  with  two  carriers  F  and  G. 

Suppose  the  inductor  A  to  he  positively  electrified  so  that  its 
potential  is  A,  and  that  the  carrier  F  is  within  it  and  is  at 
potential  F.  Then,  if  Q  is  the  coefficient  of  induction  (taken 
positive)  between  A  and  Ft  the  quantity  of  electricity  on  the  carrier 
will  be  Q(F-A). 

If  the  carrier,  while  within  the  inductor,  is  put  in  connexion  with 
the  earth,  then  F=Q,  and  the  charge  on  the  carrier  will  be  —  QA, 
a  negative  quantity.  Let  the  carrier  be  carried  round  till  it  is 
within  the  receiver  .Z?,  and  let  it  then  come  in  contact  with  a  spring 
so  as  to  be  in  electrical  connexion  with  B.  It  will  then,  as  was 
shewn  in  Art.  20,  become  completely  discharged,  and  will  com- 
municate its  whole  negative  charge  to  the  receiver  B. 

The  carrier  will  next  enter  the  inductor  C,  which  we  shall  suppose 
charged  ne'gatively.  While  within  C  it  is  put  in  connexion  with 
the  earth  and  thus  acquires  a  positive  charge,  which  it  carries  off 
and  communicates  to  the  receiver  D,  and  so  on. 

In  this  way,  if  the  potentials  of  the  inductors  remain  always 
constant,  the  receivers  B  and  D  receive  successive  charges,  which 
are  the  same  for  every  revolution  of  the  carrier,  and  thus  every 
revolution  produces  an  equal  increment  of  electricity  in  the  re- 
ceivers. 

But  by  putting  the  inductor  A  in  communication  with  the  re- 
ceiver D,  and  the  inductor  C  with  the  receiver  B,  the  potentials 
of  the  inductors  will  be  continually  increased,  and  the  quantity 
of  electricity  communicated  to  the  receivers  in  each  revolution  will 
continually  increase. 

For  instance,  let  the  potential  of  A  and  D  be  U,  and  that  of  B 
and  (7,  V,  and  when  the  carrier  is  within  A  let  the  charge  on  A 
and  G  be  #,  and  that  on  the  carrier  z,  then,  since  the  potential 
of  the  carrier  is  zero,  being  in  contact  with  earth,  its  charge  is 
z=  —  QU.  The  carrier  enters  B  with  this  charge  and  communicates 
it  to  B.  If  the  capacity  of  B  and  C  is  B,  their  potential  will  be 

changed  from  7  to  V-  ~U. 


160  THOMSON'S  REPLENISHES,.  [198*. 

If  the  other  carrier  has  at  the  same  time  carried  a  charge  —QF 
from  C  to  D,  it  will  change  the  potential  of  A  and  0  from  U  to 

U——-F,  if  Q'  is  the  coefficient  of  induction  between  the  carrier 
A 

and  C,  and  A  the  capacity  of  A  and  D.  If,  therefore,  Un  and  Fn 
be  the  potentials  of  the  two  inductors  after  n  half  revolutions,  and 
Un+i  and  Fn+1  after  ^+1  half  revolutions, 


K^-r.-jp.. 

Q  Q' 

If  we  write  p2  =  —  and  ^2  =  ~  >  we  find 

JO  a. 


Hence 


It  appears  from  these  equations  that  the  quantity  p  U-\-  q  T  con- 
tinually diminishes,  so  that  whatever  be  the  initial  state  of  elec- 
trification the  receivers  are  ultimately  oppositely  electrified,  so  that 
the  potentials  of  A  and  B  are  in  the  ratio  of  q  to  —  p. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  quantity  pU—qV  continually  increases, 
so  that,  however  little  p  U  may  exceed  or  fall  short  of  q  Fat  first, 
the  difference  will  be  increased  in  a  geometrical  ratio  in  each 
revolution  till  the  electromotive  forces  become  so  great  that  the 
insulation  of  the  apparatus  is  overcome. 

Instruments  of  this  kind  may  be  used  for  various  purposes. 

For  producing  a  copious  supply  of  electricity  at  a  high  potential, 
as  is  done  by  means  of  Mr.  Varley's  large  machine. 

For  adjusting  the  charge  of  a  condenser,  as  in  the  case  of 
Thomson's  electrometer,  the  charge  of  which  can  be  increased  or 
diminished  by  a  few  turns  of  a  very  small  machine  of  this  kind, 
which  is  then  called  a  Replenisher. 

For  multiplying  small  differences  of  potential.  The  inductors 
may  be  charged  at  first  to  an  exceedingly  small  potential,  as,  for 
instance,  that  due  to  a  thermo-electric  pair,  then,  by  turning  the 
machine,  the  difference  of  potentials  may  be  continually  multiplied 


200.]  WATER   DROPPING  ACCUMULATOR.  161 

till  it  becomes  capable  of  measurement  by  an  ordinary  electrometer. 
By  determining  by  experiment  the  ratio  of  increase  of  this  difference 
due  to  each  turn  of  the  machine,  the  original  electromotive  force 
with  which  the  inductors  were  charged  may  be  deduced  from  the 
number  of  turns  and  the  final  electrification. 

In  most  of  these  instruments  the  carriers  are  made  to  revolve 
about  an  axis  and  to  come  into  the  proper  positions  with  respect 
to  the  inductors  by  turning  an  axle.  The  connexions  are  made  by 
means  of  springs  so  placed  that  the  carriers  come  in  contact  with 
them  at  the  proper  instants. 

199*.]  Sir  W.  Thomson*,  however,  has  constructed  a  machine 
for  multiplying  electrical  charges  in  which  the  carriers  are  drops  of 
water  falling  out  of  the  inside  of  an  inductor  into  an  insulated 
receiver.  The  receiver  is  thus  continually  supplied  with  electricity 
of  opposite  sign  to  that  of  the  inductor.  If  the  inductor  is  electrified 
positively,  the  receiver  will  receive  a  continually  increasing  charge 
of  negative  electricity. 

The  water  is  made  to  escape  from  the  receiver  by  means  of  a 
funnel,  the  nozzle  of  which  is  almost  surrounded  by  the  metal  of 
the  receiver.  The  drops  falling  from  this  nozzle  are  therefore 
nearly  free  from  electrification.  Another  inductor  and  receiver  of 
the  same  construction  are  arranged  so  that  the  inductor  of  the 
one  system  is  in  connexion  with  the  receiver  of  the  other.  The 
rate  of  increase  of  charge  of  the  receivers  is  thus  no  longer  constant, 
but  increases  in  a  geometrical  progression  with  the  time,  the 
charges  of  the  two  receivers  being  of  opposite  signs.  This  increase 
goes  on  till  the  falling  drops  are  so  diverted  from  their  course  by 
the  electrical  action  that  they  fall  outside  of  the  receiver  or  even 
strike  the  inductor. 

In  this  instrument  the  energy  of  the  electrification  is  drawn 
from  that  of  the  falling  drops. 

200.]  In  Holtz's  'Influence-Machine'  a  plate  of  varnished  glass 
is  made  to  rotate  in  front  of  a  fixed  plate  of  varnished  glass.  The 
inductors  consist  of  two  pointed  pieces  of  card  sometimes  covered 
with  tin  foil  and  placed  on  the  further  side  of  the  fixed  plate  so 
that  their  points  are  at  opposite  extremities  of  a  diameter.  Holes 
are  cut  in  the  fixed  plate  opposite  the  points  of  the  inductors.  The 
electrodes  are  first  put  in  connexion  with  each  other  and  the 
machine  is  set  in  rotation.  One  of  the  inductors  is  then  electrified, 
either  by  an  ordinary  machine  or  by  an  excited  piece  of  ebonite. 

*  Proc.  E.  S.,  June  20,  1867. 
M 


162  HOLTZ'S   MACHINE.  [2OI*. 

Let  us  suppose  it  electrified  positively.  The  comb  in  front  of  the 
charged  inductor  immediately  begins  to  glow  and  discharges  nega- 
tive electricity  against  the  rotating  disk.  This  negative  electrifica- 
tion is  carried  round  by  the  disk  to  the  other  side  where  it  is  free 
from  the  influence  of  the  positive  inductor.  The  other  inductor 
now  discharges  positive  electricity  from  its  point  and  becomes 
itself  negatively  charged,  and  the  comb  of  the  negative  electrode 
discharges  positive  electricity,  which  is  carried  round  the  disk  on 
the  other  side  back  to  the  positive  electrode.  In  this  way  there 
is  kept  up  an  electric  current  from  the  positive  to  the  negative 
electrode.  A  rushing  noise  is  heard  and  in  the  dark  a  glow  is 
seen  extending  itself  from  the  positive  comb  over  the  surface  of  the 
rotating  disk  in  the  direction  opposite  to  its  motion.  If  the  elec- 
trodes are  now  gradually  separated  a  succession  of  sparks  will  pass 
between  them. 

Influence  Machine. 

1865.  Holtz  exhibited  his  machine  to  the  Berlin  Academy,  April 

1865.    8  to  10  cm.  diam. 

1866.  Topler,  metal  inductors,  two  metal  carriers  on   a   glass 

disk. 

1867.  Topler's  multiple  machine,  8  rotating  disks,  32cm.  diam. 

sparks  6  to  9  cm. 

1867.  Holtz  with  two  disks  rotating  oppositely. 

1868.  Kundt. 

Carre,  inductor  disk  38  cm.  induced  49,  spark  15  to  18. 

201*.]  In  the  electrical  machines  already  described  sparks  occur 
whenever  the  carrier  comes  in  contact  with  a  conductor  at  a 
different  potential  from  its  own. 

Now  we  have  shewn  that  whenever  this  occurs  there  is  a  loss 
of  energy,  and  therefore  the  whole  work  employed  in  turning  the 
machine  is  not  converted  into  electrification  in  an  available  form, 
but  part  is  spent  in  producing  the  heat  and  noise  of  electric 
sparks. 

I  have  therefore  thought  it  desirable  to  shew  how  an  electrical 
machine  may  be  constructed  which  is  not  subject  to  this  loss  of 
efficiency.  I  do  not  propose  it  as  a  useful  form  of  machine,  but 
as  an  example  of  the  method  by  which  the  contrivance  called  in 
heat- engines  a  regenerator  may  be  applied  to  an  electrical  machine 
to  prevent  loss  of  work. 


201*.] 


MACHINE   WITHOUT   SPABKS. 


163 


In  the  figure  let  A,  B}  C,  A',  B',  C'  represent  hollow  fixed 
conductors,  so  arranged  that  the  carrier  P  passes  in  succession 
within  each  of  them.  Of  these  A>  A'  and  B,  Bf  nearly  surround  the 
carrier  when  it  is  at  the  middle  point  of  its  passage,  but  Ct  C'  do  not 
cover  it  so  much. 

We  shall  suppose  A,  B,  C  to  be  connected  with  a  Leyden  jar 
of  great  capacity  at  potential  F,  and  A  ',  I?,  C  to  be  connected  with 
another  jar  at  potential  —  V. 

P  is  one  of  the  carriers  moving  in  a  circle  from  A  to  C",  &c., 

and  touching  in  its  course  cer- 
tain springs,  of  which  a  and 
a'  are  connected  with  A  and  A' 
respectively,  and  e,  e'  are  con- 
nected with  the  earth. 

Let  us  suppose  that  when 
the  carrier  P  is  in  the  middle 
of  A  the  coefficient  of  induction 
between  P  and  A  is  —A.  The 
capacity  of  P  in  this  position 
is  greater  than  A,  since  it  is  not 
completely  surrounded  by  the 
receiver  A.  Let  it  be  A  +  a. 

the  charge 


Fig.  42. 


Then  if  the  potential  of  P  is  U,  and  that  of  A, 
on  P  will  be  (A  +  a)U-A7. 

Now  let  P  be  in  contact  with  the  spring  a  when  in  the  middle 
of  the  receiver  A,  then  the  potential  of  P  is  F,  the  same  as  that 
of  A,  and  its  charge  is  therefore  a  V. 

If  P  now  leaves  the  spring  a  it  carries  with  it  the  charge  a  T. 
As  P  leaves  A  its  potential  diminishes,  and  it  diminishes  still  more 
when  it  comes  within  the  influence  of  C",  which  is  negatively 
electrified. 

If  when  P  comes  within  C  its  coefficient  of  induction  on  C  is 
—  C",  and  its  capacity  is  C'+c',  then,  if  U  is  the  potential  of  P 
the  charge  on  P  is 

C'7'=a7. 


then  at  this  point  U  the  potential  of  P  will  be  reduced  to  zero. 

Let  P  at  this  point  come  in  contact  with  the  spring  e  which  is 
connected  with  the  earth.  Since  the  potential  of  P  is  equal  to  that 
of  the  spring  there  will  be  no  spark  at  contact. 

This  conductor  6",  by  which  the  carrier  is  enabled  to  be  connected 

M  2, 


164:  MACHINE   WITHOUT   SPAKKS.  [201*. 

to  earth  without  a  spark,  answers  to  the  contrivance  called  a 
regenerator  in  heat-engines.  We  shall  therefore  call  it  a  Re- 
generator. 

Now  let  P  move  on,  still  in  contact  with  the  earth-spring  <?',  till 
it  comes  into  the  middle  of  the  inductor  B,  the  potential  of  which 
is  V.  If  —  B  is  the  coefficient  of  induction  between  P  and  B  at 
this  point,  then,  since  U=  0  the  charge  on  P  will  be  —BY. 

When  P  moves  away  from  the  earth-spring  it  carries  this  charge 
with  it.  As  it  moves  out  of  the  positive  inductor  B  towards  the 
negative  receiver  A'  its  potential  will  be  increasingly  negative.  At 
the  middle  of  A't  if  it  retained  its  charge,  its  potential  would  be 


A'  +  a' 

and  if  BFis  greater  than  cfV  its  numerical  value  will  be  greater 
than  that  of  V  .  Hence  there  is  some  point  before  P  reaches  the 
middle  of  A  where  its  potential  is  —  V.  At  this  point  let  it  come 
in  contact  with  the  negative  receiver-  spring  a'.  There  will  be  no 
spark  since  the  two  bodies  are  at  the  same  potential.  Let  P  move 
on  to  the  middle  of  A',  still  in  contact  with  the  spring,  and  therefore 
at  the  same  potential  with  A.  During  this  motion  it  communicates 
a  negative  charge  to  A'.  At  the  middle  of  A?  it  leaves  the  spring 
and  carries  away  a  charge  —a'V  towards  the  positive  regenerator 
C}  where  its  potential  is  reduced  to  zero  and  it  touches  the  earth- 
spring  e.  It  then  slides  along  the  earth-spring  into  the  negative 
inductor  .ZT,  during  which  motion  it  acquires  a  positive  charge  J?V 
which  it  finally  communicates  to  the  positive  receiver  A,  and  the 
cycle  of  operations  is  repeated. 

During  this  cycle  the  positive  receiver  has  lost  a  charge  «Fand 
gained  a  charge  ]?V.     Hence  the  total  gain  of  positive  electricity 


Similarly  the  total  gain  of  negative  electricity  is  BF—a'V. 

By  making  the  inductors  so  as  to  be  as  close  to  the  surface  of 
the  carrier  as  is  consistent  with  insulation,  B  and  B'  may  be  made 
large,  and  by  making  the  receivers  so  as  nearly  to  surround  the 
carrier  when  it  is  within  them,  a  and  a'  may  be  made  very  small, 
and  then  the  charges  of  both  the  Leyden  jars  will  be  increased  in 
every  revolution. 

The  conditions  to  be  fulfilled  by  the  regenerators  are 
C'V'=aV,     and     CV=<tV. 

Since  a  and  a'  are  small  the  regenerators  do  not  require  to  be 
either  large  or  very  close  to  the  carriers. 


202*.]  TORSION    BALANCE.  165 

Coulombs  Torsion  Balance. 

202*.]  A  great  number  of  the  experiments  by  which  Coulomb 
established  the  fundamental  laws  of  electricity  were  made  by  mea- 
suring the  force  between  two  small  spheres  charged  with  electricity, 
one  of  which  was  fixed  while  the  other  was  held  in  equilibrium  by 
two  forces,  the  electrical  action  between  the  spheres,  and  the 
torsional  elasticity  of  a  glass  fibre  or  metal  wire. 

The  balance  of  torsion  consists  of  a  horizontal  arm  of  gum-lac, 
suspended  by  a  fine  wire  or  glass  fibre,  and  carrying  at  one  end  a 
little  sphere  of  elder  pith,  smoothly  gilt.  The  suspension  wire  is 
fastened  above  to  the  vertical  axis  of  an  arm  which  can  be  moved 
round  a  horizontal  graduated  circle,  so  as  to  twist  the  upper  end 
of  the  wire  about  its  own  axis  any  number  of  degrees. 

The  whole  of  this  apparatus  is  enclosed  in  a  case.  Another  little 
sphere  is  so  mounted  on  an  insulating  stem  that  it  can  be  charged 
and  introduced  into  the  case  through  a  hole,  and  brought  so  that 
its  centre  coincides  with  a  definite  point  in  the  horizontal  circle 
described  by  the  suspended  sphere.  The  position  of  the  suspended 
sphere  is  ascertained  by  means  of  a  graduated  circle  engraved  on 
the  cylindrical  glass  case  of  the  instrument. 

Now  suppose  both  spheres  charged,  and  the  suspended  sphere 
in  equilibrium  in  a  known  position  such  that  the  torsion-arm  makes 
an  angle  6  with  the  radius  through  the  centre  of  the  fixed  sphere. 
The  distance  of  the  centres  is  then  2  a  sin  i  0,  where  a  is  the  radius 
of  the  torsion-arm,  and  if  F  is  the  force  between  the  spheres  the 
moment  of  this  force  about  the  axis  of  torsion  is  Fa  cos  \  9. 

Let  both  spheres  be  completely  discharged,  and  let  the  torsion- 
arm  now  be  in  equilibrium  at  an  angle  cp  with  the  radius  through 
the  fixed  sphere. 

Then  the  angle  through  which  the  electrical  force  twisted  the 
torsion-arm  must  have  been  6  —  <f>,  and  if  M  is  the  moment  of 
the  torsional  elasticity  of  the  fibre,  we  shall  have  the  equation 


Hence,  if  we  can  ascertain  M,  we  can  determine  F,  the  actual 
force  between  the  spheres  at  the  distance  2  a  sin  i  0. 

To  find  J/,  the  moment  of  torsion,  let  /  be  the  moment  of  inertia 
of  the  torsion-arm,  and  T  the  time  of  a  double  vibration  of  the  arm 
under  the  action  of  the  torsional  elasticity,  then 


166  INFLUENCE   OF   THE   CASE.  [2O2*. 

In  all  electrometers  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to  know 
what  force  we  are  measuring1.  The  force  acting  on  the  suspended 
sphere  is  due  partly  to  the  direct  action  of  the  fixed  sphere,  but 
partly  also  to  the  electrification,  if  any,  of  the  sides  of  the  case. 

If  the  case  is  made  of  glass  it  is  impossible  to  determine  the 
electrification  of  its  surface  otherwise  than  by  very  difficult  mea- 
surements at  every  point.  If,  however,  either  the  case  is  made 
of  metal,  or  if  a  metallic  case  which  almost  completely  encloses  the 
apparatus  is  placed  as  a  screen  between  the  spheres  and  the  glass 
case,  the  electrification  of  the  inside  of  the  metal  screen  will  depend 
entirely  on  that  of  the  spheres,  and  the  electrification  of  the  glass 
case  will  have  no  influence  on  the  spheres.  In  this  way  we  may 
avoid  any  indefiniteness  due  to  the  action  of  the  case. 

To  illustrate  this  by  an  example  in  which  we  can  calculate  all 
the  effects,  let  us  suppose  that  the  case  is  a  sphere  of  radius  d, 
that  the  centre  of  motion  of  the  torsion-arm  coincides  with  the 
centre  of  the  sphere  and  that  its  radius  is  a  ;  that  the  charges  on 
the  two  spheres  are  E±  and  E2t  and  that  the  angle  between  their 
positions  is  6  ;  that  the  fixed  sphere  is  at  a  distance  a^  from  the 
centre,  and  that  r  is  the  distance  between  the  two  small  spheres. 

Neglecting  for  the  present  the  effect  of  induction  on  the  dis- 
tribution of  electricity  on  the  small  spheres,  the  force  between 
them  will  be  a  repulsion 


and  the  moment  of  this  force  round  a  vertical  axis  through  the 
centre  will  be 

EEl  aa^  sin  0 
-73— 

The  image  of  El  due  to  the  spherical  surface  of  the  case  is  a  point 

I2  6 

in  the  same  radius  at  a  distance  —  with  a  charge  —JE-,—,  and  the 

«!  V 

moment  of  the  attraction  between  E  and  this  image  about  the  axis 
oi  suspension  is 


^  —  sin  0 

EE       - 

s 

1  «i  ( 

«^2           (54  )l 

^2  —  2  —  cos  0  H  ^  > 

( 

#  i                «i  ) 

ET  JJT 

fltfjsintf 

203*.]  ATTRACTED   DISK   ELECTROMETERS.  167 

If  6,  the  radius  of  the  spherical  case,  is  large  compared  with  a 
and  a±  ,  the  distances  of  the  spheres  from  the  centre,  we  may  neglect 
the  second  and  third  terms  of  the  factor  in  the  denominator.  The 
whole  moment  tending  to  turn  the  torsion-arm  may  then  be  written 


~ 


Electrometers  for  the  Measurement  of  Potentials. 

203*.]  In  all  electrometers  the  moveable  part  is  a  body  charged 
with  electricity,  and  its  potential  is  different  from  that  of  certain 
of  the  fixed  parts  round  it.  When,  as  in  Coulomb's  method,  an 
insulated  body  having  a  certain  charge  is  used,  it  is  the  charge 
which  is  the  direct  object  of  measurement.  We  may,  however, 
connect  the  bails  of  Coulomb's  electrometer,  by  means  of  fine  wires, 
with  different  conductors.  The  charges  of  the  balls  will  then 
depend  on  the  values  of  the  potentials  of  these  conductors  and  on 
the  potential  of  the  case  of  the  instrument.  The  charge  on  each 
ball  will  be  approximately  equal  to  its  radius  multiplied  by  the 
excess  of  its  potential  over  that  of  the  case  of  the  instrument, 
provided  the  radii  of  the  balls  are  small  compared  with  their 
distances  from  each  other  and  from  the  sides  or  opening  of  the 
case. 

Coulomb's  form  of  apparatus,  however,  is  not  well  adapted  for 
measurements  of  this  kind,  owing  to  the  smallness  of  the  force 
between  spheres  at  the  proper  distances  when  the  difference  of 
potentials  is  small.  A  more  convenient  form  is  that  of  the 
Attracted  Disk  Electrometer.  The  first  electrometers  on  this 
principle  were  constructed  by  Sir  W.  Snow  Harris*.  They  have 
since  been  brought  to  great  perfection,  both  in  theory  and  con- 
struction, by  Sir  W.  Thomson  f. 

When  two  disks  at  different  potentials  are  brought  face  to  face 
with  a  small  interval  between  them  there  will  be  a  nearly  uniform 
electrification  on  the  opposite  faces  and  very  little  electrification 
on  the  backs  of  the  disks,  provided  there  are  no  other  conductors 
or  electrified  bodies  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  charge  on  the 
positive  disk  will  be  approximately  proportional  to  its  area,  and  to 
the  difference  of  potentials  of  the  disks,  and  inversely  as  the  distance 

*  Phil.  Trans.  1834. 

t  See  an  excellent  report  on  Electrometers  by  Sir  W.  Thomson.  Report  of  th? 
British  Association,  Dundee,  1867. 


168 


PRINCIPLE   OF   THE   GUARD  RING. 


between  them.  Hence,  by  making  the  areas  of  the  disks  large 
and  the  distance  between  them  small,  a  small  difference  of  potential 
may  gi^e  rise  to  a  measurable  force  of  attraction. 

204*.]  The  addition  of  the  guard-ring  to  the  attracted  disk  is 
one  of  the  chief  improvements  which  Sir  W.  Thomson  has  made 
on  the  apparatus. 

Instead  of  suspending  the  whole  of  one  of  the  disks  and  deter- 
mining the  force  acting  upon  it,  a  central  portion  of  the  disk  is 
separated  from  the  rest  to  form  the  attracted  disk,  and  the  outer 
ring  forming  the  remainder  of  the  disk  is  fixed.  In  this  way  the 


CQUNT£RPOIS£ 


Fig.  43. 

force  is  measured  only  on  that  part  of  the  disk  where  it  is  most 
regular,  and  the  want  of  uniformity  of  the  electrification  near  the 
edge  is  of  no  importance,  as  it  occurs  on  the  guard-ring  and  not 
on  the  suspended  part  of  the  disk. 

Besides  this,  by  connecting  the  guard-ring  with  a  metal  case 
surrounding  the  back  of  the  attracted  disk  and  all  its  suspending 
apparatus,  the  electrification  of  the  back  of  the  disk  is  rendered 
impossible,  for  it  is  part  of  the  inner  surface  of  a  closed  hollow 
conductor  all  at  the  same  potential. 

Thomson's  Absolute  Electrometer  therefore  consists  essentially 


204*.]  ABSOLUTE   ELECTROMETER.  169 

of  two  parallel  plates  at  different  potentials,  one  of  which  is  made 
FO  that  a  certain  area,  no  part  of  which  is  near  the  edge  of  the 
plate,  is  moveable  under  the  action  of  electric  force.  To  fix  our 
ideas  we  may  suppose  the  attracted  disk  and  guard-ring  uppermost. 
The  fixed  disk  is  horizontal,  and  is  mounted  on  an  insulating  stem 
which  has  a  measurable  vertical  motion  given  to  it  by  means  of 
a  micrometer  screw.  The  guard-ring  is  at  least  as  large  as  the 
fixed  disk ;  its  lower  surface  is  truly  plane  and  parallel  to  the  fixed 
disk.  A  delicate  balance  is  erected  on  the  guard-ring  to  which 
is  suspended  a  light  moveable  disk  which  almost  fills  the  circular 
aperture  in  the  guard-ring  without  rubbing  against  its  sides.  The 
lower  surface  of  the  suspended  disk  must  be  truly  plane,  and  we 
must  have  the  means  of  knowing  when  its  plane  coincides  with  that 
of  the  lower  surface  of  the  guard-ring,  so  as  to  form  a  single  plane 
interrupted  only  by  the  narrow  interval  between  the  disk  and  its 
guard-ring. 

For  this  purpose  the  lower  disk  is  screwed  up  till  it  is  in  contact 
with  the  guard-ring,  and  the  suspended  disk  is  allowed  to  rest 
upon  the  lower  disk,  so  that  its  lower  surface  is  in  the  same  plane 
as  that  of  the  guard-ring.  Its  position  with  respect  to  the  guard- 
ring  is  then  ascertained  by  means  of  a  system  of  fiducial  marks. 
Sir  W.  Thomson  generally  uses  for  this  purpose  a  black  hair 
attached  to  the  moveable  part.  This  hair  moves  up  or  down  just 
in  front  of  two  black  dots  on  a  white  enamelled  ground  and  is 
viewed  along  with  these  dots  by  means  of  a  piano  convex  lens  with 
the  plane  side  next  the  eye.  If  the  hair  as  seen  through  the  lens 
appears  straight  and  bisects  the  interval  between  the  black  dots 
it  is  said  to  be  in  its  sighted  position^  and  indicates  that  the  sus- 
pended disk  with  which  it  moves  is  in  its  proper  position  as  regards 
height.  The  horizontality  of  the  suspended  disk  may  be  tested  by 
comparing  the  reflexion  of  part  of  any  object  from  its  upper  surface 
with  that  of  the  remainder  of  the  same  object  from  the  upper 
surface  of  the  guard-ring. 

The  balance  is  then  arranged  so  that  when  a  known  weight  is 
placed  on  the  centre  of  the  suspended  disk  it  is  in  equilibrium 
in  its  sighted  position,  the  whole  apparatus  being  freed  from 
electrification  by  putting  every  part  in  metallic  communication. 
A  metal  case  is  placed  over  the  guard- ring  so  as  to  enclose  the 
balance  and  suspended  disk,  sufficient  apertures  being  left  to  see 
the  fiducial  marks. 

The  guard-ring,  case,  and   suspended  disk  are  all  in  metallic 


170  ABSOLUTE   ELECTROMETER.  [204*. 

communication  with  each  other,  but  are  insulated  from  the  other 
parts  of  the  apparatus. 

Now  let  it  be  required  to  measure  the  difference  of  potentials 
of  two  conductors.  The  conductors  are  put  in  communication  with 
the  upper  and  lower  disks  respectively  by  means  of  wires,  the 
weight  is  taken  off  the  suspended  disk,  and  the  lower  disk  is 
moved  up  by  means  of  the  micrometer  screw  till  the  electrical 
attraction  brings  the  suspended  disk  down  to  its  sighted  position. 
We  then  know  that  the  attraction  between  the  disks  is  equal  to 
the  weight  which  brought  the  disk  to  its_  sighted  position. 

If  W  be  the  numerical  value  of  the  weight,  and  g  the  force  of 
gravity,  the  force  is  Wgt  and  if  A  is  the  area  of  the  suspended 
disk,  D  the  distance  between  the  disks,  and  V  the  difference  of  the 
potentials  of  the  disks, 


or     7 


If  the  suspended  disk  is  circular,  of  radius  R,  and  if  the  radius  of 
the  aperture  of  the  guard-ring  is  R',  then 

*,  and   V  =  4  j 


~R' 


*  Let  us  denote  the  radius  of  the  suspended  disk  by  E,  and  that  of  the  aperture  of 
the  guard-ring  by  R',  then  the  breadth  of  the  annular  interval  between  the  disk  and 
the  ring  will  be  B  =  E'-E. 

If  the  distance  between  the  suspended  disk  and  the  large  fixed  disk  is  D,  and  the 
difference  of  potentials  between  these  disks  is  F,  then  (see  Electricity  and  Magnetism, 
Art.  201)  the  quantity  of  electricity  on  the  suspended  disk  will  be 


-  a 


8D  8D      D  +  a 

where    a  =  B  ^^,     or     a  =  0.220635  (R'-R). 

If  the  surface  of  the  guard-ring  is  not  exactly  in  the  plane  of  the  surface  of 
the  suspended  disk,  let  us  suppose  that  the  distance  between  the  fixed  disk  and 
the  guard-ring  is  not  D  but  D  +  z  =  D',  then  (see  Electricity  and  Magnetism,  Art.  205) 
there  will  be  an  additional  charge  of  electricity  near  the  edge  of  the  disk  on 
account  of  its  height  z  above  the  general  surface  of  the  guard-ring.  The  whole 
charge  in  this  case  is  therefore 

R*     a  R  +  E'  ,-n     nM        * 

-  D'-D 

and  in  the  expression  for  the  attraction  we  must  substitute  for  A,  the  area  of  the  disk, 
the  corrected  quantity 


205*.]     SMALL  ELECTROMOTIVE   FORCES   MEASURED.         171 


Since  there  is  always  some  uncertainty  in  determining  the 
micrometer  reading  corresponding  to  D  =  0,  and  since  any  error 
in  the  position  of  the  suspended  disk  is  most  important  when  D 
is  small,  Sir  W.  Thomson  prefers  to  make  all  his  measurements 
depend  on  differences  of  the  electromotive  force  V.  Thus,  if  V  and 
V  are  two  potentials,  and  D  and  J/  the  corresponding  distances, 


For  instance,  in  order  to  measure  the  electromotive  force  of  a 
galvanic  battery,  two  electrometers  are  used. 

By  means  of  a  condenser,  kept  charged  if  necessary  by  a  re- 
plenisher,  the  lower  disk  of  the  principal  electrometer  is  maintained 
at  a  constant  potential.  This  is  tested  by  connecting  the  lower 
disk  of  the  principal  electrometer  with  the  lower  disk  of  a  secondary 
electrometer,  the  suspended  disk  of  which  is  connected  with  the 
earth.  The  distance  between  the  disks  of  the  secondary  elec- 
trometer and  the  force  required  to  bring  the  suspended  disk  to 
its  sighted  position  being  constant,  if  we  raise  the  potential  of  the 
condenser  till  the  secondary  electrometer  is  in  its  sighted  position, 
we  know  that  the  potential  of  the  lower  disk  of  the  principal 
electrometer  exceeds  that  of  the  earth  by  a  constant  quantity  which 
we  may  call  V. 

If  we  now  connect  the  positive  electrode  of  the  battery  to  earth, 
and  connect  the  suspended  disk  of  the  principal  electrometer  to  the 
negative  electrode,  the  difference  of  potentials  between  the  disks 
will  be  F-\-  v,  if  v  is  the  electromotive  force  of  the  battery.  Let 
D  be  the  reading  of  the  micrometer  in  this  case,  and  let  If  be  the 
reading  when  the  suspended  disk  is  connected  with  earth,  then 


In  this  way  a  small  electromotive  force  v  may  be  measured 
by  the  electrometer  with  the  disks  at  conveniently  measurable 
distances.  When  the  distance  is  too  small  a  small  change  of 
absolute  distance  makes  a  great  change  in  the  force,  since  the 

where    E  —  radius  of  suspended  disk, 

R'  —  radius  of  aperture  in  the  guard -ring, 
D  =  distance  between  fixed  and  suspended  disks, 
D'  =  distance  between  fixed  disk  and  guard-ring, 
a  =  0.220635  (K-E). 

When  a  is  small  compared  with  D  we  may  neglect  the  second  term,  and  when 
D'  —  D  ie  small  we  may  neglect  the  last  term. 


172  ABSOLUTE   ELECTROMETER. 

force  varies  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance,  so  that  any 
error  in  the  absolute  distance  introduces  a  large  error  in  the  result 
unless  the  distance  is  large  compared  with  the  limits  of  error  of 
the  micrometer  screw. 

The  effect  of  small  irregularities  of  form  in  the  surfaces  of  the 
disks  and  of  the  interval  between  them  diminish  according  to  the 
inverse  cube  and  higher  inverse  powers  of  the  distance,  and  what- 
ever be  the  form  of  a  corrugated  surface,  the  eminences  of  which 
just  reach  a  plane  surface,  the  electrical  effect  at  any  distance 
which  is  considerable  compared  to  the  breadth  of  the  corrugations, 
is  the  same  as  that  of  a  plane  at  a  certain  small  distance  behind 
the  plane  of  the  tops  of  the  eminences. 

By  means  of  the  auxiliary  electrification,  tested  by  the  auxiliary 
electrometer,  a  proper  interval  between  the  disks  is  secured. 

The  auxiliary  electro-meter  may  be  of  a  simpler  construction,  in 
which  there  is  no  provision  for  the  determination  of  the  force 
of  attraction  in  absolute  measure,  since  all  that  is  wanted  is  to 
secure  a  constant  electrification.  Such  an  electrometer  may  be 
called  a  gauge  electrometer. 

This  method  of  using  an  auxiliary  electrification  besides  the  elec- 
trification to  be  measured  is  called  the  Heterostatic  method  of 
electrometry,  in  opposition  to  the  Idiostatic  method  in  which  the 
whole  effect  is  produced  by  the  electrification  to  be  measured. 

In  several  forms  of  the  attracted  disk  electrometer,  the  attracted 
disk  is  placed  at  one  end  of  an  arm  which  is  supported  by  being 
attached  to  a  platinum  wire  passing  through  its  centre  of  gravity 
and  kept  stretched  by  means  of  a  spring.  The  other  end  of  the 
arm  carries  the  hair  which  is  brought  to  a  sighted  position  by 
altering  the  distance  between  the  disks,  and  so  adjusting  the  force 
of  the  electric  attraction  to  a  constant  value.  In  these  electro- 
meters this  force  is  not  in  general  determined  in  absolute  measure, 
but  is  known  to  be  constant,  provided  the  torsional  elasticity  of 
the  platinum  wire  does  not  change. 

The  whole  apparatus  is  placed  in  a  Leyden  jar,  of  which  the  inner 
surface  is  charged  and  connected  with  the  attracted  disk  and 
guard-ring.  The  other  disk  is  worked  by  a  micrometer  screw  and 
is  connected  first  with  the  earth  and  then  with  the  conductor  whose 
potential  is  to  be  measured.  The  difference  of  readings  multiplied 
by  a  constant  to  be  determined  for  each  electrometer  gives  the 
potential  required. 


206*.]  MEASUREMENT   OF   POTENTIAL.  173 

On  the  Measurement  of  Electric  Potential. 

206*.]  In  order  to  determine  large  differences  of  potential  in  ab- 
solute measure  we  may  employ  the  attracted  disk  electrometer,  and 
compare  the  attraction  with  the  effect  of  a  weight.  If  at  the  same 
time  we  measure  the  difference  of  potential  of  the  same  conductors 
by  means  of  the  quadrant  electrometer,  we  shall  ascertain  the 
absolute  value  of  certain  readings  of  the  scale  of  the  quadrant 
electrometer,  and  in  this  way  we  may  deduce  the  value  of  the  scale 
readings  of  the  quadrant  electrometer  in  terms  of  the  potential 
of  the  suspended  part,  and  the  moment  of  torsion  of  the  suspension 
apparatus. 

To  ascertain  the  potential  of  a  charged  conductor  of  finite  size 
we  may  connect  the  conductor  with  one  electrode  of  the  electro- 
meter, while  the  other  is  connected  to  earth  or  to  a  body  of 
constant  potential.  The  electrometer  reading  will  give  the  potential 
of  the  conductor  after  the  division  of  its  electricity  between  it 
and  the  part  of  the  electrometer  with  which  it  is  put  in  contact. 
If  K  denote  the  capacity  of  the  conductor,  and  K'  that  of  this  part 
of  the  electrometer,  and  if  V,  V  denote  the  potentials  of  these 
bodies  before  making  contact,  then  their  common  potential  after 
making  contact  will  be 


K+K' 
Hence  the  original  potential  of  the  conductor  was 


If  the  conductor  is  not  large  compared  with  the  electrometer, 
K'  will  be  comparable  with  K,  and  unless  we  can  ascertain  the 
values  of  K  and  K'  the  second  term  of  the  expression  will  have 
a  doubtful  value.  But  if  we  can  make  the  potential  of  the  electrode 
of  the  electrometer  very  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  body  before 
making  contact,  then  the  uncertainty  of  the  values  of  K  and  K' 
will  be  of  little  consequence. 

If  we  know  the  value  of  the  potential  of  the  body  approximately, 
we  may  charge  the  electrode  by  means  of  a  '  replenisher  '  or  other- 
wise to  this  approximate  potential,  and  the  next  experiment  will 
give  a  closer  approximation.  In  this  way  we  may  measure  the 
potential  of  a  conductor  whose  capacity  is  small  compared  with  that 
of  the  electrometer. 


174  POTENTIAL   AT   ANY   POINT   IN    THE   AIR.       [207*. 

To  Measure  the  Potential  at  any  Point  in  the  Air. 

207*.]  First  Method.  Place  a  sphere,  whose  radius  is  small  com- 
pared with  the  distance  of  electrified  conductors,  with  its  centre 
at  the  given  point.  Connect  it  by  means  of  a  fine  wire  with  the 
earth,  then  insulate  it,  and  carry  it  to  an  electrometer  and  ascertain 
the  total  charge  on  the  sphere. 

Then,  if  V  be  the  potential  at  the  given  point,  and  a  the 
radius  of  the  sphere,  the  charge  of  the  sphere  will  be  —Va-=  Q, 
and  if  V  be  the  potential  of  the  sphere  as  measured  by  an 
electrometer  when  placed  in  a  room  whose  walls  are  connected 
with  the  earth,  then  Q  —  y'a, 

whence  F+F'=0, 

or  the  potential  of  the  air  at  the  point  where  the  centre  of  the 
sphere  was  placed  is  equal  but  of  opposite  sign  to  the  potential  of 
the  sphere  after  being  connected  to  earth,  then  insulated,  and 
brought  into  a  room. 

This  method  has  been  employed  by  M.  Delmann  of  Creiiznach  in 
measuring  the  potential  at  a  certain  height  above  the  earth's 
surface.* 

Second  Method.  We  have  supposed  the  sphere  placed  at  the 
given  point  and  first  connected  to  earth,  and  then  insulated,  and 
carried  into  a  space  surrounded  with  conducting  matter  at  potential 
zero. 

Now  let  us  suppose  a  fine  insulated  wire  carried  from  the  elec- 
trode of  the  electrometer  to  the  place  where  the  potential  is  to 
be  measured.  Let  the  sphere  be  first  discharged  completely.  This 
may  be  done  by  putting  it  into  the  inside  of  a  vessel  of  the  same 
metal  which  nearly  surrounds  it  and  making  it  touch  the  vessel. 
Now  let  the  sphere  thus  discharged  be  carried  to  the  end  of  the 
wire  and  made  to  touch  it.  Since  the  sphere  is  not  electrified  it 
will  be  at  the  potential  of  the  air  at  the  place.  If  the  electrode 
wire  is  at  the  same  potential  it  will  not  be  affected  by  the  contact, 
but  if  the  electrode  is  at  a  different  potential  it  will  by  contact 
with  the  sphere  be  made  nearer  to  that  of  the  air  than  it  was 
before.  By  a  succession  of  such  operations,  the  sphere  being 
alternately  discharged  and  made  to  touch  the  electrode,  the  poten- 
tial of  the  electrode  of  the  electrometer  will  continually  approach 
that  of  the  air  at  the  given  point. 

*  [Compare  Art.  50.] 


208"'\]  POTENTIAL   OF   A   CONDUCTOR.  175 

208*.]  To  measure  the  potential  of  a  conductor  without  touching 
it,  we  may  measure  the  potential  of  the  air  at  any  point  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  conductor,  and  calculate  that  of  the  conductor 
from  the  result.  If  there  be  a  hollow  nearly  surrounded  by  the 
conductor,  then  the  potential  at  any  point  of  the  air  in  this  hollow 
will  be  very  nearly  that  of  the  conductor. 

In  this  way  it  has  been  ascertained  by  Sir  W.  Thomson  that  if 
two  hollow  conductors,  one  of  copper  and  the  other  of  zinc,  are 
in  metallic  contact,  then  the  potential  of  the  air  in  the  hollow 
surrounded  by  zinc  is  positive  with  reference  to  that  of  the  air  in 
the  hollow  surrounded  by  copper. 

Third  Method.  If  by  any  means  we  can  cause  a  succession  of 
small  bodies  to  detach  themselves  from  the  end  of  the  electrode, 
the  potential  of  the  electrode  will  approximate  to  that  of  the  sur- 
rounding air.  This  may  be  done  by  causing  shot,  filings,  sand,  or 
water  to  drop  out  of  a  funnel  or  pipe  connected  with  the  electrode. 
The  point  at  which  the  potential  is  measured  is  that  at  which 
the  stream  ceases  to  be  continuous  and  breaks  into  separate  parts 
or  drops. 


CHAPTER  XII. 


THE   MEASUREMENT   OF   ELECTRIC   RESISTANCE. 

209*.]  IN  the  present  state  of  electrical  science,  tlie  determi- 
nation of  the  electric  resistance  of  a  conductor  may  be  considered 
as  the  cardinal  operation  in  electricity,  in  the  same  sense  that  the 
determination  of  weight  is  the  cardinal  operation  in  chemistry. 

The  reason  of  this  is  that  the  determination  in  absolute  measure 
of  other  electrical  magnitudes,  such  as  quantities  of  electricity, 
electromotive  forces,  currents,  &c.,  requires  in  each  case  a  com- 
plicated series  of  operations,  involving  generally  observations  of 
time,  measurements  of  distances,  and  determinations  of  moments 
of  inertia,  and  these  operations,  or  at  least  some  of  them,  must  be 
repeated  for  every  new  determination,  because  it  is  impossible  to  pre- 
serve a  unit  of  electricity,  or  of  electromotive  force,  or  of  current,  in 
an  unchangeable  state,  so  as  to  be  available  for  direct  comparison. 

But  when  the  electric  resistance  of  a  properly  shaped  conductor 
of  a  properly  chosen  material  has  been  once  determined,  it  is  found 
that  it  always  remains  the  same  for  the  same  temperature*,  so  that 
the  conductor  may  be  used  as  a  standard  of  resistance,  with  which 
that  of  other  conductors  can  be  compared,  and  the  comparison  of 
two  resistances  is  an  operation  which  admits  of  extreme  accuracy. 

When  the  unit  of  electrical  resistance  has  been  fixed  on,  material 
copies  of  this  unit,  in  the  form  of '  Resistance  Coils,'  are  prepared 
for  the  use  of  electricians,  so  that  in  every  part  of  the  world 
electrical  resistances  may  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the  same  unit. 
These  unit  resistance  coils  are  at  present  the  only  examples  of 
material  electric  standards  which  can  be  preserved,  copied,  and  used 
for  the  purpose  of  measurement.  Measures  of  electrical  capacity, 
which  are  also  of  great  importance,  are  still  defective,  on  account 
of  the  disturbing  influence  of  electric  absorption. 

210*.]  The  unit  of  resistance  may  be  an  entirely  arbitrary  one, 
as  in  the  case  of  Jacobi's  Etalon,  which  was  a  certain  copper 

*  [Recent  observations  have  shewn  that  it  is  far  from  easy  to  find  a  material 
satisfying  this  condition.] 


213*-]  UNIT   OF   RESISTANCE.  177 

wire  of  22-4932  grammes  weight,  7-61975  metres  length,  and  0-667 
millimetres  diameter.  Copies  of  this  have  been  made  by  Leyser  of 
Leipsig,  and  are  to  be  found  in  different  places. 

According  to  another  method  the  unit  may  be  defined  as  the 
resistance  of  a  portion  of  a  definite  substance  of  definite  dimensions. 
Thus,  Siemens'  unit  is  defined  as  the  resistance  of  a  column  of 
mercury  of  one  metre  long,  and  one  square  millimetre  section,  at 
the  temperature  0°C. 

21 1*.]  Finally,  the  unit  may  be  defined  with  reference  to  the 
electrostatic  or  the  electromagnetic  system  of  units.  In  practice 
the  electromagnetic  system  is  used  in  all  telegraphic  operations, 
and  therefore  the  only  systematic  units  actually  in  use  are  those 
of  this  system. 

In  the  electromagnetic  system  a  resistance  is  a  quantity  homoge- 
neous with  a  velocity,  and  may  therefore  be  expressed  as  a  velocity. 

212"*.]  The  first  actual  measurements  on  this  system  were  made 
by  Weber,  who  employed  as  his  unit  one  millimetre  per  second. 
Sir  W.  Thomson  afterwards  used  one  foot  per  second  as  a  unit, 
but  a  large  number  of  electricians  have  now  agreed  to  use  the 
unit  of  the  British  Association,  which  professes  to  represent  a 
resistance  which,  expressed  as  a  velocity,  is  ten  millions  of  metres 
per  second.  The  magnitude  of  this  unit  is  more  convenient  than 
that  of  Weber's  unit,  which  is  too  small.  It  is  sometimes  referred 
to  as  the  B.A.  unit,  but  in  order  to  connect  it  with  the  name  of 
the  discoverer  of  the  laws  of  resistance,  it  is  called  the  Ohm. 

213*.]  To  recollect  its  value  in  absolute  measure  it  is  useful 
to  know  that  ten  millions  of  metres  is  professedly  the  distance 
from  the  pole  to  the  equator,  measured  along  the  meridian  of  Paris. 
A  body,  therefore,  which  in  one  second  travels  along  a  meridian 
from  the  pole  to  the  equator  would  have  a  velocity  which,  on  the 
electromagnetic  system,  is  professedly  represented  by  an  Ohm. 

I  say  professedly,  because,  if  more  accurate  researches  should 
prove  that  the  Ohm,  as  constructed  from  the  British  Association's 
material  standards,  is  not  really  represented  by  this  velocity,  elec- 
tricians would  not  alter  their  standards,  but  would  apply  a  cor- 
rection. In  the  same  way  the  metre  is  professedly  one  ten-millionth 
of  a  certain  quadrantal  arc,  but  though  this  is  found  not  to  be 
exactly  true,  the  length  of  the  metre  has  not  been  altered,  but  the 
dimensions  of  the  earth  are  expressed  by  a  less  simple  number. 

According  to  the  system  of  the  British  Association,  the  absolute 
value  of  the  unit  is  originally  chosen  so  as  to  represent  as  nearly 

N 


178 


STANDARD  RESISTANCE   COILS. 


[214*. 


as  possible  a  quantity  derived  from  the  electromagnetic  absolute 
system. 

214"^.]  When  a  material  unit  representing  this  abstract  quantity 
has  been  made,  other  standards  are  constructed  by  copying  this  unit, 
a  process  capable  of  extreme  accuracy — of  much  greater  accuracy 
than,  for  instance,  the  copying  of  foot-rules  from  a  standard  foot. 

These  copies,  made  of  the  most  permanent  materials,  are  dis- 
tributed over  all  parts  of  the  world,  so  that  it  is  not  likely  that 
any  difficulty  will  be  found  in  obtaining  copies  of  them,  if  the 
original  standards  should  be  lost. 

But  such  units  as  that  of  Siemens  can  without  very  great 
labour  be  reconstructed  with  considerable  accuracy,  so  that  as  the 
relation  of  the  Ohm  to  Siemens  unit  is  known,  the  Ohm  can  be 
reproduced  even  without  having  a  standard  to  copy,  though  the 
labour  is  much  greater  and  the  accuracy 
much  less  than  by  the  method  of  copying. 
Finally,  the  Ohm  may  be  reproduced  by 
the  electromagnetic  method  by  which  it 
was  originally  determined.  This  method, 
which  is  considerably  more  laborious  than 
the  determination  of  a  foot  from  the  seconds 
pendulum,  is  probably  inferior  in  accuracy 
to  that  last  mentioned.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  determination  of  the  electromagnetic 
unit  in  terms  of  the  Ohm  with  an  amount 
of  accuracy  corresponding  to  the  progress 
of  electrical  science,  is  a  most  important 
physical  research  and  well  worthy  of  being 
repeated. 

The  actual  resistance  coils  constructed 
to  represent  the  Ohm  were  made  of  an 
alloy  of  two  parts  of  silver  and  one  of  pla- 
tinum in  the  form  of  wires  from  -5  milli- 
metres to  -8  millimetres  diameter,  and  from 
one  to  two  metres  in  length.  These  wires 


Fig.  U. 


were  soldered  to  stout  copper  electrodes.  The  wire  itself  was 
covered  with  two  layers  of  silk,  imbedded  in  solid  paraffin,  and 
enclosed  in  a  thin  brass  case,  so  that  it  can  be  easily  brought  to 
a  temperature  at  which  its  resistance  is  accurately  one  Ohm. 
This  temperature  is  marked  on  the  insulating  support  of  the  coil. 
(See  Fig.  44.) 


215*.]  FORMS   OF   RESISTANCE   COILS.  179 

On  the  Forms  of  Resistance  Colls. 

215*.]  A  Resistance  Coil  is  a  conductor  capable  of  being1  easily 
placed  in  the  voltaic  circuit,  so  as  to  introduce  into  the  circuit 
a  known  resistance. 

The  electrodes  or  ends  of  the  coil  must  be  such  that  no  appre- 
ciable error  may  arise  from  the  mode  of  making  the  connexions. 
For  resistances  of  considerable  magnitude  it  is  sufficient  that  the 
electrodes  should  be  made  of  stout  copper  wire  or  rod  well  amal- 
gamated with  mercury  at  the  ends,  and  that  the  ends  should  be 
made  to  press  on  flat  amalgamated  copper  surfaces  placed  in 
mercury  cups. 

For  very  great  resistances  it  is  sufficient  that  the  electrodes 
should  be  thick  pieces  of  brass,  and  that  the  connexions  should 
be  made  by  inserting  a  wedge  of  brass  or  copper  into  the  interval 
between  them.  This  method  is  found  very  convenient. 

The  resistance  coil  itself  consists  of  a  wire  well  covered  with 
silk,  the  ends  of  which  are  soldered  permanently  to  the  elec- 
trodes. 

The  coil  must  be  so  arranged  that  its  temperature  may  be  easily 
observed.  For  this  purpose  the  wire  is  coiled  on  a  tube  and 
covered  with  another  tube,  so  that  it  may  be  placed  in  a  vessel 
of  water,  and  that  the  water  may  have  access  to  the  inside  and  the 
outside  of  the  coil. 

To  avoid  the  electromagnetic  effects  of  the  current  in  the  coil 
the  wire  is  first  doubled  back  on  itself  and  then  coiled  on  the  tube, 
so  that  at  every  part  of  the  coil  there  are  equal  and  opposite 
currents  in  the  adjacent  parts  of  the  wire. 

When  it  is  desired  to  keep  two  coils  at  the  same  temperature  the 
wires  are  sometimes  placed  side  by  side  and  coiled  up  together. 
This  method  is  especially  useful  when  it  is  more  important  to 
secure  equality  of  resistance  than  to  know  the  absolute  value  of 
the  resistance,  as  in  the  case  of  the  equal  arms  of  Wheatstone's 
Bridge  (Art.  221). 

When  measurements  of  resistance  were  first  attempted,  a  resist- 
ance coil,  consisting  of  an  uncovered  wire  coiled  in  a  spiral  groove 
round  a  cylinder  of  insulating  material,  was  much  used.  It  was 
called  a  Rheostat.  The  accuracy  with  which  it  was  found  possible 
to  compare  resistances  was  soon  found  to  be  inconsistent  with  the 
use  of  any  instrument  in  which  the  contacts  are  not  more  perfect 
than  can  be  obtained  in  the  rheostat.  The  rheostat,  however,  is 

N  3 


180 


RESISTANCE   BOXES. 


[216* 


still  used  for  adjusting  the  resistance  where  accurate  measurement 
is  not  required. 

Resistance  coils  are  generally  made  of  those  metals  whose  resist- 
ance is  greatest  and  which  vary  least  with  temperature.  German 
silver  fulfils  these  conditions  very  well,  but  some  specimens  are 
found  to  change  their  properties  during  the  lapse  of  years.  Hence 
for  standard  coils,  several  pure  metals,  and  also  an  alloy  of  platinum 
and  silver,  have  been  employed,  and  the  relative  resistance  of  these 
during  several  years  has  been  found  constant  up  to  the  limits  of 
modern  accuracy*. 

21 6*.]  For  very  great  resistances,  such  as  several  millions  of 
Ohms,  the  wire  must  be  either  very  long  or  very  thin,  and  the 
construction  of  the  coil  is  expensive  and  difficult.  Hence  tellurium 
and  selenium  have  been  proposed  as  materials  for  constructing 
standards  of  great  resistance.  A  very  ingenious  and  easy  method 
of  construction  has  been  lately  proposed  by  Phillips  f.  On  a  piece 
of  ebonite  or  ground  glass  a  fine  pencil-line  is  drawn.  The  ends 
of  this  filament  of  plumbago  are  connected  to  metallic  electrodes, 
and  the  whole  is  then  covered  with  insulating  varnish.  If  it 
should  be  found  that  the  resistance  of  such  a  pencil-line  remains 
constant,  this  will  be  the  best  method  of  obtaining  a  resistance  of 
several  millions  of  Ohms. 

217*.]  There  are  various  arrangements  by  which  resistance  coils 
may  be  easily  introduced  into  a  circuit. 

For  instance,  a  series  of  coils  of  which  the  resistances  are  1,  2, 
4,  8,  16,  &c.,  arranged  according  to  the  powers  of  2,  may  be  placed 
in  a  box  in  series. 


33       16        8         4        2          1 

Fig.  45. 
The  electrodes  consist  of  stout  brass  plates,  so  arranged  on  the 


*  [More  recent  experiments  indicate  a  small  change  in  resistance  in  course  of  time.l 
f  Phil.  Mag.,  July,  1870. 


2  I  8*.] 


RESISTANCE   BOXES. 


181 


outside  of  the  box  that  by  inserting  a  brass  plug  or  wedge  between 
two  of  them  as  a  shunt,  the  resistance  of  the  corresponding  coil 
may  be  put  out  of  the  circuit.  This  arrangement  was  introduced 
by  Siemens. 

Each  interval  between  the  electrodes  is  marked  with  the  resist- 
ance of  the  corresponding  coil,  so  that  if  we  wish  to  make  the 
resistance  box  equal  to  107  we  express  107  in  the  binary  scale  as 
64  +  32  +  8  +  2+1  or  1101011.  We  then  take  the  plugs  out 
of  the  holes  corresponding  to  64,  32,  8,  2  and  1,  and  leave  the 
plugs  in  16  and  4. 

This  method,  founded  on  the  binary  scale,  is  that  in  which  the 
smallest  number  of  separate  coils  is  needed,  and  it  is  also  that 
which  can  be  most  readily  tested.  For  if  we  have  another  coil 
equal  to  1  we  can  test  the  equality  of  1  and  1',  then  that  of  1  +  1' 
and  2,  then  that  of  1  +  1'  +  2  and  4,  and  so  on. 

The  only  disadvantage  of  the  arrangement  is  that  it  requires 
a  familiarity  with  the  binary  scale  of  notation,  which  is  not 
generally  possessed  by  those  accustomed  to  express  every  number 
in  the  decimal  scale. 

218*.]  A  box  of  resistance  coils  may  be  arranged  in  a  different 
way  for  the  purpose  of  mea- 
suring conductivities  instead  of 
resistances. 

The  coils  are  placed  so  that 
one  end  of  each  is  connected 
with  a  long  thick  piece  of 
metal  which  forms  one  elec- 
trode of  the  box,  and  the  other 


Fig.  46. 


end  is  connected  with  a  stout  piece  of  brass  plate  as  in  the  former 
case. 

The  other  electrode  of  the  box  is  a  long  brass  plate,  such  that 
by  inserting  brass  plugs  between  it  and  the  electrodes  of  the  coils 
it  may  be  connected  to  the  first  electrode  through  any  given  set  of 
coils.  The  conductivity  of  the  box  is  then  the  sum  of  the  con- 
ductivities of  the  coils. 

In  the  figure,  in  which  the  resistances  of  the  coils  are  1,  2,  4,  &c., 
and  the  plugs  are  inserted  at  2  and  8,  the  conductivity  of  the  box 
is  \  +  J-  =  |,  and  the  resistance  of  the  box  is  therefore  f  or  1-6. 

This  method  of  combining  resistance  coils  for  the  measurement 
of  fractional  resistances  was  introduced  by  Sir  W.  Thomson  under 
the  name  of  the  method  of  multiple  arcs.  See  Art.  158. 


182 


THE   COMPARISON   OF   RESISTANCES. 


[219= 


On  the  Comparison  of  Resistances. 

JL  e/ 

219*.]  If  E  is  the  electromotive  force  of  a  battery,  and  R  the 
resistance  of  the  battery  and  its  connexions,  including  the  galvan- 
ometer used  in  measuring  the  current,  and  if  the  strength  of  the 
current  is  /  when  the  battery  connexions  are  closed,  and  I19  I2 
when  additional  resistances  rl9  r2  are  introduced  into  the  circuit, 
then,  by  Ohm's  Law, 

E  =  772  =  /!  (R  +  rJ  =  72  (R+r£. 

Eliminating  E,  the  electromotive  force  of  the  battery,  and  R 
the  resistance  of  the  battery  and  its  connexions,  we  get  Ohm's 
formula 


This  method  requires  a  measurement  of  the  ratios  of  J,  7X  and  J2, 
and  this  implies  a  galvanometer  graduated  for  absolute  mea- 
surements. 

If  the  resistances  r^  and  r2  are  equal,  then  /x  and  J2  are  equal, 
and  we  can  test  the  equality  of  currents  by  a  galvanometer  which 
is  not  capable  of  determining  their  ratios. 

But  this  is  rather  to  be  taken  as  an  example  of  a  faulty  method 
than  as  a  practical  method  of  determining  resistance.  The  electro- 
motive force  E  cannot  be  maintained  rigorously  constant,  and  the 
internal  resistance  of  the  battery  is  also  exceedingly  variable,  so 
that  any  methods  in  which  these  are  assumed  to  be  even  for  a  short 
time  constant  are  not  to  be  depended  on. 

220*.]  The  comparison  of  resistances  can  be  made  with  extreme 


accuracy  by  either   of  two  methods,  in  which  the  result  is  in- 
dependent of  variations  of  R  and  E. 


220*.]  THE   COMPARISON    OF   RESISTANCES.  183 

The  first  .of  these  methods  depends  on  the  use  of  the  differential 
galvanometer,  an  instrument  in  which  there  are  two  coils,  the 
currents  in  which  are  independent  of  each  other,  so  that  when 
the  currents  are  made  to  flow  in  opposite  directions  they  act  in 
opposite  directions  on  the  needle,  and  when  the  ratio  of  these 
currents  is  that  of  m  to  n  they  have  no  resultant  effect  on  the 
galvanometer  needle. 

Let  71}  1.2  be  the  currents  through  the  two  coils  of  the  galvan- 
ometer, then  the  deflexion  of  the  needle  may  be  written 


Now  let  the  battery  current  I  be  divided  between  the  coils  of 
the  galvanometer,  and  let  resistances  A  and  B  be  introduced  into 
the  first  and  second  coils  respectively.  Let  the  remainder  of  the 
resistance  of  their  coils  and  their  connexions  be  a  and  ft  respect- 
ively, and  let  the  resistance  of  the  battery  and  its  connexions 
between  C  and  I)  be  r,  and  its  electromotive  force  E. 

Then  we  find,  by  Ohm's  Law,  for  the  difference  of  potentials 
between  C  and  D, 


and  since 


where  J)  - 

The  deflexion  of  the  galvanometer  needle  is  therefore 


and  if  there  is  no  observable  deflexion,  then  we  know  that  the 
quantity  enclosed  in  brackets  cannot  differ  from  zero  by  more  than 
a  certain  small  quantity,  depending  on  the  power  of  the  battery, 
the  suitableness  of  the  arrangement,  the  delicacy  of  the  galvan- 
ometer, and  the  accuracy  of  the  observer. 

Suppose  that  B  has  been  adjusted  so  that  there  is  no  apparent 
deflexion. 

Now  let  another  conductor  A'  be  substituted  for  A,  and  let  A/  be 
adjusted  till  there  is  no  apparent  deflexion.  Then  evidently  to  a 
first  approximation  A'  =  A. 

To  ascertain  the  degree  of  accuracy  of  this  estimate,  let  the 
altered  quantities  in  the  second  observation  be  accented,  then 


184  MEASUREMENT  OF   EESISTANCE.  [22O*. 


Hence  n  (A'-  A]  =  ^5  -  ~b\ 

If  6  and  5',  instead  of  being  both  apparently  zero,  had  been  only 
observed  to  be  equal,  then,  unless  we  also  could  assert  that  E  =  E\ 
the  right-hand  side  of  the  equation  might  not  be  zero.  In  fact, 
the  method  would  be  a  mere  modification  of  that  already  described. 

The  merit  of  the  method  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  thing 
observed  is  the  absence  of  any  deflexion,  or  in  other  words,  the 
method  is  a  Null  method ,  one  in  which  the  non-existence  of  a  force 
is  asserted  from  an  observation  in  which  the  force,  if  it  had  been 
different  from  zero  by  more  than  a  certain  small  amount,  would 
have  produced  an  observable  effect. 

Null  methods  are  of  great  value  where  they  can  be  employed, 
but  they  can  only  be  employed  where  we  can  cause  two  equal  and 
opposite  quantities  of  the  same  kind  to  enter  into  the  experiment 
together. 

In  the  case  before  us  both  b  and  6'  are  quantities  too  small  to  be 
observed,  and  therefore  any  change  in  the  value  of  E  will  not  affect 
the  accuracy  of  the  result. 

The  actual  degree  of  accuracy  of  this  method  might  be  ascer- 
tained by  taking  a  number  of  observations  in  each  of  which  A' 
is  separately  adjusted,  and  comparing  the  result  of  each  observation 
with  the  mean  of  the  whole  series. 

But  by  putting  A'  out  of  adjustment  by  a  known  quantity,  as, 
for  instance,  by  inserting  at  A  or  at  B  an  additional  resistance 
equal  to  a .  hundredth  part  of  A  or  of  B,  and  then  observing 
the  resulting  deviation  of  the  galvanometer  needle,  we  can  estimate 
the  number  of  degrees  corresponding  to  an  error  of  one  per  cent. 
To  find  the  actual  degree  of  precision  we  must  estimate  the  smallest 
deflexion  which  could  not  escape  observation,  and  compare  it  with 
the  deflexion  due  to  an  error  of  one  per  cent. 

*If  the  comparison  is  to  be  made  between  A  and  B,  and  if  the 
positions  of  A  and  B  are  exchanged,  then  the  second  equation 
becomes 

*  This  investigation  is  taken  from  Weber's  treatise  on  Galvanometry.  Gottingen 
Transactions,  x.  p.  65. 


220*.]  DIFFERENTIAL  GALVANOMETER.  185 


whence  (m  -f  n)  (B-  A)  =  -j  8  -  -^  5'. 

If  w  and  n,  A  and  .5,  a  and  j3  are  approximately  equal,  then 
B-A  =         r  (^  +  a)  (A  +  a  +  2r)  (8-5')- 


Here  5—  6'  may  be  taken  to  be  the  smallest  observable  deflexion 
of  the  galvanometer. 

If  the  galvanometer  wire  be  made  longer  and  thinner,  retaining 
the  same  total  mass,  then  n  will  vary  as  the  length  of  the  wire 
and  a  as  the  square  of  the  length.  Hence  there  will  be  a  minimum 

value  of  (^  +  °)M  +  °  +  ^)  when 


If  we  suppose  r,  the  battery  resistance,  small  compared  with  A, 
this  gives  a  =  $A-, 

or,  the  resistance  of  each  coil  of  the  galvanometer  should  be  one-third 
of  the  resistance  to  le  measured. 
We  then  find  Q   .2. 


If  we  allow  the  current  to  flow  through  one  only  of  the  coils 
of  the  galvanometer,  and  if  the  deflexion  thereby  produced  is  A 
(supposing  the  deflexion  strictly  proportional  to  the  deflecting 
force),  then 

mE          3  nE  .c  I 

A  =  —T—      ~  =  -      -  if  r  =  0  and  a  =  -  A. 
a  +  r       4    A  3 


B-A       28-5' 

Hence  —  =  --  . 

A  3     A 

In  the  differential  galvanometer  two  currents  are  made  to 
produce  equal  and  opposite  effects  on  the  suspended  needle.  The 
force  with  which  either  current  acts  on  the  needle  depends  not 
only  on  the  strength  of  the  current,  but  on  the  position  of  the 
windings  of  the  wire  with  respect  to  the  needle.  Hence,  unless 
the  coil  is  very  carefully  wound,  the  ratio  of  m  to  n  may  change 
when  the  position  of  the  needle  is  changed,  and  therefore  it  is 
necessary  to  determine  this  ratio  by  proper  methods  during  each 


186  MEASUREMENT   OF   RESISTANCE.  [221*. 

course  of  experiments  if  any  alteration  of  the  position  of  the  needle 
is  suspected. 

The  other  null  method,  in  which  Wheatstone's  Bridge  is  used, 
requires  only  an  ordinary  galvanometer,  and  the  observed  zero 
deflexion  of  the  needle  is  due,  not  to  the  opposing  action  of  two 
currents,  but  to  the  non-existence  of  a  current  in  the  wire.  Hence 
we  have  not  merely  a  null  deflexion,  but  a  null  current  as  the 
phenomenon  observed,  and  no  errors  can  arise  from  want  of 
regularity  or  change  of  any  kind  in  the  coils  of  the  galvanometer. 
The  galvanometer  is  only  required  to  be  sensitive  enough  to  detect 
the  existence  and  direction  of  a  current,  without  in  any  way 
determining  its  value  or  comparing  its  value  with  that  of  another 
current. 

221*.]  Wheatstone's  Bridge  consists  essentially  of  six  conductors 
connecting  four  points.  An  electromotive 
force  E  is  made  to  act  between  two  of  the 
points  by  means  of  a  voltaic  battery  in- 
troduced between  B  and  C.  The  current 
between  the  other  two  points  0  and  A  is 
measured  by  a  galvanometer. 

Under  certain  circumstances  this  current 
becomes  zero.  The  conductors  BC  and  OA 
are  then  said  to  be  conjugate  to  each  other, 

which  implies  a  certain  relation  between  the  resistances  of  the 
other  four  conductors,  and  this  relation  is  made  use  of  in  measuring 
resistances. 

If  the  current  in  OA  is  zero,  the  potential  at  0  must  be  equal 
to  that  at  A.  Now  when  we  know  the  potentials  at  B  and  C  we 
can  determine  those  at  0  and  A  by  the  rule  given  at  Art.  157, 
provided  there  is  no  current  in  OA, 

__By+Cfi  Bb  +  Cc 

ft  +  y  b  +  c 

whence  the  condition  is  ij$  _  ^ 

where  b,  c,  ft,  y  are  the  resistances  in  CA,  AB,  BO  and  OC  re- 
spectively. 

To  determine  the  degree  of  accuracy  attainable  by  this  method 
we  must  ascertain  the  strength  of  the  current  in  OA  when  this 
condition  is  not  fulfilled  exactly. 

Let  A,  B,  C  and  0  be  the  four  points.  Let  the  currents  along 
BC,  CA  and  AB  be  x,  y  and  #,  and  the  resistances  of  these 


222*.]  WHEATSTONE'S  BRIDGE.  187 

conductors  a,  b  and  c.  Let  the  currents  along  OA,  OB  and  OC  be 
£,  rj,  £  and  the  resistances  a,  £  and  y.  Let  an  electromotive  force 
E  act  along  BC.  Required  the  current  f  along  0  A. 

Let  the  potentials  at  the  points  A>  .Z?,  C  and  0  be  denoted 
by  the  symbols  A,  B,  C  and  0.     The  equations  of  conduction  are 


ly  =  C-A  fir)=  0—B, 

cz=A—B  yf=0-C; 

with  the  equations  of  continuity 


By  considering  the  system  as  made  up  of  three  circuits  OBC, 
OCA  and  OAB  in  which  the  currents  are  #,  y,  z  respectively,  and 
applying  Kirchhoff's  rule  [Art.  158]  to  each  cycle,  we  eliminate  the 
values  of  the  potentials  0,  A,  B,  C,  and  the  currents  f,  77,  £  and 
obtain  the  following  equations  for  a?,  y  and  2, 


—  az  =  0, 

Hence,  if  we  put 

a          — ci 


— P  — a 

we  find  £  =  -77(^/3  — CX 

E  . 
and  x  =  -=r  {(b  +  y)( 

222*.]  The  value  of  J)  may  be  expressed  in  the  symmetrical  form, 

or,  since  we  suppose  the  battery  in  the  conductor  a  and  the 
galvanometer  in  a,  we  may  put  B  the  battery  resistance  for  a  and 
G  the  galvanometer  resistance  for  a.  We  then  find 


If  the  electromotive  force  E  were  made  to  act  along  OA,  the 
resistance  of  OA  being  still  a,  and  if  the  galvanometer  were  placed 


188  MEASUREMENT   OF   RESISTANCE.  [223*. 

in  BC,  the  resistance  of  BC  being  still  a,  then  the  value  of  D 
would  remain  the  same,  and  the  current  in  BC  due  to  the  electro- 
motive force  E  acting  along  OA  would  be  equal  to  the  current  in 
OA  due  to  the  electromotive  force  E  acting  in  BC. 

But  if  we  simply  disconnect  the  battery  and  the  galvanometer, 
and  without  altering  their  respective  resistances  connect  the  battery 
to  0  and  A  and  the  galvanometer  to  B  and  C,  then  in  the  value  of 
D  we  must  exchange  the  values  of  B  and  G.  If  If  be  the  value  of 
D  after  this  exchange,  we  find 


Let  us  suppose  that  the  resistance  of  the  galvanometer  is  greater 
than  that  of  the  battery. 

Let  us  also  suppose  that  in  its  original  position  the  galvanometer 
connects  the  junction  of  the  two  conductors  of  least  resistance  ft,  y 
with  the  junction  of  the  two  conductors  of  greatest  resistance  ~b,  c, 
or,  in  other  words,  we  shall  suppose  that  if  the  quantities  b,  c,  y,  ft 
are  arranged  in  order  of  magnitude,  b  and  c  stand  together,  and 
y  and  (B  stand  together.  Hence  the  quantities  b  —  ft  and  c  —  y  are 
of  the  same  sign,  so  that  their  product  is  positive,  and  therefore 
D'  —  D  is  of  the  same  sign  as  B  —  G. 

If  therefore  the  galvanometer  is  made  to  connect  the  junction  of 
the  two  greatest  resistances  with  that  of  the  two  least,  and  if 
the  galvanometer  resistance  is  greater  than  that  of  the  battery, 
then  the  value  of  D  will  be  less,  and  the  value  of  the  deflexion  of 
the  galvanometer  greater,  than  if  the  connexions  are  exchanged. 

The  rule  therefore  for  obtaining  the  greatest  galvanometer  de- 
flexion in  a  given  system  is  as  follows  : 

Of  the  two  resistances,  that  of  the  battery  and  that  of  the 
galvanometer,  connect  the  greater  resistance  so  as  to  join  the  two 
greatest  to  the  two  least  of  the  four  other  resistances. 

223*.]  We  shall  suppose  that  we  have  to  determine  the  ratio  of 
the  resistances  of  the  conductors  AB  and  AC,  and  that  this  is  to  be 
done  by  finding  a  point  0  on  the  conductor  BOC,  such  that  when 
the  points  A  and  0  are  connected  by  a  wire,  in  the  course  of  which 
a  galvanometer  is  inserted,  no  sensible  deflexion  of  the  galvano- 
meter needle  occurs  when  the  battery  is  made  to  act  between  B 
and  C. 

The  conductor  BOC  may  be  supposed  to  be  a  wire  of  uniform 
resistance  divided  into  equal  parts,  so  that  the  ratio  of  the  resist- 
ances of  BO  and  OC  may  be  read  off  at  once. 


223*.]  WHEATSTONE'S  BRIDGE.  189 

Instead  of  the  whole  conductor  being  a  uniform  wire,  we  may 
make  the  part  near  0  of  such  a  wire,  and  the  parts  on  each  side 
may  be  coils  of  any  form,  the  resistance  of  which  is  accurately 
known. 

We  shall  now  use  a  different  notation  instead  of  the  symmetrical 
notation  with  which  we  commenced. 

Let  the  whole  resistance  of  BAG  be  R. 

Let  c  =  mR  and  6  =  (l  —m)  R. 

Let  the  whole  resistance  of  BOC  be  S. 

Let  j8  =  nS  and  y  —  (l  —n)  S. 

The  value  of  n  is  read  off  directly,  and  that  of  m  is  deduced  from 
it  when  there  is  no  sensible  deviation  of  the  galvanometer. 

Let  the  resistance  of  the  battery  and  its  connexions  be  J8,  and 
that  of  the  galvanometer  and  its  connections  G. 

We  find  as  before 


and  if  £  is  the  current  in  the  galvanometer  wire 

t      mS(         \ 
C  =  -jj-  (n-m). 

In  order  to  obtain  the  most  accurate  results  we  must  make  the 
deviation  of  the  needle  as  great  as  possible  compared  with  the 
value  of  (n—m).  This  may  be  done  by  properly  choosing  the 
dimensions  of  the  galvanometer  and  the  standard  resistance  wire. 

It  may  be  shewn  that  when  the  form  of  a  galvanometer  wire 
is  changed  while  its  mass  remains  constant,  the  deviation  of  the 
needle  for  unit  current  is  proportional  to  the  length,  but  the 
resistance  increases  as  the  square  of  the  length.  Hence  the 
maximum  deflexion  is  shewn  to  occur  when  the  resistance  of  the 
galvanometer  wire  is  equal  to  the  constant  resistance  of  the  rest 
of  the  circuit. 

In  the  present  case,  if  5  is  the  deviation, 


where  C  is  some  constant,,  and  G  is  the  galvanometer  resistance 
which  varies  as  the  square  of  the  length  of  the  wire.  Hence  we 
find  that  in  the  value  of  D,  when  5  is  a  maximum,  the  part  involv- 
ing G  must  be  made  equal  to  the  rest  of  the  expression. 

If  we  also  put  m  =  #,  as  is  the  case  if  we  have  made  a  correct 
observation,  we  find  the  best  value  of  G  to  be 

0  =  »(1  -»)(£+*> 


190 


MEASUREMENT  OF   RESISTANCE. 


[224*. 


This  result  is  easily  obtained  by  considering  the  resistance  from 
A  to  0  through  the  system,  remembering  that  BC,  being  conjugate 
to  AO,  has  no  effect  on  this  resistance. 

In  the  same  way  we  should  find  that  if  the  total  area  of  the 
acting  surfaces  of  the  battery  is  given,  the  most  advantageous  ar- 
rangement of  the  battery  is  when 


Finally,  we  shall  determine  the  value  of  /S  such  that  a  given 
change  in  the  value  of  n  may  produce  the  greatest  galvanometer 
deflexion.  By  differentiating  the  expression  for  f  we  find 


If  we  have  a  great  many  determinations  of  resistance  to  make 
in  which  the  actual  resistance  has  nearly  the  same  value,  then  it 
may  be  worth  while  to  prepare  a  galvanometer  and  a  battery  for 
this  purpose.  In  this  case  we  find  that  the  best  arrangement  is 

S=R,        B=\R,         G=2n(l-n}R, 
and  if  *  =  i  G  =  \E. 

On  ike  Use  of  Wheatstone's  Bridge. 

224*.]  We  have  already  explained  the  general  theory  of  Wheat- 
stone's  Bridge,  we  shall  now  consider  some  of  its  applications. 


Fig.  49. 

The  comparison  which  can  be  effected  with  the  greatest  exactness 
is  that  of  two  equal  resistances. 


224*.]  USE  OF  WHEATSTONE'S  BRIDGE.  191 

Let  us  suppose  that  /3  is  a  standard  resistance  coil,  and  that  we 
wish  to  adjust  y  to  be  equal  in  resistance  to  /3. 

Two  other  coils,  b  and  c,  are  prepared  which  are  equal  or  nearly 
equal  to  each  other,  and  the  four  coils  are  placed  with  their  electrodes 
in  mercury  cups  so  that  the  current  of  the  battery  is  divided 
between  two  branches,  one  consisting  of  /3  and  y  and  the  other 
of  6  and  c.  The  coils  6  and  c  are  connected  by  a  wire  PR,  as 
uniform  in  its  resistance  as  possible,  and  furnished  with  a  scale  of 
equal  parts. 

The  galvanometer  wire  connects  the  junction  of  /3  and  y  with 
a  point  Q  of  the  wire  PR,  and  the  point  of  contact  at  Q  is  made 
to  vary  till  on  closing  first  the  battery  circuit  and  then  the 
galvanometer  circuit,  no  deflexion  of  the  galvanometer  needle  is 
observed. 

The  coils  £  and  y  are  then  made  to  change  places,  and  a  new 
position  is  found  for  Q.  If  this  new  position  is  the  same  as  the 
old  one,  then  we  know  that  the  exchange  of  {3  and  y  has  produced 
no  change  in  the  proportions  of  the  resistances,  and  therefore  y 
is  rightly  adjusted.  If  Q  has  to  be  moved,  the  direction  and 
amount  of  the  change  will  indicate  the  nature  and  amount  of  the 
alteration  of  the  length  of  the  wire  of  y,  which  will  make  its  resis- 
tance equal  to  that  of  j3. 

If  the  resistances  of  the  coils  b  and  c,  each  including  part  of  the 
wire  PR  up  to  its  zero  reading,  are  equal  to  that  of  b  and  c  divisions 
of  the  wire  respectively,  then,  if  x  is  the  scale  reading  of  Q  in  the 
first  case,  and  y  that  in  the  second, 

/3  c+y  _  y 


b—x~  y  b—  y  ~"  ft 

whence  y2    _         (b  +  c)  (y—x) 

-        h  (6-y) 


Since  b—  y  is  nearly  equal  to  c+x,  and  both  are  great  with 
respect  to  x  or  ^,  we  may  write  this 


When  y  is  adjusted  as  well  as  we  can,  we  substitute  for  b  and  c 
other  coils  of  (say)  ten  times  greater  resistance. 

The  remaining  difference  between  /3  and  y  will  now  produce 
a  ten  times  greater  difference  in  the  position  of  Q  than  with  the 


192 


MEASUBEMENT   OF   RESISTANCE. 


[225 


original  coils  I  and  <?,  and  in  this  way  we  can  continually  increase 
the  accuracy  of  the  comparison. 

The  adjustment  by  means  of  the  wire  with  sliding  contact  piece 
is  more  quickly  made  than  by  means  of  a  resistance  box,  and  it  is 
capable  of  continuous  variation. 

The  battery  must  never  be  introduced  instead  of  the  galvano- 
meter into  the  wire  with  a  sliding  contact,  for  the  passage  of  a 
powerful  current  at  the  point  of  contact  would  injure  the  surface 
of  the  wire.  Hence  this  arrangement  is  adapted  for  the  case  in 
which  the  resistance  of  the  galvanometer  is  greater  than  that  of  the 
battery. 

When  y,  the  resistance  to  be  measured,  a,  the  resistance  of  the 
battery,  and  a,  the  resistance  of  the  galvanometer,  are  given,  the 
best  values  of  the  other  resistances  have  been  shewn  by  Mr.  Oliver 
Heaviside  (Phil.  Mag.,  Feb.  1873)  to  be 


c  = 


a  a, 


b  = 


a  +  y 
ay — — -9 


a+y 
a  +  y 


Thomson's  *  Method  for  the  Determination  of  the  'Resistance  of 
the  Galvanometer. 


Galvanometer 


An  arrangement  similar  to  Wheatstone's  Bridge  has  been 

employed  with  advantage  by 
Sir  W.  Thomson  in  determin- 
ing the  resistance  of  the  gal- 
vanometer when  in  actual  use. 
It  was  suggested  to  Sir  W. 
Thomson  by  Mance's  Method. 
See  Art.  226. 

Let  the  battery  be  placed, 
as  before,  between  B  and  C 
in  the  figure  of  Article  221, 
but  let  the  galvanometer  be 
placed  in  CA  instead  of  in 
OA.  If  6(3  —  cy  is  zero,  then 
the  conductor  OA  is  conjugate 
to  BCj  and,  as  there  is  no  cur- 


Fig.  50. 


rent  produced  in  OA  by  the  battery  in  BC,  the  strength  of  the 
current  in  any  other  conductor  is  independent  of  the  resistance 


*  Proc.  B.  8.,  Jan.  19,  1871. 


226*.]  MANGE'S  METHOD.  193 

in  OA.  Hence,  if  the  galvanometer  is  placed  in  CA  its  deflexion 
will  remain  the  same  whether  the  resistance  of  OA  is  small  or 
great.  We  therefore  observe  whether  the  deflexion  of  the  galvano- 
meter remains  the  same  when  0  and  A  are  joined  by  a  conductor 
of  small  resistance,  as  when  this  connexion  is  broken,  and  if,  by 
properly  adjusting  the  resistances  of  the  conductors,  we  obtain  this 
result,  we  know  that  the  resistance  of  the  galvanometer  is 


. 

where  c,  y,  and  /3  are  resistance  coils  of  known  resistance. 

It  will  be  observed  that  though  this  is  not  a  null  method,  in  the 
sense  of  there  being  no  current  in  the  galvanometer,  it  is  so  in 
the  sense  of  the  fact  observed  being  the  negative  one,  that  the 
deflexion  of  the  galvanometer  is  not  changed  when  a  certain  con- 
tact is  made.  An  observation  of  this  kind  is  of  greater  value 
than  an  observation  of  the  equality  of  two  different  deflexions  of 
the  same  galvanometer,  for  in  the  latter  case  there  is  time  for 
alteration  in  the  strength  of  the  battery  or  the  sensitiveness  of 
the  galvanometer,  whereas  when  the  deflexion  remains  constant, 
in  spite  of  certain  changes  which  we  can  repeat  at  pleasure,  we  are 
sure  that  the  current  is  quite  independent  of  these  changes. 

The  determination  of  the  resistance  of  the  coil  of  a  galvanometer 
can  easily  be  effected  in  the  ordinary  way  of  using  Wheatstone's 
Bridge  by  placing  another  galvanometer  in  OA.  By  the  method 
now  described  the  galvanometer  itself  is  employed  to  measure  its 
own  resistance. 

Mance's*  Method  of  determining  the  Resistance  of  the  Battery. 

226*.]  The  measurement  of  the  resistance  of  a  battery  when  in 
action  is  of  a  much  higher  order  of  difficulty,  since  the  resistance 
of  the  battery  is  found  to  change  considerably  for  some  time  after 
the  strength  of  the  .current  through  it  is  changed.  In  many  of  the 
methods  commonly  used  to  measure  the  resistance  of  a  battery  such 
alterations  of  the  strength  of  the  current  through  it  occur  in  the 
course  of  the  operations,  and  therefore  the  results  are  rendered 
doubtful. 

In  Mance's  method,  which  is  free  from  this  objection,  the  battery 
is  placed  in  JBC  and  the  galvanometer  in  CA.  The  connexion 
between  0  and  IB  is  then  alternately  made  and  broken. 

*  Proc.  B.  8.,  Jan.  19,  1871. 
O 


194  MEASUREMENT  OF   RESISTANCE.  [226"''". 

If  the  deflexion  of  the  galvanometer  remains  unaltered,  we  know 
that  OB  is  conjugate  to  CA,  whence  cy  =  a  a,  and  a,  the  resistance 
of  the  battery,  is  obtained  in  terms  of  known  resistances  <?,  y,  a. 

When  the  condition  cy  =  a  a  is  fulfilled,  then  the  current  through 
the  galvanometer  is 


and  this  is  independent  of  the  resistance  /3  between  0  and  B.  To 
test  the  sensibility  of  the  method  let  us  suppose  that  the  condition 
cy  =  a  a  is  nearly,  but  not  accurately,  fulfilled,  and  that  yQ  is  the 
current  through  the  galvanometer  when  0  and  B  are  connected 


Fig.  61. 

by  a  conductor  of  no  sensible  resistance,  and  y^  the  current  when 
0  and  B  are  completely  disconnected. 

To  find  these  values  we  must  make  fi  equal  to  0  and  to  oo  in  the 
general  formula  for  y,  and  compare  the  results. 

In  this  way  we  find 


where  yQ  and  y^  are  supposed  to  be  so  nearly  equal  that  we  may, 
when  their  difference  is  not  in  question,  put  either  of  them  equal 
to  y,  the  value  of  the  current  when  the  adjustment  is  perfect. 

The  resistance,  c,  of  the  conductor  AB  should  be  equal  to  a, 
that  of  the  battery,  a  and  y,  should  be  equal  and  as  small  as 
possible,  and  5  should  be  equal  to  a  +  y. 

Since  a  galvanometer  is  mosfc  sensitive  when  its  deflexion  is 
small,  we  should  bring  the  needle  nearly  to  zero  by  means  of  fixed 
magnets  before  making  contact  between  0  and  B. 

In  this  method  of  measuring  the  resistance  of  the  battery,  the 
current  in  the  battery  is  not  in  any  way  interfered  with  during  the 
operation,  so  that  we  may  ascertain  its  resistance  for  any  given 


227*.]      COMPARISON   OF   ELECTROMOTIVE   FORCES.  195 


strength  of  current,  so  as  to  determine  how  the  strength  of  current 
affects  the  resistance. 

If  y  is  the  current  in  the  galvanometer,  the  actual  current 
through  the  battery  is  #0  with  the  key  down  and  x±  with  the 
key  up,  where 

a?0  =  y  (l  -\  --  )  ,          x,  =  y  (l  -f  -  +    ,ae    .)  > 
a  +  y'  y  ^        y      y(a-f  <?)' 

the  resistance  of  the  battery  is 

cy 

a  =  —  , 
a 

and  the  electromotive  force  of  the  battery  is 


The  method  of  Art.  225  for  finding  the  resistance  of  the  galva- 
nometer differs  from  this  only  in  making  and  breaking  contact 
between  0  and  A  instead  of  between  '0  and  B,  and  by  exchanging 
a  and  /3  we  obtain  for  this  case 

y*—y\  _  ft        cy-bfr 

y     ~y  ('+£)(0+y)' 

On  the  Comparison  of  Electromotive  Forces. 

227*.]  The  following  method  of  comparing  the  electromotive 
forces  of  voltaic  and  thermoelectric  arrangements,  when  no  current 
passes  through  them,  requires  only  a  set  of  resistance  coils  and  a 
constant  battery. 

Let  the  electromotive  force  E  of  the  battery  be  greater  than  that 
of  either  of  the  electromotors  to  be  compared,  then,  if  a  sufficient 


1HHHI 


m 
Fig.  52. 

resistance,  J^,  be   interposed   between  the  points  Alt  Bl  of  the 
primary  circuit  EB1A1E,  the  electromotive  force  from  B±  to  ^ 

O  2 


196    POGGENDORFF'S  COMPENSATION  METHOD.  [227*. 

may  be  made  equal  to  that  of  the  electromotor^.  If  the  elec- 
trodes of  this  electromotor  are  now  connected  with  the  points 
AH  B!  no  current  will  flow  through  the  electromotor.  By  placing 
a  galvanometer  G1  in  the  circuit  of  the  electromotor  JElt  and 
adjusting  the  resistance  between  A1  and  J$lt  till  the  galvanometer 
G±  indicates  no  current,  we  obtain  the  equation 

E^S^C, 

where  B±  is  the  resistance  between  Al  and  Bl  ,  and  C  is  the  strength 
of  the  current  in  the  primary  circuit. 

In  the  same  way,  by  taking  a  second  electromotor  E.2  and  placing 
its  electrodes  at  A2  and  _Z?2,  so  that  no  current  is  indicated  by  the 
galvanometer  6ra, 


where  E2  is  the  resistance  between  A2  and  _52.  If  the  observations 
of  the  galvanometers  Gl  and  G2  are  simultaneous,  the  value  of  C, 
the  current  in  the  primary  circuit,  is  the  same  in  both  equations, 
and  we  find 

.EI  '.  1/2  i  '.  RI  i  xt2. 

In  this  way  the  electromotive  force  of  two  electromotors  may  be 
compared.*  The  absolute  electromotive  force  of  an  electromotor 
may  be  measured  either  electrostatically  by  means  of  the  electro- 
meter, or  electromagnetically  by  means  of  an  absolute  galvano- 
meter. 

This  method,  in  which,  at  the  time  of  the  comparison,  there 
is  no  current  through  either  of  the  electromotors,  is  a  modification 
of  PoggendorfFs  method,  and  is  due  to  Mr.  Latimer  Clark,  who 
has  deduced  the  following  values  of  electromotive  forces  : 

Concentrated  v  .. 

solution  of 

Danielll.  Amalgamated  Zinc  H2S04+   4  aq.  Cu  S04       Copper  =1.079 

II.  „                   H2SO<+12aq.  CuS04        Copper  =0.978 

III.  „                  H2S04+12aq.  Cu2  (N03)  Copper  =1.00 
Eunsenl.                   „                        „            „  HN03        Carbon  =1.964 

II.  „  „  ,,        sp.  g.  1.  38     Carbon     =1.888 

Grove  „  H2SO4+   4  aq.       HN03       Platinum  =1.956 

A  Volt  is  an  electromotive  force  equal  to  100,000,000  units  of  the  centimetre-gramme- 
second  system. 

*  [Any  number  of  batteries  may  be  compared  by  the  help  of  only  one  galvanometer 
if  one  pole  of  each  battery  is  connected  with  the  same  electrode  of  the  galvanometer 
the  other  poles  being  connected  through  separate  keys  to  points  Alt  A2,  &c.  upon 
the  wire  and  the  keys  being  depressed  one  at  a  time  but  in  rapid  succession.] 


CHAPTEE   XIIL 


ON   THE   ELECTRIC   RESISTANCE   OF   SUBSTANCES. 

228*.]  THERE  are  three  classes  in  which  we  may  place  different 
substances  in  relation  to  the  passage  of  electricity  through  them. 

The  first  class  contains  all  the  metals  and  their  alloys,  some 
sulphurets,  and  other  compounds  containing  metals,  to  which  we 
must  add  carbon  in  the  form  of  gas-coke,  and  selenium  in  the 
crystalline  form. 

In  all  these  substances  conduction  takes  place  without  any 
decomposition,  or  alteration  of  the  chemical  nature  of  the  substance, 
either  in  its  interior  or  where  the  current  enters  and  leaves  the 
body.  In  all  of  them  the  resistance*  increases  as  the  temperature 
rises. 

The  second  class  consists  of  substances  which  are  called  electro- 
lytes, because  the  current  is  associated  with  a  decomposition  of 
the  Substance  into  two  components  which  appear  at  the  electrodes. 
As  a  rule  a  substance  is  an  electrolyte  only  when  in  the  liquid 
form,  though  certain  colloid  substances,  such  as  glass  at  100CC, 
which  are  apparently  solid,  are  electrolytes.  It  would  appear  from 
the  experiments  of  Sir  B.  C.  Brodie  that  certain  gases  are  capable 
of  electrolysis  by  a  powerful  electromotive  force. 

In  all  substances  which  conduct  by  electrolysis  the  resistance 
diminishes  as  the  temperature  rises. 

The  third  class  consists  of  substances  the  resistance  of  which  is 
so  great  that  it  is  only  by  the  most  refined  methods  that  the 
passage  of  electricity  through  them  can  be  detected.  These  are 
called  Dielectrics.  To  this  class  belong  a  considerable  number 
of  solid  bodies,  many  of  which  are  electrolytes  when  melted,  some 
liquids,  such  as  turpentine,  naphtha,  melted  paraffin,  &c.,  and  all 
gases  and  vapours.  Carbon  in  the  form  of  diamond,  and  selenium 
in  the  amorphous  form,  belong  to  this  class. 

The  resistance  of  this  class  of  bodies  is  enormous  compared  with 
that  of  the  metals.  It  diminishes  as  the  temperature  rises.  It 


198  RESISTANCE   OF  METALS.  [229*. 

is  difficult,  on  account  of  the  great  resistance  of  these  substances, 
to  determine  whether  the  feeble  current  which  we  can  force  through 
them  is  or  is  not  associated  with  electrolysis. 

On  the  Electric  Resistance  of  Metals. 

229*.]  There  is  no  .part  of  electrical  research  in  which  more 
numerous  or  more  accurate  experiments  have  been  made  than  in 
the  determination  of  the  resistance  of  metals.  It  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  in  the  electric  telegraph  that  the  metal  of  which  the 
wires  are  made  should  have  the  smallest  attainable  resistance. 
Measurements  of  resistance  must  therefore  be  made  before  selecting 
the  materials.  When  any  fault  occurs  in  the  line,  its  position  is 
at  once  ascertained  by  measurements  of  resistance,  and  these  mea- 
surements, in  which  so  many  persons  are  now  employed,  require 
the  use  of  resistance  coils,  made  of  metal  the  electrical  properties 
of  which  have  been  carefully  tested. 

The  electrical  properties  of  metals  and  their  alloys  have  been 
studied  with  great  care  by  MM.  Matthiessen,  Vogt,  and  Hockin, 
and  by  MM.  Siemens,  who  have  done  so  much  to  introduce  exact 
electrical  measurements  into  practical  work. 

It  appears  from  the  researches  of  Dr.  Matthiessen,  that  the  effect 
of  temperature  on  the  resistance  is  nearly  the  same  for  a  considerable 
number  of  the  pure  metals,  the  resistance  at  100°C  being  to  that 
at  0°C  in  the  ratio  of  1.414  to  1,  or  of  1  to  .707.  For  pure  iron 
the  ratio  is  1.645,  and  for  pure  thallium  1.458. 

The  resistance  of  metals  has  been  observed  by  Dr.  C.  W.  Siemens* 
through  a  much  wider  range  of  temperature,  extending  from  the 
freezing  point  to  350CC,  and  in  certain  cases  to  1000°C.  He  finds 
that  the  resistance  increases  as  the  temperature  rises,  but  that  the 
rate  of  increase  diminishes  as  the  temperature  rises.  The  formula, 
which  he  finds  to  agree  very  closely  both  with  the  resistances 
observed  at  low  temperatures  by  Dr.  Matthiessen  and  with  his 
own  observations  through  a  range  of  1000°C,  is 


where  T  is  the  absolute  temperature  reckoned  from  —  273°C,  and 
a,  j3,  y  are  constants.     Thus,  for 

Platinum  ......  r  —  0.039369^+0.00216407^—  0.2413, 

Copper  .........  r=  0.026577^  +  0.00314437T~0.22751} 

Iron  ............  r  =  0.0725457T*  +  0.0038133Z7-1.23971. 

*  Proc.R.S.,  April,  27,1871. 


230*.]  RESISTANCE   OF  METALS.  199 

From  data  of  this  kind  the  temperature  of  a  furnace  may  be 
determined  by  means  of  an  observation  of  the  resistance  of  a 
platinum  wire  placed  in  the  furnace. 

Dr.  Matthiessen  found  that  when  two  metals  are  combined  to 
form  an  alloy,  the  resistance  of  the  alloy  is  in  most  cases  greater 
than  that  calculated  from  the  resistance  of  the  component  metals 
and  their  proportions.  In  the  case  of  alloys  of  gold  and  silver,  the 
resistance  of  the  alloy  is  greater  than  that  of  either  pure  gold  or 
pure  silver,  and,  within  certain  limiting  proportions  of  the  con- 
stituents, it  varies  very  little  with  a  slight  altefation  of  the  pro- 
portions. For  this  reason  Dr.  Matthiessen  recommended  an  alloy 
of  two  parts  by  weight  of  gold  and  one  of  silver  as  a  material 
for  reproducing  the  unit  of  resistance. 

The  effect  of  change  of  temperature  on  electric  resistance  is 
generally  less  in  alloys  than  in  pure  metals. 

Hence  ordinary  resistance  coils  are  made  of  German  silver,  on 
account  of  its  great  resistance  and  its  small  variation  with  tem- 
perature. 

An  alloy  of  silver  and  platinum  is  also  used  for  standard  coils. 

230*.]  In  the  following  table  R  is  the  resistance  in  Ohms  of  a 
column  one  metre  long  and  one  gramme  weight  at  0°C,  and  r  is 
the  resistance  in  centimetres  per  second  of  a  cube  of  one  centi- 
metre, according  to  the  experiments  of  Matthiessen  *. 

Percentage 
increment  of 

Specific  resistance  for 

gravity  R  r         1°C  at  20°C. 

Silver 10-50  hard  drawn  0-1689  1609  0-377 

Copper 8-95  hard  drawn  0-1469  1642  0-388 

Gold 19-27  hard  drawn  0-4150  2154  0-365 

Lead    11-391  pressed  2-257  19847  0-387 

Mercury 13-595  liquid  13-071  96146  0-072 

Gold  2,  Silver  1  . .  15-218  hard  or  annealed  1-668  10988  0-065 

Selenium  at  100°C  Crystalline  form  6  x  10ls  1-00 

It  appears  from  the  researches  of  Matthiessen  and  Hockin  that 
the  resistance  of  a  uniform  column  of  mercury  of  one  metre  in 
length,  and  weighing  one  gramme  at  0°C.  is  13*071  Ohms,  whence 
it  follows  that  if  the  specific  gravity  of  mercury  is  13-595,  the 
resistance  of  a  column  of  one  metre  in  length  and  one  square 
millimetre  in  section  is  0.96146  Ohms. 

*  Phil.  Mag.,  May,  1865. 


200  RESISTANCE   OF   ELECTROLYTES.  [231 


On  the  Electric  Resistance  of  Electrolytes. 

231*.]  The  measurement  of  the  electric  resistance  of  electrolytes 
is  rendered  difficult  on  account  of  the  polarization  of  the  electrodes, 
which  causes  the  observed  difference  of  potentials  of  the  metallic 
electrodes  to  be  greater  than  the  electromotive  force  which  actually 
produces  the  current. 

This  difficulty  can  be  overcome  in  various  ways.  In  certain 
cases  we  can  get  rid  of  polarization  by  using  electrodes  of  proper 
material,  as,  for  instance,  zinc  electrodes  in  a  solution  of  sulphate 
of  zinc.  By  making  the  surface  of  the  electrodes  very  large  com- 
pared with  the  section  of  the  part  of  the  electrolyte  whose  resist- 
ance is  to  be,  measured,  and  by  using  only  currents  of  short  duration 
in  opposite  directions  alternately,  we  can  make  the  measurements 
before  any  considerable  intensity  of  polarization  has  been  excited 
by  the  passage  of  the  current. 

Finally,  by  making  two  different  experiments,  in  one  of  which 
the  path  of  the  current  through  the  electrolyte  is  much  longer  than 
in  the  other,  and  so  adjusting  the  electromotive  force  that  the 
actual  current,  and  the  time  during  which  it  flows,  are  nearly  the 
same  in  each  case,  we  can  eliminate  the  effect  of  polarization 
altogether. 

232*.]  In  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Paalzow*  the  electrodes  were 
in  the  form  of  large  disks  placed  in  separate  flat  vessels  filled  with 
the  electrolyte,  and  the  connexion  was  made  by  means  of  a  long 
siphon  filled  with  the  electrolyte  and  dipping  into  both  vessels. 
Two  such  siphons  of  different  lengths  were  used. 

The  observed  resistances  of  the  electrolyte  in  these  siphons 
being  2^  and  R2,  the  siphons  were  next  filled  with  mercury,  and 
their  resistances  when  filled  with  mercury  were  found  to  be  R± 
and  R2'. 

The  ratio  of  the  resistance  of  the  electrolyte  to  that  of  a  mass 
of  mercury  at  0°C  of  the  same  form  was  then  found  from  the 
formula  • 


To  deduce  from  the  values  of  p  the  resistance  of  a  centimetre  in 
*  Berlin  Monatsbericht,  July,  1868. 


2  33*0  RESISTANCE   OF  ELECTROLYTES.  201 

length  having  a  section  of  a  square  centimetre,  we  must  multiply 
them  by  the  value  of  r  for  mercury  at  0°C.     See  Art.  230. 
The  results  given  by  Paalzow  are  as  follow  :  — 

Mixtures  of  Sulphuric  Acid  and  Water. 


TO™ 


Resistance  compared 
with  mercury. 


H2S04                       15°C  96950 

H2S04   +    14H20 19°C  14157 

HaSO4   +    13H2O 22°C  13310 

HaS04  +  499  H2O 22°C  184773 

Sulphate  of  Zinc  and  Water. 

ZnS04  +    23H20   23°C  194400 

ZnSO4   +    24H2O 23°C  191000 

ZnSO4  +105H2O 23°C  354000 

Sulphate  of  Copper  and  Water. 

CuS04  +    45H20 22°C  202410 

Cu  S04  +  105  H20 22°C  339841 

Sulphate  of  Magnesium  and  Water. 

MgSO4  +    34  H20 22°C  199180 

Mg  S04  +  107  H20 22°C  324600 

Hydrochloric  Acid  and  Water. 

HC1       +    15H2O 23°C  13626 

H  Cl       +  500  H20 23°C  86679 

233*.]  MM.  F.  Kohlrausch  and  W.  A.  Nippoldt*  have  de- 
termined the  resistance  of  mixtures  of  sulphuric  acid  and  water. 
They  used  alternating  magneto-electric  currents,  the  electromotive 
force  of  which  varied  from  4  to  TV  of  that  of  a  Grove's  cell,  and 
by  means  of  a  thermoelectric  copper-iron  pair  they  reduced  the 
electromotive  force  to  reinnnr  °f  ^a^  °f  a  Grove's  cell.  They  found 
that  Ohm's  law  was  applicable  to  this  electrolyte  throughout  the 
range  of  these  electromotive  forces. 

The  resistance  is  a  minimum  in  a  mixture  containing  about  one- 
third  of  sulphuric  acid. 

The  resistance  of  electrolytes  diminishes  as  the  temperature 
increases.  The  percentage  increment  of  conductivity  for  a  rise  of 
1CC  is  given  in  the  following  table. 

*  Pogg.  Ann.  cxxxviii,  p,  286,  Oct.  1869. 


202  BESISTANCE   OF   DIELECTKICS.  [234= 


Resistance  of  Mixtures  of  Sulphuric  Acid  and  Water  at  22°C  in  terms 
of  Mercury  at  0°C.     MM.  Kohlrausch  and  Nippoldt. 

Specific  gravity 
at  18°5 

Percentage 
ofH2SO4 

Resistance 
at  22°C 
(Hg=l) 

Percentage 
increment  of 
conductivity 
for  1°C. 

0-9985 

0-0 

746300 

0-47 

1-00 

0-2 

465100 

0-47 

1-0504 

8.3 

34530 

0-653 

1-0989 

14-2 

18946 

0-646 

14431 

20-2 

14990 

0^799 

1-2045 

28.0 

13133 

1.317 

1-2631 

35.2 

13132 

1-259 

1-3163 

41-5 

14286 

1-410 

1-3547 

46-0 

15762 

1-674 

1-3994 

50-4 

17726 

1-582 

1.4482 

55.2 

20796 

1-417 

1.5026 

60.3 

25574 

1-794 

On  the  Electrical  Resistance  of  Dielectrics. 

234*.]  A  great  number  of  determinations  of  the  resistance  of 
gutta-percha,  and  other  materials  used  as  insulating  media,  in  the 
manufacture  of  telegraphic  cables,  have  been  made  in  order  to 
ascertain  the  value  of  these  materials  as  insulators. 

The  tests  are  generally  applied  to  the  material  after  it  has  been 
used  to  cover  the  conducting  wire,  the  wire  being  used  as  one 
electrode,  and  the  water  of  a  tank,  in  which  the  cable  is  plunged, 
as  the  other.  Thus  the  current  is  made  to  pass  through  a  cylin- 
drical coating  of  the  insulator  of  great  area  and  small  thickness. 

It  is  found  that  when  the  electromotive  force  begins  to  act,  the 
current,  as  indicated  by  the  galvanometer,  is  by  no  means  constant. 
The  first  effect  is  of  course  a  transient  current  of  considerable 
intensity,  the  total  quantity  of  electricity  being  that  required  to 
charge  the  surfaces  of  the  insulator  with  the  superficial  distribution 
of  electricity  corresponding  to  the  electromotive  force.  This  first 
current  therefore  is  a  measure  not  of  the  conductivity,  but  of  the 
capacity  of  the  insulating  layer. 

But  even  after  this  current  has  been  allowed  to  subside  the 
residual  current  is  not  constant,  and  does  not  indicate  the  true 
conductivity  of  the  substance.  It  is  found  that  the  current  con- 
tinues to  decrease  for  at  least  half  an  hour,  so  that  a  determination 
of  the  resistance  deduced  from  the  current  will  give  a  greater  value 
if  a  certain  time  is  allowed  to  elapse  than  if  taken  immediately 
after  applying  the  battery. 


234*-]  RESISTANCE   OF   DIELECTRICS.  203 

Thus,  with  Hooper's  insulating  material  the  apparent  resistance 
at  the  end  of  ten  minutes  was  four  times,  and  at  the  end  of 
nineteen  hours  twenty-three  times  that  observed  at  the  end  of 
one  minute.  When  the  direction  of  the  electromotive  force  is 
reversed,  the  resistance  falls  as  low  or  lower  than  at  first  and 
then  gradually  rises. 

These  phenomena  seem  to  be  due  to  a  condition  of  the  gutta- 
percha,  which,  for  want  of  ^a  better  name,  we  may  call  polarization, 
and  which  we  may  compare  on  the  one  hand  with  that  of  a  series 
of  Leyden  jars  charged  by  cascade,  and,  on  the  other,  with  Hitter's 
secondary  pile. 

If  a  number  of  Leyden  jars  of  great  capacity  are  connected  in 
series  by  means  of  conductors  of  great  resistance  (such  as  wet 
cotton  threads  in  the  experiments  of  M.  Gaugain),  then  an  electro- 
motive force  acting  on  the  series  will  produce  a  current,  as 
indicated  by  a  galvanometer,  which  will  gradually  diminish  till 
the  jars  are  fiilly  charged. 

The  apparent  resistance  of  such  a  series  will  increase,  and  if  the 
dielectric  of  the  jars  is  a  perfect  insulator  it  will  increase  without 
limit.  If  the  electromotive  force  be  removed  and  connexion  made 
between  the  ends  of  the  series,  a  reverse  current  will  be  observed, 
the  total  quantity  of  which,  in  the  case  of  perfect  insulation,  will  be 
the  same  as  that  of  the  direct  current.  Similar  effects  are  observed 
in  the  case  of  the  secondary  pile,  with  the  difference  that  the  final 
insulation  is  not  so  good,  and  that  the  capacity  per  unit  of  surface 
is  immensely  greater. 

In  the  case  of  the  cable  covered  with  gutta-percha,  &c.,  it  is 
found  that  after  applying  the  battery  for  half  an  hour,  and  then 
connecting  the  wire  with  the  external  electrode,  a  reverse  current 
takes  place,  which  goes  on  for  some  time,  and  gradually  reduces 
the  system  to  its  original  state. 

These  phenomena  are  of  the  same  kind  with  those  indicated 
by  the  ' residual  discharge'  of  the  Leyden  jar,  except  that  the 
amount  of  the  polarization  is  much  greater  in  gutta-percha,  &c. 
than  in  glass. 

This  state  of  polarization  seems  to  be  a  directed  property  of  the 
material,  which  requires  for  its  production  not  only  electromotive 
force,  but  the  passage,  by  displacement  or  otherwise,  of  a  con- 
siderable quantity  of  electricity,  and  this  passage  requires  a  con- 
siderable time.  When  the  polarized  state  has  been  set  up,  there 
is  an  internal  electromotive  force  acting  in  the  substance  in  the 


204  RESISTANCE   OF   DIELECTRICS.  [235*- 

reverse  direction,  which  will  continue  till  it  has  either  produced 
a  reversed  current  equal  in  total  quantity  to  the  first,  or  till  the 
state  of  polarization  has  quietly  subsided  by  means  of  true  con- 
duction through  the  substance. 

The  whole  theory  of  what  has  been  called  residual  discharge, 
absorption  of  electricity,  electrification,  or  polarization,  deserves 
a  careful  investigation,  and  will  probably  lead  to  important  dis- 
coveries relating  to  the  internal  structure  of  bodies. 

235*.]  The  resistance  of  the  greater  number  of  dielectrics  di- 
minishes as  the  temperature  rises. 

Thus  the  resistance  of  gutta-percha  is  about  twenty  times  as  great 
at  0°C  as  at  24°C.  Messrs.  Bright  and  Clark  have  found  that  the 
following  formula  gives  results  agreeing  with  their  experiments. 
If  r  is  the  resistance  of  gutta-percha  at  temperature  T  centigrade, 
then  the  resistance  at  temperature  T+ 1  will  be 

.S  =  rx  0.8878', 
the  number  varies  between  0.8878  and  0.9. 

Mr.  Hockin  has  verified  the  curious  fact  that  it  is  not  until  some 
hours  after  the  gutta-percha  has  taken  its  temperature  that  the 
resistance  reaches  its  corresponding  value. 

The  effect  of  temperature  on  the  resistance  of  india-rubber  is  not 
so  great  as  on  that  of  gutta-percha. 

The  resistance  of  gutta-percha  increases  considerably  on  the  ap- 
plication of  pressure. 

The  resistance,  in  Ohms,  of  a  cubic  metre  of  various  specimens  of 
gutta-percha  used  in  different  cables  is  as  follows*. 

Name  of  Cable. 

Bed  Sea 267  x  1012  to  .362  x  1012 

Malta-Alexandria 1.23  x  1012 

Persian  Gulf 1.80  x  1012 

Second  Atlantic     3.42  xlO12 

Hooper's  Persian  Gulf  Core  ...  7  4 . 7    x  1 0 12 
Gutta-percha  at  24°C   3.53  x  1012 

236*.]  The  following  table,  calculated  from  the  experiments  of 
M.  Buff f,  shews  the  resistance  of  a  cubic  metre  of  glass  in  Ohms 
at  different  temperatures. 

*  Jenkin's  Cantor  Lectures. 

f  [Annalen  der  Chemie  und  Pharmacie,  bd.  xc.  257  (1854) „] 


238*.]  RESISTANCE   OF   DIELECTRICS.  205 

Temperature.  Resistance. 

200°C  227000 

250°  13900 

300°  1480 

350°  1035 

400°  735 

237*.]  Mr.  C.  F.  Varley*  has  recently  investigated  the  conditions 
of  the  current  through  rarefied  gases,  and  finds  that  the  electro- 
motive force  E  is  equal  to  a  constant  E9  together  with  a  part 
depending  on  the  current  according  to  Ohm's  Law,  thus 


For  instance,  the  electromotive  force  required  to  cause  the 
current  to  begin  in  a  certain  tube  was  that  of  323  DanielPs  cells, 
but  an  electromotive  force  of  304  cells  was  just  sufficient  to 
maintain  the  current.  The  intensity  of  the  current,  as  measured 
by  the  galvanometer,  was  proportional  to  the  number  of  cells  above 
304.  Thus  for  305  cells  the  deflexion  was  2,  for  306  it  was  4, 
for  307  it  was  6,  and  so  on  up  to  380,  or  304  +  76  for  which  the 
deflexion  was  150,  or  76  x  1.97. 

From  these  experiments  it  appears  that  there  is  a  kind  of 
polarization  of  the  electrodes,  the  electromotive  force  of  which 
is  equal  to  that  of  304  DanielFs  cells,  and  that  up  to  this  electro- 
motive force  the  battery  is  occupied  in  establishing  this  state  of 
polarization.  When  the  maximum  polarization  is  established,  the 
excess  of  electromotive  force  above  that  of  304  cells  is  devoted  to 
maintaining  the  current  according  to  Ohm's  Law. 

The  law  of  the  current  in  a  rarefied  gas  is  therefore  very  similar 
to  the  law  of  the  current  through  an  electrolyte  in  which  we  have 
to  take  account  of  the  polarisation  of  the  electrodes. 

In  connexion  with  this  subject  we  should  study  Thomson's  re- 
sults f,  in  which  the  electromotive  force  required  to  produce  a  spark 
in  air  was  found  to  be  proportional  not  to  the  distance,  but  to  the 
distance  together  with  a  constant  quantity.  The  electromotive 
force  corresponding  to  this  constant  quantity  may  be  regarded  as 
the  intensity  of  polarization  of  the  electrodes. 

238*.]  MM.  Wiedemann  and  Eiihlmann  have  recently  J  investi- 
gated the  passage  of  electricity  through  gases.  The  electric  current 
was  produced  by  Holtz's  machine,  and  the  discharge  took  place 

*  Proc.  P.  8.,  Jan.  12,  1871.  > 

t  [Proc.  R.  8.,  1860,  or  Reprint,  chap,  xix.] 

I  Berichte  der  Konigl.  Sachs.  Geselkckaft,  Oct.  20,  1871. 


206  RESISTANCE   OF   DIELECTRICS.  [238''". 

between  spherical  electrodes  within  a  metallic  vessel  containing 
rarefied  gas.  The  discharge  was  in  general  discontinuous,  and  the 
interval  of  time  between  successive  discharges  was  measured  by 
means  of  a  mirror  revolving  along  with  the  axis  of  Holtz's  machine. 
The  images  of  the  series  of  discharges  were  observed  by  means  of 
a  heliometer  with  a  divided  object-glass,  which  was  adjusted  till 
one  image  of  each  discharge  coincided  with  the  other  image  of 
the  next  discharge.  By  this  method  very  consistent  results  were 
obtained.  It  was  found  that  the  quantity  of  electricity  in  each 
discharge  is  independent  of  the  strength  of  the  current  and  of 
the  material  of  the  electrodes,  and  that  it  depends  on  the  nature 
and  density  of  the  gas,  and  on  the  distance  and  form  of  the 
electrodes. 

These  researches  confirm  the  statement  of  Faraday*  that  the 
electric  tension  (see  Art.  46)  required  to  cause  a  disruptive  discharge 
to  begin  at  the  electrified  surface  of  a  conductor  is  a  little  less 
when  the  electrification  is  negative  than  when  it  is  positive,  but 
that  when  a  discharge  does  take  place,  much  more  electricity  passes 
at  each  discharge  when  it  begins  at  a  positive  surface.  They  also 
tend  to  support  the  hypothesis,  that  the  stratum  of  gas  condensed 
on  the  surface  of  the  electrode  plays  an  important  part  in  the 
phenomenon,  and  they  indicate  that  this  condensation  is  greatest 
at  the  positive  electrode. 

Note  on  WJieatstones  Bridge. 

[The  following  method  of  determining  the  current  in  the  Gal- 
vanometer of  Wheatstone's  Bridge  was  given  by  Professor  Maxwell 
in  his  last  course  of  lectures,  and  is  a  good  illustration  of  the  method 
of  treating  a  system  of  linear  conductors.  It  has  been  communicated 
to  the  present  editor  by  Professor  J.  A.  Fleming  of  University 
College,  Nottingham.  The  method  simply  assumes  Ohm's  Law  for 
each  conductor,  and  that  the  whole  electromotive  force  around  a 
linear  circuit  is  the  sum  of  the  electromotive  forces  in  the  several 
conductors  forming  the  circuits,  and  therefore  equal  to  the  sum  of 
the  products  of  the  resistance  of  each  conductor  and  the  current 
flowing  in  it,  the  currents  being  taken  in  cyclic  order. 

Let  P,  Q,  S9  R,  G  and  £  (Fig.  53)  denote  the  resistances  in  the 
several  conductors  forming  the  bridge,  and  let  them  be  arranged  as 
indicated  in  the  figure.  Now  the  six  conductors  may  be  considered 

*  Exp.  Res.,  1501. 


WHEATSTONES   BRIDGE. 


207 


as  forming  three  independent  circuits  viz. : — PGQ,  RSG,  and  QS~B. 
Let  x  -\-y,  y  and  z  denote  the  currents  in  these  circuits  respectively, 
each  current  being  considered  as  flowing  in  the  directions  indicated 
by  the  arrows.  Then  the  actual  current  in  Q  is  z—x—y^  that  in 
S  is  z— y  and  that  in  G,  is  x,  and  the  electromotive  force  between 


the  ends  of  Q  is  Q  (z—y—x)  and  so  on  for  the  other  conductors. 
Of  the  three  circuits  specified  above  the  E.  M.  F.  in  the  first  two  is 
zero  while  that  in  the  third  is  JE,  the  electromotive  force  of  the 
battery.  Hence,  applying  Ohm's  Law  to  each  circuit  in  order  we 
have 

Gv-Qz        =0 


(R+S+G}y       —Sz- 


or 


(P+  G  +  Q)x+(P+  Q)y-Q* 
-Gx 

-  Q* 
Solving  for  x  we  obtain 


=  0 
=0 


...  (II) 


-S  + 


=  E 


x  = 


R+S,  - 


where  A  is  the  determinant  of  the  system  of  equations  (II). 

The  condition  for  no  current  in  the  galvanometer  is  x  =  0,  or 

QR-PS=0,  °r|-=f" 


208  WHEATSTONE'S  BRIDGE. 

To  obtain  the  current  equations,  (I),  the  rule  is — 

'Multiply  each  cycle  sign  (i.e.  current)  by  the  sum  of  all  the 
resistances  which  bound  that  cycle,  and  subtract  from  it  the  sign 
of  each  neighbouring  cycle  multiplied  by  the  resistance  separating 
the  cycles,  and  equate  the  result  to  the  E.  M.  F.  in  the  cycle.' 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  method  is  a  simple  application  of 
Kirchhoff's  second  law,  but  the  above  rule  is  very  convenient 
in  its  application.] 


THE   END. 


PLATE    I 
Aft  93. 


of  Force^  and  EauipoletMal  Surfaces. 


qup 


A  =  20  .          B  =  3  f,    Porn* 


..          A  P  =,  %  AJS  '. 


For  the  DeiegcOes  of  the 


Presi 


PLATE  H. 

Art  94. 


Lines  of  Force  and  E quipolenfiial  Surfaces. 


A  =  W  £=--5          P,   Poirui  of  Equilibrium, .  AP=2AB 

Q, ,    SpJi.erictiJ     surface,  of  Ztsv  potenfoaZ 

M,    PwruL  of  MaLcimunv  Force  odong  tit*  auxis . 

The  dotted  tint  is  thtlwt  of  force  ^i-O.I     tfauus 

'  For  tfu  Delegates  of  the  'Clarendon  Pre-ss. 


PLATE     III. 
Art.  95. 


of  Force  and  F (j  iiipolcnlicd   Surfaces. 


For  the  Deieqc^&s  of  lh&  dar&ndon  Press. 


PLATE  IV. 
Art.  96 


lines  of  Force  and  EquipolenMal  Surfaces. 

A  =lo  B--12  C=20. 

For  the  Delegates  of  tha  Clar&ndon  Press. 


Plate  V. 
Art  193 


Luves     of    Force      n^ccjur     tJve    tdye    of   a    Plate 


For  ihe.  Delegates  of  lhe>  Clarendon,  Press. 


PLATE  "VI 


Jitney    of  Force    rt&zr  a, 

For  the  Delegates  of  the>  Qar&ndon  Press 


RETURN  TO  the  circulation  desk  of  any 

University  of  California  Library 

or  to  the 

NORTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 
Bldg.  400,  Richmond  Field  Station 
University  of  California 
Richmond,  CA  94804-4698 

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS 
2 -month  loans  may  be  renewed  by  calling 

(510)642-6753 
1-year  loans  may  be  recharged  by  bringing  books 

to  NRLF 
Renewals    and    recharges    may    be    made    4    days 

prior  to  due  date 

DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW 


ite. 


IMUV 


2199? 


NOV  0  7  1S3C 


UlriUULA  I  iUN  Ubr  I . 


KELEY 


20,000  (4/94) 


YC    ! 1114 


U.C.  BERKELEY  LIBRARIES 


