NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 
Bethesda, Maryland 


ates om ae 
SECTION. o fos ima 


Works of this Section cannot be taken from the Library except by writte 
permission of the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. 


af ares 7 e 4 : ; 
‘i ; an} a = TS aN . hy 
Cec ; Me ek Va Ae 
Pa 
ee . 
r 
= ‘ a) 
‘ 
A H . 
2 3 
y, 
. ’ 
‘ 
+ 
foes . 
. 
/ B 
6 ras -. : 


TEXT-BOOKS OF SCIENCE. 


‘Now in course of publication, in small 8vo. each volume containing 


about 300 pages, price 3s. 6d. bound in cloth, 
A SERIES OF 


ELEMENTARY WORKS ON MECHANICAL AND 


PHYSICAL SCIENCE, 


FORMING A SERIES OF 


TEXT-BOOKS OF SCIENCE 


ADAPTED FOR THE USE OF ARTISANS AND OF STUDENTS IN PUBLIC 


AND OTHER SCHOOLS. 


Edited by T. M. GOODEVE, M.A. 


Lecturer on Applied Mechanics.at the Royal School of Mines, and formerly 


Professor of Natural Philosophy in King’s College, London. 


The following Text-Books are now published :— 


THE ELEMENTS OF MECHANISM. 
Designed for Students of Applied Mechanics. By T. M. GooprEvr, M.A. 
soe of the Series. New Hdition, revised; with 257 Figures on Wood. 
ce 3s. 6d. 


- METALS, THEIR PROPERTIES AND TREATMENT. 


By CHARLES Loupon BLoxaM, Professor of Chemistry in King’s College, 

London ; Professor of Chemistry in the Department of Artillery Studies, 

~~ in a Military Academy, Woolwich. With 105 Figures on Wood. 
ce 3s. 6d. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF INORGANIC 
CHEMISTRY. 
By WILLIAM ALLEN MILLER, M.D. LL.D. F.R.S. late Professor of Chemistry 
in King’s College, London ; Author of ‘Elements of Chemistry. Theoretical 
and Practical.’ New Edition, revised ; with 71 Figureson Wood. 3s. 6d. 


. ALGEBRA AND TRIGONOMETRY. 


By the Rev. WILLIAM NATHANIKL GRIFFIN, B.D. sometime Fellow of 
St. John’s College, Cambridge. Price 3s, 6d. 


PLANE AND SOLID GEOMETRY. 
By the Rev. H. W. Warson, formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Cam- 
bridge, and late Assistant-Master of Harrow School. Price 3s. 6d. 


. THEORY OF HEAT. 


By J. CLERK MAXWELL, M.A. LL.D. Edin. F.R.SS. L. & E. Professor of 
Experimental Physics in the University of Cambridge. New Edition, 
revised ; with 41 Woodcuts and Diagrams. Price 3s. 6d. 


. TECHNICAL ARITHMETIC AND MENSURATION. 


By CHARLES W. MERRIFIELD, F.R.S. Barrister-at-Law, Principal of the 
Royal School of Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering, Honorary 
Secretary of the Institution of Naval Architects, and Late an Examiner in 
the Department of Public Education. Price 3s. 6d, 


London: LONGMANS and CO. Paternoster Row. 


i Se oe ee ee ee ee ee 
ay aiid f pasties di ay be fa 


nC ii ties 


Text-Books ot Science. : 
(254 | 


; Mr ORGANIC CHEMISTRY. 
f ‘ By H. E, ARMSTRONG, Ph.D. Professor of Chemistry in the London Insti- 
| D7] 2: tution 


The following Text-Books are in active preparation :— 


q 
; ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM. 


‘ By FLEEMING JENKIN, F.R.SS, L. & E. Professor of Engineering in the 
a University of Edinburgh. 


PRACTICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE GEOMETRY, AND PRIN- 
CIPLES OF MECHANICAL DRAWING. 

By CHARLES W. MERRIFIELD, F.R.S. Barrister-at-Law, Principal of the 

Royal School of Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering, Honorary 


A Secretary of the Institution of Naval Architects, and Late an Examiner in 
‘a the Department of Public Education. 


PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS. 
By T. M, GoopEVE, M.A. Editor of the Series, 


DESCRIPTIVE MECHANISM, 


Including Descriptions of the Lathes, Planing, Slotting, and Shaping 
Machines, and the mode of Handling Work in the Engineer’s Shop and 
other Workshops. 

By C. P. B. SHELLEY, Civil Engineer, and Professor of Manufacturing 
Art and Machinery at King’s College, London. 


ECONOMICAL APPLICATIONS OF HEAT, 


Including Combustion, Evaporation, Furnaces, Flues, and Boilers. 
f By C. P. B, SHELLEY, Civil Engineer, and Professor of Manufacturing 
it Art and Machinery at King’s College, London. 
With a Chapter on the Probable Future Development of the Science of Heat, by 
. C. WILLIAM SIEMENS, F,R.S. 


THE STEAM ENGINE. 
By T. M. GooDEvE, M.A. Editor of the Series. 


SOUND AND LIGHT. 


' 

By G. G. Stokes, M.A. D.C.L. Fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge ; 
Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in the University of Cambridge; and 

t Secretary to the Royal Society. 


‘STRENGTH OF MATERIALS. 


By JoHN ANDERSON, C.E, Superintendent of Machinery at the Royal 
Arsenal, Woolwich. 


*,* To be followed by other works on other Branches of Science. 


eo London: LONGMANS and CO. Paternoster Row. 


J. CLERK MAXWELL, M.A. 
LL.D. Epin., F.R.SS. L. & E. 


Professor of Experimental Physics in the University of Cambridge. 


Be 


"D APPLETON AND CO. 
| NEW YORK. 
1872. 


a) ON ailing S/R | 


PREFACE. 


—o— 
; 


_ THE AIM of this book is to exhibit the scientific 
connexion of the various steps by which our know- 
_ ledge of the phenomena of heat has been extended. 

The first of these steps is the invention of the thermo- 
_ meter, by which the registration and comparison 
_ of temperatures is rendered possible. The second 
step is the measurement of quantities of heat, or 
Calorimetry. The whole science of heat is founded 
_ on Thermometry and Calorimetry, and when these 
_ operations are understood we may proceed to the 
third step, which is the investigation of those relations 
_ between the thermal and the mechanical properties of 
_ substances which form the subject of Thermodynamics 
_ The whole of this part of the subject depends on the 
_ consideration of the Intrinsic Energy of a system of 
_ bodies, as depending on the temperature and physical 
_ state, as well as the form, motion, and relative position 
of these bodies. Of this energy, however, only a 
' part is available for the purpose of producing me- 
chanical work, and though the energy itself is inde- 
_ structible, the available part is liable to diminution by 
the action of certain natural processes, such as con- 
uction and radiation of heat, friction, and viscosity. 
hese processes, by which energy is rendered unavail- 
ible as a source of work, are classed together under 
he name of the Dissipation of Energy, and form the 


vi Preface. 


subjects of the next division of the book. The last 
chapter is devoted to the explanation of various 
phenomena by means of the hypothesis that bodies 
consist of molecules, the motion of which constitutes 
the heat of those bodies. 

In order to bring the treatment of these subjects 
within the limits of this text-book, it has been found 
necessary to omit everything which is not an essential 
part of the intellectual process by which the doctrines 
of heat have been developed, or which does not 
materially assist the student in forming his own judg- 
ment on these doctrines. 

For this reason, no account is given of several very 
important experiments, and many illustrations of the 
theory of heat by means of natural phenomena are 
omitted. The student, however, will find this part of 
the subject treated at greater length in several excel- 
Jent works on the same subject which have lately 
appeared. 

A full account of the most important experiments 
on the effects of heat will be found in Dixon’s 
‘Treatise on Heat’ (Hodges & Smith, 1849). 

Professor Balfour Stewart’s treatise contains all that 
is necessary to be known in order to make experi- 
ments on heat. The student may be also referred to 


_ Deschanel’s ‘ Natural Philosophy,’ Part II., translated 


by Professor Everett, who has added a chapter on 
Thermodynamics ; to Professor Rankine’s work on the 
Steam Engine, in which he will find the first systematic 
treatise on thermodynamics; to Professor Tait’s ‘ Ther- 
modynamics,’ which contains an historical sketch of 
the subject, as well as the mathematical investigations ; 
and to Professor Tyndall’s work on ‘Heat as a Mode 
of Motion, in which the doctrines of the science are 
forcibly impressed on the mind by well-chosen illus- 
trative experiments. The original memoirs of Pro- 
fessor Clausius, one of the founders of the modern 
science of Thermodynamics, have been edited in 
English by Professor Hirst. 


CONTENTS. 


— ¢ + 


ae CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION. 


- Meaning of the word Temperature . * . . : ate 
The Mercurial Thermometer . - ; : 3 é Z 5 
Heat as a Quantity . : 2 _ 6 

Diffusion of Heat py Conduction ah Tdntions oO? ee ae 
The three Physical States of Bodies . = : : : Aaa | 


CHAPTER II. 
THERMOMETRY, OR THE REGISTRATION OF TEMPERATURE. 


Definition of Higher and Lower Temperature . . . . 32 
Mer wemperatures Of Reference lk ke 
Different Thermometric Scales . ‘ P ‘ a eee. 7: 
Construction of a Thermometer Be ee wg taal tar ese 
- The Air Thermometer . p F e $0 46 
per Methods of Ascertaining ‘Temperatures . . : ‘<a 


, CHAPTER IIL. 
sg CALORIMETRY, OR THE MEASUREMENT OF HEAT. 


Selection ofa Unitof Heat . .. . : ‘ . 
All Heat isofthe same Kind .  . ae 

Ice Calorimeters. arene oat eae ’ ier 
- Bunsen’s Calorimeter : y : 3 * < - 
~ Method of Mixture . ; 3 : 
_ Definitions of Thermal Capacity and ‘petite Heat : r F 
tent Heat of Steam 


eve 


viii Contents. 


CHAPTER IV. 


ELEMENTARY DYNAMICAL PRINCIPLES. 


Measurement of Quantities 


The Units of Length, Mass, and Tink, bala didir Therived Vite: 76 


Measurement of Force. : a . . : : 
Work and Energy . é : . . . . ° 
Principle of the Conservation of Energy .  . Pietige 
CHAPTER V. 
MEASUREMENT OF INTERNAL FORCES AND THEIR 
Longitudinal Pressure and Tension . : ‘ 2 cS 
Definition of a Fluid.—Hydrostatic Pressure. ‘ i 
Work done by a Piston ona Fluid . . : : . 
Watt’s Indicator and the Indicator Diagram. : . 
Elasticity of a Fluid ; : . ° . : . 
CHAPTER VI. 


PAGE 
74 

eae 

5 BF 

’ 92 
EFFECTS. 
+ 94 

e . 95 

- Ior 

+. £02 

» | 407 


LINES OF EQUAL TEMPERATURE ON THE INDICATOR 


DIAGRAM. 


Relation between Volume, Pressure, and a st ig . 
Isothermal Lines of a Gas Q 
Isothermal Lines of a Vapour in Contact with i Liquid . 
Steam Line and Water Line 


Continuity of the Liquid and Gaseous States. Repeats of 


Cagniard de la Tour and Andrews. ° 


CHAPTER VII. 


ADIABATIC LINES, 


Properties of a Substance when heat is prevented from entering or 


leaving it . : : 
The Adiabatic Lines are Steer han the factnecnls 
Diagram showing the Effects of Heat on Water. 


. e 


. 108 
Pai i: 
as Sic 

117 
EIS 
ip 
“': Igo 
. tae 


CHAPTER VIII. 


HEAT ENGINES, 


P Carnat’s Engine. . : : : ; 
Second Law of Thermodynamics 

' Carnot’s Function and Thomson’s Abschite Scale of ‘Texiperatare 
Maximum #iiciency ofa Heat Engine .- . . . 


CHAPTER IX. 


RELATIONS BETWEEN THE PHYSICAL PROPERTIES 
OF A SUBSTANCE. 


‘our Thermodynamic Relations — 


The two Modes of Defining Elasticity 


CHAPTER X. 


LATENT HEAT. 


Relation between the Latent Heat and the Alteration of the Volume 
___ of the Substance during a Change of State . Shik ae as 
‘Lowering of the Freezing Point by Pressure . . . . 


CHAPTER XI. 
THERMODYNAMICS OF GASES. 


by Expansion. : 
tion of the Specific Heat of Ate a 


} 


CHAPTER XII. 
ON THE INTRINSIC ENERGY OF A SYSTEM OF BODIES. 


i 3 3 F F & pESZ 


> Energy and aol F : é F : «385 
01 | of Energy . : 


x Contents. 


CHAPTER XIII. 
ON FREE EXPANSION. 


Theory of a Fluid rushing through a Porous Plug. . - 189 
Determination of the Dynamical Equivalent of Heat . ‘3 Pages (i 
Determination of the Absolute Scale of Temperature . ae ei) 


CHAPTER XIV. 


DETERMINATION OF HEIGHTS BY THE BAROMETER. 


Principle of the Barometer ; ‘ : ; : 3 . 1975 sam 
The Barometer in a Diving Bell , : ; : ‘. - 198 
Height of the ‘ Homogeneous Atmosphere’ ‘ 5 : . 200 am 
Height of a Mountain found by the Barometer . : 3 <i 26% 


CHAPTER XV. 


ON THE PROPAGATION OF WAVES OF LONGITUDINAL 
DISTURBANCE. 


Waves of Permanent Type j : ; : : : - 203 
Velocity of Sound . : : ‘ : : : : +” 208 


CHAPTER XVI. 


ON RADIATION, 


Definition of Radiation . ‘ : F : ; : » , 20 
Interference . ; : : : 2 > . 4 
Different Kinds of Radidtion : : ; ‘ : : ee ry 
Prevost’s Theory of Exchanges . ; ; : 4 35228 
Rate of Cooling 4 : : é : «ee 


Effects of Radiation on icin pieks y A , . o 286 


Contents. xi 


CHAPTER XVII. 


ON CONVECTION CURRENTS. 


PAGE 
How they are Produced . : Pete 


macues Determination of the Point of yr eee Deasity of Water 232 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
ON THE DIFFUSION OF HEAT BY CONDUCTION. 


_ Conduction through a Plate. ; ; ‘ , ‘ + 233 
. Different Measures of Conductivity . : : : ? yen aan 
_ Conduction ina Solid. ; ; : > 3 nee 
_ Sketch of Fourier’s Theory ; : : ‘ es 236 
_ Harmonic Distributions of Ceasierutere : P e 4 a 243 
Steady and Periodic Flow of Heat . - 2 wigs 
Determination of the Thermal cena aged of Bodien ; + 248 
pen cations ofthe Theory. : ’ c : S72: 252 


CHAPTER XIX. 
ON THE DIFFUSION OF FLUIDS. 


oefficient of Diffusion . ; , ‘ 3 eae [ok 
Researches of Graham and Loschmidt eget Sa. Genaca ee 


CHAPTER XxX. 
ON CAPILLARITY. 


Superficial Energy and Superficial Tension é r a . 260 
Rise ofa Liquidina Tube  . < . 266 
Wvaporation and Condensation as Affected i Capillary ty ae ae 
able of Superficial Tension. , j an O94 


ce 
x 
ea 
“A = 


: 
a 
J 
‘ 


CHAPTER XXI. 
ON ELASTICITY AND VISCOSITY. 


- Different Kinds of Stress and Strain . 
_ Coefficient of Viscosity . : : 


CHAPTER XXII 
MOLECULAR THEORY OF THE CONSTITUTION OF BODIES. 
s ‘ 


Kinetic and Potential Energy . 
_ Evidence that Heat is the Kinetic. Bncigy ‘oe the Molecules of a a 
Body :. - ; ‘ : 4 . . 5 
Kinetic Theory of Gite 
Deduction of the Laws of Gases 
Equilibrium of a Vertical Column 
Diffusion, Viscosity, and Conduction 
_ Evaporation and Condensation . ; : 
Mepmiectrolysis. . - 3. BR Gt 5 
Radiation ‘ : 
Limitation of the Second te of Thermodjanmiles 
The Properties of Molecules. . : . 


raft 


Ps 
» 
~*~ 


4 E dD, & 


CHAPTER I. 


INTRODUCTION. 


_ THE DISTINCTION between hot bodies and cold ones is 

familiar to all, and is associated in our minds with the 
difference of the sensations which we experience in touching f: 
_ various substances, according as they are hot or cold, The ae 
_ intensity of these sensations is susceptible of degrees, so that : 
we may estimate one body to be hotter or colder than 
‘another by the touch.. The words hot, warm, cool, cold, 
" are associated in our minds with a series of sensations which 
‘we suppose to indicate a corresponding series of states of * rr 
an object with respect to heat. 
_ We use these words, therefore, as the names of these 

‘states of the object, or, in scientific language, they are the 


names of Temperatures, the word hot indicating a high 


temperature, cold a low temperature, and the intermediate | 
as intermediate temperatures, while the word temperature ‘aye 
itself is a general term intended to apply to any one of these ae 
states of the object. Me 
_ Since the state of a body may vary continuously from 
old to hot, we must admit the existence of an indefinite oie 
number of intermediate states, which we call intermediate a 
B 


temperatures. We may give names to any number 

particular degrees of temperature, and express any other 

temperature by its relative place among these degrees. . 
The temperature of a body, therefore, is a quantity which - 


a 
indicates how hot cr how cold the body is. i 

_ When we say that the temperature of one body is higher q 
or lower than that of another, we mean that the first body is 
hotter or colder than the second, but we also imply that we - 
refer the state of both bodies to a certain scale of tempe- 
ratures. By the use, therefore, of the word temperature, 
we fix in our minds the conviction that it is possible, not 4 
only to feel, but to measure, how hot a body is. bs 
Words of this kind, which express the same things as _ 

_ the words of primitive language, but express them ina way 
- susceptible of accurate numerical statement, are called ‘a 
scientific! terms, because they contribute to the growth of 4 


- science. 

We might suppose that a person who has carefully cul- 
tivated his senses would be able by simply touching an- 
- object to assign its place in a scale of temperatures, but it is 

found by experiment that the estimate formed of temperature — 
by the touch depends upon a great variety of circumstances, 
some of these relating to the texture or consistency of the — 
object, and some to the temperature of the hand or the 
state of health of the person who makes the estimate. 
For instance, if the temperature of a piece of wood were 
the same as that of a piece of iron, and much higher than — 
that of the hand, we should estimate the iron to be hotter 
than the wood, because it parts with its heat more readily to — 
the hand, whereas if their temperatures were equal, and 
much lower than that of the hand, we should estimate the 
iron to be colder than the wood. 
There is another common experiment, in which we place © 
_ one hand in hot water and the other in cold for a sufficient 


na er 
na 


aish eo ae 


beet 
{ 


ane ee 


ge 


ie ia 


q 
FE: 


’ <Scientifick, adj. Producing demonstrative knowledge. ~Fohnson's 
Dut. eee 


(Pe> Meas 
€ eS ee 


Temperature. 3 


time. If we then dip both hands in the same basin of 
lukewarm water alternately, or even at once, it will appear 
cold to the warmed hand and hot to the cooled hand. 

In fact, our sensations of every kind depend upon so 
many variable conditions, that for all scientific purposes we 
prefer to form our estimate of the state of bodies from their 
observed action on some apparatus whose conditions are 
more simple and less variable than those of our own senses. 

The properties of most substances vary when their tem- 
perature varies. Some of these variations are abrupt, and 
serve to indicate particular temperatures as points of re- 
ference; others are continuous, and serve to measure other 
temperatures by comparison with the temperatures of refer- 
ence. 

‘ For instance, the temperature at which ice melts is found 
to be always the same under ordinary circumstances, though, 
as we Shall see, it is slightly altered by change of pressure. 
The temperature of steam which issues from boiling water 
is also constant when the pressure is constant. 

_ These two phenomena therefore—the melting of ice and 
_ the boiling of water—indicate in a visible manner two tempe- 
 tatures which we may use as points of reference, the position 
_ of which depends on the properties of water and not on the 
conditions of our senses. 

Other changes of state which take place at temperatures 
more or less definite, such as the melting of wax or of 
lead, and the boiling of liquids of definite composition, are 
_ occasionally used to indicate when these temperatures are 
attained, but the melting of ice and the boiling of pure 
water at a standard pressure remain the most important 
temperatures of reference in modern science. 

These phenomena of change of state serve to indicate 
only a certain number of particular temperatures. In 
_ order to measure temperatures in general, we must avail 
Ourselves of some property of a substance which alters 


continuously with the temperature. 
” ; R2 


The volume of most substances increases continuously 
-as the temperature rises, the pressure remaining constant. 
There are exceptions to this rule, and the dilatations of 
different substances are not in general in the same propor- 
tion ; but any substance in which an increase of temperature, 
however small, produces an increase of volume may be used 
to indicate changes of temperature. 

For instance, mercury and glass both expand when heated, 
but the dilatation of mercury is greater than that of glass. 
Hence if a cold glass vessel be filled with cold mercury, and 
if the vessel and the mercury in it are then equally heated, 
the glass vessel will expand, but the mercury will expand 
more, so that the vessel will no longer contain the mercury. 
If the vessel be provided with a long neck, the mercury 
forced out of the vessel will rise in the neck, and if the neck 
is a narrow tube finely graduated, the amount of mercury 

forced out of the vessel may be accurately measured. 

This is the principle of the common mercurial thermo- 
meter, the construction of which will be afterwards more 
minutely described, At present we consider it simply as an 
instrument the indications of which vary when the tempe- 
rature varies, but are always the same when the temperature 
of the instrument is the same. 

The dilatation of other liquids, as well as that of solids and 

_ of gases, may be used for thermometric purposes, and the 

—thermo-electric properties of metals, and the variation of their 
electric resistance with temperature, are also employed in 
researches on heat. We must first, however, study the theory 
of temperature in itself before we examine the properties of 
different substances as related to temperature, and for this — 
purpose we shall use the particular mercurial thermometer 
just described. 


* 


The Thermometer. 5 


THE MERCURIAL THERMOMETER. 


This thermometer consists of a glass tube terminating in 
a bulb, the bulb and part of the tube being filled with 
mercury, and the rest of the tube being empty. We shall 
suppose the tube to be graduated in any manner so that the 
height of the mercury in the tube may be observed and 
recorded. We shall not, however, assume either that the 
tube is of uniform section or that the degrees are of equal 
size, so that the scale of this primitive thermometer must be 
regarded as completely arbitrary. By means of our thermo- 
meter we can ascertain whether one temperature is higher or 
lower than another, or equal to it, but we cannot assert that 
the difference between two temperatures, a and B, is greater 
or less than the difference between two other temperatures, 
c and pb. 

We shall suppose that in every observation the temperature 
of the mercury and the glass is equal and uniform over the 
whole thermometer. The reading of the scale will then 
depend on the temperature of the thermometer, and, since 
we have not yet established any more perfect thermometric 
scale, we shall call this reading provisionally ‘ the temperature 
by the arbitrary scale of the thermometer.’ 

_ The reading of a thermometer indicates primarily its own 
_ temperature, but if we bring the thermometer into intimate 
contact with another substance, as for instance if we plunge 
it into a liquid for a sufficient time, we find that the reading 


_ of the thermometer becomes higher or lower according as 


_ the liquid is hotter or colder than the thermometer, and that 
if we leave the thermometer in contact with the substance for 


_ a sufficient time the reading becomes stationary. Let us 
_ Call this ultimate reading ‘the temperature of the substance.’ 
_ We shall find as we go on that we have a right to do so. 


Let us now take a vessel of water which we shall suppose 
_ to be at the temperature of the air, so that if left to itself it 


would remain at the same temperature. Take another 
- smaller vessel of thin sheet copper or tin plate, and fill it 
_ with water, oil, or any other liquid, and immerse it-in the — 
larger vessel of water for a certain time. Then, if by means — 
of our thermometer we register the temperatures of the 
_ liquids in the two vessels before and after the immersion of 
_ the copper vessel, we find that if they are originally at the 
same temperature the temperature of both remains the same, 
but that if one is at a higher temperature than the other, that 
which has the higher temperature becomes colder and that 
_ which has the lower temperature becomes hotter, so that if 
_ they continue in contact for a sufficient time they arrive at 
last at the same temperature, after which no change of tem- 
perature takes place. " 

The loss of temperature by the hot body is not in general 
equal to the gain of temperature by the cold body, but ‘it is 
manifest that the two simultaneous phenomena are due to 
one cause, and this cause may be described as the passage 
of Heat from the hot body to the cold one. 

As this is the first time we have used the word Heat, letus 
_ examine what we mean by it. 

We find the cooling of a hot body and the heating of 
a cold body happening simultaneously as parts of the same 
_ phenomenon, and we describe this phenomenon as the pas- 
sage of heat from the hot body to the cold one. Heat, then, 
_.is something which may be transferred from one body to 
another, so as to diminish the quantity of heat in the first 
and increase that in the second by the same amount. 
When heat is communicated to a body, the temperature 
of the body is generally increased, but sometimes other 

effects are produced, such as change of state. When heat 
leaves a body, there is either a fall of temperature or a 
change of state. If no heat enters or leaves a body, and 
if no changes of state or mechanical actions take place 
‘in the body, the temperature of the body will remain 3 
constant. 


SNe 
rt 


Heat as a Quantity. cS 


_ Heat, therefore, may pass out of one body into another 
_ just as water may be poured from one vessel into another, 
and it may be retained in a body for any time, just as water 
may be kept in a vessel. We have therefore a right to speak 
of heat as of a measurable guantity, and to treat it mathema- 
tically like other measurable quantities so long as it continues 
to exist as heat. We shall find, however, that we have no 
right to treat heat as a substance, for it may be transformed 
into something which is not heat, and is certainly not a 
substance at all, namely, mechanical work. 
We must remember, therefore, that though we admit heat 
to the title of a measurable quantity, we must not give it 
_ rank as a substance, but must hold our minds in suspense 
_ till we have further evidence as to the nature of heat. 
_ Such evidence is furnished by experiments on friction, in 
which mechanical work, instead of being transmitted from 
one part of a machine to another, is apparently lost, while 
at the same time, and in the same place, heat is generated, 
the amount of heat being in an exact proportion to the 
amount of work lost. We have, therefore, reason to believe 
that heat is of the same nature as mechanical work, that is, 
it is one of the forms of Energy. 
In the eighteenth century, when many new facts were 
_ being discovered relating to the action of heat on bodies, 
_ and when at the same time great progress was being made 
_ in the knowledge of the chemical action of substances, the 
- word Caloric was introduced to signify heat as a measurable 
- quantity. So long as the word denoted nothing more than 
- this, it might be usefully employed, but the form of the word 
" accommodated itself to the tendency of the chemists of that 
_ time to seek for new ‘imponderable substances,’ so that 
_ the word caloric came to connote! not merely heat, but heat 
‘ _ as an indestructible imponderable fluid, insinuating itself 
- into the pores of bodies, dilating and dissolving them, and 


- | £A connotative term is one which denotes a subject and implies an 
 attribute.’—JZi/P's Logic, book i. chap. ii. § 5. 


ultimately vaporising them, combining with bodies in definite 
quantities, and so becoming latent, and reappearing when — 
_ these bodies alter their condition. In fact, the word caloric, 
when once introduced, soon came to imply the recognised 
existence of something material, though probably of a more 
subtle nature than the then newly discovered gases. Caloric 
_ resembled these gases in being invisible and in its property 
of becoming fixed in solid bodies. It differed from them 
because its weight could not be detected by the finest 
balances, but there was nd doubt in the minds of many 
eminent men that caloric was a fluid pervading all bodies, 
probably the cause of all repulsion, and possibly even of the 
extension of bodies in space. 

Since ideas of this kind have always been connected 
with the word caloric, and the word itself has been in no 
sight degree the means of embodying and propagating 
these ideas, and since all these ideas are now known to be 
false, we shall avoid as much as possible the use of the 
word caloric in treating of heat. We shall find it useful, 
_ however, when we wish to refer to the erroneous theory 

which supposes heat to be a substance, to call it the 
Caloric Theory of Heat.’ : 

The word heat, though a primitive word and not a _ 
scientific term, will be found sufficiently free from ambiguity _ 
when we use it to express a measurable quantity, because it 
will be associated with words expressive of quantity, indi- 
cating how much heat we are speaking of 3 

We have nothing to do with the word heat as an abstract 
term signifying the property of hot things, and when we 
might say a certain heat, as the heat of new milk, we shall 
always use the more scientific word temperature, and speak — 
of the temperature of new milk. ; 

We shall never use the word heat to denote the sensation 
of heat. In fact, it is never so used in ordinary language, 
which has no names for sensations, unless when the sensation _ 
itself is of more importance to us than its physical cause, as — 


Measurement of Heat. ie ag 


_ in the case of pain, &c. The only name we have for this 
sensation is ‘ the sensation of heat.’ 

When we require an adjective to denote that a phe- 
nomenon is related to heat we shall call it a thermal 
phenomenon, as, for instance, we shall speak of the thermal 
conductivity of a substance or of thermal radiation to dis- 
tinguish the conduction and radiation of heat from the 
conduction of electricity or the radiation of light. The 
science of heat has been called (by Dr. Whewell and others) 
Thermotics, and the theory of heat as a form of energy is 
called Thermodynamics. In the same way the theory of the 
equilibrium of heat might be called Thermostatics, and that 
of the motion of heat Thermokinematics. 

The instrument by which the temperature of bodies is 
registered is called a Thermometer or measurer of warmth, 
and the method of constructing and using thermometers may 
be called Thermometry. 

The instrument by which quantities of heat are measured 
is called a Calorimeter, probably because it was invented at 
a time when heat was called Caloric. The name, however, 
is now well established, and is a convenient one, as its form 
is sufficiently distinct from that of the word Thermometer. 
The method of measuring heat may be called Calorimetry. 
- A certain quantity of heat, with which all other quantities 
are compared, is called a Thermal Unit. This is the quantity 
of heat required to produce a particular effect, such as to 
melt a pound of ice, or to raise a pound of water from one 
defined temperature to another defined temperature. A par- 
ticular thermal unit has been called by some authors a Calorie. 
We have now obtained two of the fundamental ideas 
of the science of heat—the idea of temperature, or the 
property of a body considered with reference to its power of 
heating other bodies ; and the idea of heat as a measurable 
_ quantity, which may be transferred from hotter bodies to 
colder ones. We shall consider the further development of 
_ these ideas in the chapters on Thermometry and Calorimetry, 


ch bub we manse first direct our attention to the process by 
heat is transferred from one body to another. 
This process is called the Diffusion of Heat. The diffusion 
_ of heat invariably transfers heat from a hotter body to a colder 
one, so as to cool the hotter body and warm the colder body. 
This process would go on till all bodies were brought to the 
same temperature if it were not for certain other processes 
by which the temperatures of bodies are changed inde- 
pendently of any exchange cf heat with other bodies, as, for 
instance, when combustion or any other chemical process 
_ takes place, or when any change occurs in the form, structure, 
or physical state of the body. 

The changes of temperature of a body arising from other 
causes than the transfer of heat from other bodies will be 
considered when we come to describe the different physical 
states of bodies. We are at present concerned only with 
the passage of heat into the body or out of it, and this _ 
always takes place by diffusion, and is always from a hotter 
to a colder body. 

Three processes of diffusion of heat are commonly recog- 
nised—Conduction, Convection, and Radiation. | 

Conduction is the flow of heat through an unequally heated 
_ body from places of higher to places of lower temperature. 

Convection is the motion of the hot body itself carrying its 
heat withit. If by this motion it is brought near bodies colder 
than itself it will warm them faster than if it had not been 
moved nearer to them. The term convection is applied to — 
those processes by which the diffusion of heat is rendered — 

more rapid by the motion of the hot substance from one ~ 
place to another, though the ultimate transfer of heat “~ 4 
still take place by conduction. 

In Radiation, the hotter body loses heat, and the colds 
body receives heat by means of a process occurring in some 
intervening medium which does not itself become thereby hot. 

In each of these three processes of diffusion of heat the — 
temperatures of the bodies between which the mia eis 


ee ra Si petit 
\ ‘crt of Cn Yk Cee Md 


7 re Bw Oe i Sia St Ya i & Na es 
BACAR CUM gr TIRE 2h aS ayant 


| Diffusion of Heat. oy ee 


_ place tend to become equal. We shall not at present discuss 
the convection of heat, because it is not a purely thermal 
phenomenon, since it depends on a hot substance being 
carried from one place to another, either by human effort, 
as when a hot iron is taken out of the fire and put into the 
tea-urn, or by some natural property of the heated substance, 
as when water, heated by contact with the bottom of a 
kettle placed on the fire, expands as it becomes warmed, 
and forms an ascending current, making way for colder and 
_ therefore denser water to descend and take its place. In 
every such case of convection the ultimate and only direct 
transfer of heat is due to conduction, and the only effect of 
the motion of the hot substance is to bring the unequally 
heated portions nearer to each other, so as to facilitate the 
exchange of heat. We shall accept the conduction of heat 
as a fact, without at present attempting to form any theory 
of the details of the process by which it takes place. We 
do not even assert that in the diffusion of heat by conduc- 
' tion the transfer of heat is entirely from the hotter to the 
colder body. All that we assert is, that the amount of heat 
_ transferred from the hotter to the colder body is invariably 
_ greater than the amount, if any, transferred from the colder 
_ to the hotter. 


ra i eee 3 t 


ord 


i 
A 
4 
‘ 
3 
4 
: 
ag 


ON CONDUCTION. 


In the experiments which we have described, heat passes 
_ from one body into another through an intervening sub- 
_ stance, as from a vessel of water through the glass bulb of a 
| thermometer into the mercury inside the bulb. 

_. This process, by which heat passes from hotter to colder 
" parts of a body, is called the conduction of heat. When 
_ heat is passing through a body by conduction, the tem- 
_ perature of the body must be greater in the parts from 
' which the heat comes than in those to which it tends, 


temperatures of the opposite sides of the layer. F or instance, 
if we put a silver spoon into a cup of hot tea, the part — 
of the spoon in the tea soon becomes heated, while the © 
part just out of the tea is comparatively cool. On ac- 
count of this inequality of temperature, heat immediately — 
Fic. 1. begins to flow along the metal from 
A to B. The heat first warms Ba — 
little, and so makes B warmer than 
c, and then the heat flows on from | 
B to Cc, and in this way the very — 
end of the spoon will in course ot © 
time become warm to the touch. 
The essential requisite to the con- — 
Muction of heat is, that in every part of its course the heat 
must pass from hotter to colder parts of the body. No 
heat can be conducted as far as E till a has been made 
hotter than B, B than c,c than p, andp than &. To do 
this requires a certain amount of heat to be expended in 
warming in succession all these intermediate parts of the 
spoon, so that for some time after the spoon is placed in — 
the cup no alteration of temperature can be perceived at 
the end of the spoon. 

Hence we may define conduction as the passage of heat — 
through a body depending on inequality of temperature in — 
adjacent parts of the body. 

When any part of a body is heated by conduction, the — 

_ parts of the body through which the heat comes to it must 
be hotter than itself, and the parts higher up the stream of 
heat still hotter. 

If we now try the experiment of the spoon in the tedcig 
with a German silver spoon along with the silver one, we 
shall find that the end of the silver spoon becomes hot long — 
before that of the German silver one ; and if we also put ina ; 
bone or horn spoon, we shall not be able to perceive any | 
warmth at the end of it, however long we wait. 

This shows that silver conducts heat quicker than German 4 


eS eg NM ee AS od eee 


ae 


~. 


= ee ae Lae Cae, Vee 
OE Me ee ye Wie coe po oe ee a mae 


Radiation. 13 


_ silver, and German silver quicker than bone or horn. The 
_ reason why the end of the spoon never gets as hot as the 
tea is, that the intermediate parts of the spoon are cooling, 
_ partly by giving their heat to the air in contact with them, 
_ and partly by radiation out into space. 

To show that the first effect of heat on the thermometer 
__ is to warm the material of which the bulb is composed, and 
a that the heat cannot reach the fluid inside till the bulb has 
_ been warmed, take a thermometer with a large bulb, watch 
a the fluid in the tube, and dash a little hot water over the 
_ bulb. The fluid will fall in the tube before it begins to 
| rise, showing that the bulb began to expand before the fluid 
_ expanded. 
q 


ON RADIATION. 


| 

F On a calm day in winter we feel the sun’s rays warm even 
_ when water is freezing and ice is hard and dry. 

If we make use of a thermometer, we find that if the 
q sun’s rays fall on it, it indicates a temperature far above 
” freezing, while the air immediately surrounding the bulb is 
ata temperature below freezing. ‘The heat, therefore, which 
we feel, and to which the thermometer also responds, is not 
conveyed to it by conduction through the air, for the air 
is cold, and a cold body cannot make a body warmer than 
"itself by conduction. The mode in which the heat reaches 
the body which it warms, without warming the air through 
which it passes, is called radiation. Substances which 
admit of radiation taking place through them are called 
' Diathermanous. Those which do not allow heat to pass 
through them without becoming themselves hot are called 
Athermanous. That which passes through the medium 
' during this process is generally called Radiant Heat, 
though as long as it is radiant it possesses none of the 
_ properties which distinguish heat from other forms of energy, 
Since the temperature of the body through which it passes, 


and the other physical properties of the body, are in no way si 
affected by the passage of the radiation, provided the body — 
is perfectly diathermanous. If the body is not perfectly 


diathermanous it stops more or less of the radiation, and 4 
becomes heated itself, instead of transmitting the whole 


radiation to bodies beyond it. 
The distinguishing characteristic of radiant heat is, that — 
it travels in vays like light, whence the name radiant. These — 
rays have all the physical properties of rays of light, and are 
capable of reflexion, refraction, interference, and polarisation. 
They may be divided into different kinds by the prism, as 
light is divided into its component colours, and some of the _ 
heat-rays are identical with the rays of light, while other 
kinds of heat-rays make no impression on our eyes. For 
instance, if we take a glass convex lens, and place it in the 
sun’s rays, a body placed at the focus where a small image ~ 
of the sun is formed will be intensely heated, while the lens _ 
itself and the air through which the rays pass remain quite 
cold. If we allow the rays before they reach the focus to 
fall on the surface of water, so that the rays meet in a focus - 
in the interior of the water, then if the water is quite clear 
at the focus it will remain tranquil, but if we make the focus _ 
fall upon a mote in the water, the rays will be stopped, the 
mote will be heated and will cause the water next it to 
expand, and so an upward current will be produced, and the 
mote will begin to rise in the water. This shows that it | 
is only when the radiation is stepped that it has any effectin 
heating what it falls on. a 
_ By means of any regular concave piece of metal, such as 
the scale of a balance, pressed when hot against a clear 
sheet of ice, first on one side and then on the other, it is easy _ 
to make a lens of ice which may be used on a sunny day as 


a burning glass; but this experiment, which was formerly _ 


in great repute, is far inferior in interest to one invented by _ 
Professor Tyndall, in which the heat, instead of being con- 
 centrated Ay ice, is concentrated éw ice. Take a clear block 


Radiation. Sadie 


of ice and make a flat surface on it, parallel to the original 
surface of the lake, or to the layers of bubbles generally 
_ found in large blocks ; then let the converging rays of the 
sun from an ordinary burning glass fall on this surface, and 
come to a focus within the ice. The ice, not being per- 
fectly diathermanous, will be warmed by the rays, but much 
- more at the focus than anywhere else. Thus the ice will 
begin to melt at the focus in the interior of its substance, 
and, as it does so, the portions which melt first are regu- 
larly formed crystals, and so we see in the path of the beam 
_ a number of six-rayed stars, which are hollows cut out of 
_ the ice and containing water. This water, however, does 
_ not quite fill them, because the water is of less bulk than 
the ice of which it was made, so that parts of the stars are 
empty. 
. Experiments on the heating effects of radiation show 
_ that not only the sun but all hot bodies emit radiation. When 
_ the body is hot enough, its radiations become visible, and 
' the body is said to be red hot. When it is still hotter it 
sends forth not only red rays, but rays of every colour, and 
_ it is then said to be white hot. When a body is too cold 
to shine visibly, it still shines with invisible heating rays, 
| which can be perceived by a sufficiently delicate thermo- 
' meter, and it does not appear that any body can be so 
| cold as not to send forth radiations. The reason why all 
| bodies do not appear to shine is, that our eyes are sensitive 
| only to particular kinds of rays, and we only see by means 
_ of rays of these kinds, coming from some very hot body, 
| either directly or after reflexion or scattering at the surface 
_ of other bodies. 
We shall see that the phrases radiation of heat and ra- 
diant heat are not quite scientifically correct, and must be 
used with caution. Heat is certainly communicated from 
| one body to another by a process which we call ra- 
' diation, which takes place in the region between the 
_ two bodies. We have no right, however, to speak of this 


ue 


16 Introduction. 


process of radiation as heat. We have defined heat 
as it exists in hot bodies, and we have seen that all heat 
is of the same kind. But the radiation between bodies 
differs from heat as we have defined it—1st, in not making 
the body hot through which it passes; 2nd, in being of 
many different kinds. Hence we shall generally speak of 
radiation, and when we speak of radiant heat we do not 
mean to imply the existence of a new kind of heat, but to 
consider radiation in its thermal aspect. 


ON THE DIFFERENT PHYSICAL STATES OF BODIES. 


Bodies are found to behave in different ways under the 
action of forces. If we cause a longitudinal pressure to act 
on a body in one direction by means of a pair of pincers or 
a vice, the body being free to move in all other directions, 
we find that if the body is a piece of cold iron there is very 
little effect produced, unless the pressure be very great ; if 
the body is a piece of india-rubber, it is compressed in the 
direction of its length and bulges out at the sides, but it 
soon comes into a state of equilibrium, in which it continues 
to support the pressure ; but if we substitute water for the 
india-rubber we cannot perform the experiment, for the 
water flows away laterally, and the jaws of the pincers 
come together without having exerted any appreciable 
pressure. 

Bodies which can sustain a longitudinal pressure, however 
small that pressure may be, without being supported by a 
lateral pressure, are called solid bodies. . Those which 
cannot do so are called fluids. We shall see that in a fluid 
at rest the pressure at any point must be equal in all direc- 
tions, and this pressure is called the pressure of the fluid. 

There are two great classes of fluids. If we put into a 
closed vessel a small quantity of a fluid of the first class, — 
such as water, it will partly fill the vessel, and the rest of the 
vessel may either be empty or may contain a different fluid. 


Solids, Liquids, and Gases. 17 


Fluids having this property are called liquids. Water is a 
liquid, and if we put a little water into a bottle the water 
will lie at the bottom of the bottle, and will be separated by 
a distinct surface from the air or the vapour of water 
above it. 

If, on the contrary, the fluid which we put into the closed 
vessel be one of the second class, then, however small a 
portion we introduce, it will expand and fill the vessel, or at 
least as much of it as is not occupied by a liquid. 

Fluids having this property are called gases. Air is a 
gas, and if we first exhaust the air from a vessel and then 
introduce the smallest quantity of air, the air will immediately 
expand till it fills the whole vessel so that there is as much 
air in a cubic inch in one part of the vessel as in another. 

Hence a gas cannot, like a liquid, be kept in an open- 
mouthed vessel. 

The distinction, therefore, between a gas and a liquid is 
that, however large the space may be into which a portion of 
gas is introduced, the gas will expand and exert pressure on 
every part of its boundary, whereas a liquid will not expand 
more than a very small fraction of its bulk, even when the 
pressure is reduced to zero; and some liquids can even 
sustain a hydrostatic tension, or negative pressure, without 
their parts being separated. 

The three principal states in which bodies are found are, 
therefore, the solid, the liquid, and the gaseous states. 

Most substances are capable of existing in all these states, 
as, for instance, water exists in the forms of ice, water, and 


| steam. A few solids, such as carbon, have not yet been 


_ Melted ; and a few gases, such as oxygen, hydrogen, and 
_ hitrogen, have not yet been liquefied or solidified, but these 
_ may be considered as exceptional cases, arising from the 
limited range of temperature and pressure which we can 
command in our experiments. 

. The ordinary effects of heat in modifying the physical 
_ State of bodies may be thus described. We may take water 

€ 


18 Introduction. 


as a familiar example, and explain, when it is necessary, the 
different phenomena of other bodies. 

At the lowest temperatures at which it has been observed 
water exists in the solid form as ice. When heat is com 
municated to very cold ice, or to any other solid body not 
at its melting temperature— 

1. The temperature rises. 

2. The body generally expands (the only exception among 
solid bodies, as far as I am aware, is the iodide of silver, 
which has been found by M. Fizeau to contract as the 
temperature rises). 

3. The rigidity of the body, or its resistance to change of 
form, generally diminishes. This phenomenon is more 
apparent in some bodies than in others. It is very con- 
spicuous in iron, which when heated but not melted becomes 
soft and easily forged. The consistency of glass, resins, fats, 
and frozen oils alters very much with change of temperature. 
On the other hand, it is believed that steel wire is stiffer at 
212° F. than at 32°F., and it has been shown by Joule and 
Thomson that the longitudinal elasticity of caoutchouc 
increases with the temperature between certain limits of 
temperature. When ice is very near its melting point it 
becomes very soft. : 

4. A great many solid bodies are constantly in a state of 
evaporation or transformation into the gaseous state at their 
free surface. Camphor, iodine, and carbonate of ammonia 
are well-known examples of this. These solid bodies, if not 
kept in stoppered bottles, gradually disappear by evapora- 
tion, and the vapour which escapes from them may be 
recognised by its smell.and by its chemical action. Ice, 
too, is continually “passing .into a state of vapour at its 
surface, and in a dry climate during a long frost large 
pieces of ice become smaller and:at-last disappear. 

There are other solid bodies which.do not seem to lose 
any of their substance in this way; <at ileast, we cannot 
detect any loss. It is probable, however,that.those solid 


Fusion. 19 


bodies which can be detected by their smell are evaporating 
with extreme slowness. Thus iron and copper have each a 
well-known smell. This, however, may arise from chemical 
action at the surface, which sets free hydrogen or some 
other gas combined with a very small quantity of the 
metal. 


ev 


FUSION. 


When the temperature of a solid body is raised to a 
sufficient height it begins to melt into a liquid. Suppose a 
small portion of the solid to be melted, and that no more heat 
is applied till the temperature of the remaining solid and of 
| the liquid has become equalised ; ifa little more heat is then 
applied and the temperature again equalised there will be 
more liquid matter and less solid matter, but since the liquid 
_ and the solid are at the same temperature, that temperature 
| must still be the melting temperature. 
a Hence, if the partly melted mass be kept well mixed 
_ together, so that the solid and fluid parts are at the same 
_ temperature, that temperature must be the melting tempera- 
ture of the solid, and no rise of temperature will follow from 
the addition of heat till the whole of the solid has been con- 
verted into liquid. 
3 The heat which is required to melt a certain quantity of 
' a solid at the melting point into a liquid at the same 
Pe temperature is called the latent heat of fusion. 
eA It is called /atent heat, because the application: of. this 
heat to the body does not raise its temperature or warm the 
Rs body. 
rs Those, therefore, who maintained heat to:be a substance 
Pa. _ supposed that it existed in the fluid in a concealed or latent 
State, and in this way they distinguished: it from the heat 
which, when applied to a body, makes it hotter, or raises the 
3 temperature. This they called sensible heat. <A body, there- 
fore, was said to possess so much heat. Part of this heat was 
_ called sensible heat, and to it was ascribed the temperature 
2 


SS aa 


ee - 


45 ae a 
Ss eae > vee 


1. 


nn Oe 


LL Fag pee 


Sig NS ts 


Et te 


20 Introduction. 


of the body. The other part was called latent heat, and 
to it was ascribed the liquid or gaseous form of the body. 

The fact that a certain quantity of heat must be applied 
to a pound of melting ice to convert it into water is all that 
we mean in this treatise when we speak of this quantity 
of heat as the latent heat of fusion of a pound of water. 

We make no assertion as to the state in which the heat 
exists'in the water. We do not even assert that the heat 
communicated to the ice is still in existence as heat. 

Besides the change from solid to liquid, there is generally 
a change of volume in the act of fusion. The water formed 
from the ice is of smaller bulk than the ice, as is shown by 
ice floating in water, so that the total volume of the ice and 
water diminishes as the melting goes on. 

On the other hand, many substances expand in the act of 
fusion, so that the solid parts sink in the fluid. During the 
fusion of the mass the volume in these cases increases. 

It has been shown by Prof. J. Thomson,! from the 
principles of the dynamical theory of heat, that if pressure is 
applied to a mixture of ice and water, it will not only compress 
both the ice and the water, but some: of the ice will be 
melted at the same time, so that the total compression will 
be increased by the contraction of bulk due to this melting. 
The heat required to melt this ice being taken from the rest 
of the mass, the temperature of the whole will diminish. 

Hence the melting point is lowered by pressure.in. the 
case of ice. This deduction from theory was experimentally 
verified by Sir W. Thomson. 

If the substance had been one of those which expand in 
melting, the effect of pressure would be to solidify some of 
the mixture, and to raise the temperature of fusion. Most of 
the substances of which the crust of the earth is composed 
expand in the:act of melting. Hence their melting points 
will rise under great pressure. If the earth were throughout 


? Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1849. 


Fusion. 2t 


ina state of fusion, when the external parts began to solidify 
_ they would sink in the molten mass, and when they had 
sunk to a great depth they would remain solid under the 
_ enormous pressure even at a temperature greatly above the 
_ point of fusion of the same rock at the surface. It does not 
_ follow, therefore, that in the interior of the earth the matter 
is in a liquid state, even if the temperature is far above that 
of the fusion of rocks in our furnaces. 

It has been shown by Sir W. Thomson that if the earth, as 
_ awhole, were not more rigid than a ball of glass of equal size, 
_ the attraction of the moon and sun would pull it out of shape, 
4 and raise tides on the surface, so that the solid earth would 
_ rise and fall as the sea does, only not quite so much. It is 
_ true that this motion would be so smooth and regular that 
_ we should not be able to perceive it in a direct way, but its 
effect would be to diminish the apparent rise of the tides of 
_ the ocean, so as to make them much smaller than they 
_ actually are. 


the ocean, that the earth as a whole is more rigid than glass, 
4 _and therefore that no very large portion of its interior can 
_ beliquid. The effect of pressure on the melting point of 
- bodies enables us to reconcile this conclusion with the 
_ observed increase of temperature as we descend in the 
_ €arth’s crust, and the deductions as to the interior tempera- 
_ ture founded on this fact by the aid of the theory of the 
conduction of heat. 


EFFECT OF HEAT ON LIQUIDS. 


When heat is applied to a liquid its effects are— 

1. To warm the liquid. The quantity of heat required to 
‘Yaise the liquid one degree is generally greater than that 
equired to raise the substance in the solid form one degree, 
and in general it requires more heat at high than at low 
_ temperatures to warm the liquid one degree. 

2. To alter its volume. Most liquids expand as their 


It appears, therefore, from what we know of the tides of | 


22 Introduction. 


temperature rises, but water contracts from 32° F. to 39°'1 F., 
and then expands, slowly at first, but afterwards more 
rapidly. 

3. To alter its physical state. Liquids, such as oil, tar, 
&c., which are sluggish in their motion, are said to be 
viscous. When they are heated their viscosity generally 
diminishes and they become more mobile. This is the case 
even with water, as appears by the experiments of M. O. E. 
Meyer. 

When sulphur is heated, the melted sulphur undergoes 
several remarkable changes as its temperature rises, being 
mobile when first melted, then becoming remarkably viscous 
at a higher temperature, and again becoming mobile when 
stillmore heated. These changes are connected with chemical 
changes in the constitution of the sulphur, which are observed: 
also in solid sulphur. 

4. To convert the liquid into vapour. 

Whatever be the temperature of a liquid which partially 
fills a vessel, it always gives off vapour till the remainder of 
the wessel is filled with vapour, and this goes on till the 
density of the vapour has reached a value which depends only 
on the temperature. 

If in any way, as by the motion of a piston, the vessel be 
made larger, then more vapour will be formed till the density 
is the same as before. Ifthe piston be pushed in, and the 
vessel made smaller, some of the vapour is condensed into 
the liquid state, but the density of the remainder of the 
vapour still remains the same. 

If the remainder of the vessel, instead of containing 
nothing but the vapour of the liquid, contains any quantity 
of air or some other gas not capable of chemical action on 
the liquid, then exactly the same quantity of vapour will be 
formed, but the time required for the vapour to reach the 
further parts of the vessel will be greater, as it has to 


diffuse itself through the air in the vessel by a kind of — 


percolation. 
These laws of evaporation were discovered by Dalton. 


| 
| 


: 
; 
1 


Evaporation. . 23 


The conversion of the liquid into vapour requires an 
amount of ‘latent heat’ which is generally much greater 
than the latent heat of fusion of the same substance. 

In all substances, the density, pressure, and temperature 
are so connected that if we know any two of them the value 
of the third is determinate. Now in the case of vapours in 
contact with their own liquids or solids, there is for each 
temperature a corresponding density, which is the greatest 
density which the vapour can have at that temperature, 
without being condensed into the liquid or solid form. 
Hence for each temperature there is also a maximum 
pressure which the vapour can exert. 

A vapour which is at the maximum density and pressure 
corresponding to its temperature is called a saturated vapour. 
It is then just at the point of condensation, and the slightest 
increase of pressure or decrease of temperature will cause 
some of the vapour to be condensed. Professor Rankine 
restricts the use of the word vapour by itself to the case of a 
saturated vapour, and when the vapour is not at the point of 
condensation he calls it superheated vapour, or simply gas. 


BOILING. 


When a liquid in an open vessel is heated to a tempera- 
ture such that the pressure of its vapour at that tempera- 
ture is greater than the pressure at a point in the interior 
of the liquid, the liquid will begin to evaporate at that 
point, so that a bubble of vapour will be formed there. 
This process, in which bubbles of vapour are formed in 
the interior of the liquid, is called boiling or ebullition. 

When water is heated in the ordinary way by applying 
heat to the bottom of a vessel, the lowest layer of the water 
becomes hot first, and by its expansion it becomes lighter 
than the colder water above, and gradually rises, so that a 
gentle circulation of water is kept up, and the whole water 
is gradually warmed, though the lowest layer is always the 
hottest. As the temperature increases, the absorbed air, 


24 Introduction. 


which is generally found in ordinary water, is expelled, and 
. rises in small bubbles without noise. At last the water in 
: contact with the heated metal becomes so hot that, in spite 
of the pressure of the atmosphere on the surface of the 
hi water, the additional pressure due to the water in the 
. vessel, and the cohesion of the water itself, some of the 
water at the bottom is transformed into steam, forming a 
f bubble adhering to the bottom of the vessel. As soon as a 
bubble is formed, evaporation goes on rapidly from the water 
all round it, so that it soon grows large, and rises from the 
bottom. If the upper part of the water into which the 
bubble rises is still below the boiling temperature, the 
bubble is condensed, and its sides come together with a 
sharp rattling noise, called simmering. But the rise of the 
bubbles stirs the water about much more vigorously than 
the mere expansion of the water, so that the water is soon 
heated throughout, and brought to the boil, and then the 
bubbles enlarge rapidly during their whole ascent, and 
burst into the air, throwing the water about, and making 
the well-known softer and more rolling noise of boiling. 

The steam, as it bursts out of the bubbles, is an invisible 
gas, but when it comes into the colder air it is cooled below 
its condensing point, and part of it is formed into a cloud 
consisting of small drops of water which float in the air. 
As the cloud of drops disperses itself and mixes with dry 
air the quantity of water in each cubic foot diminishes as 
the volume of any part of the cloud increases. The little 
drops of water begin to evaporate as soon as there is suffi- 
cient room for the vapour to be formed at the temperature 
of the atmosphere, and so the cloud vanishes again into 
thin air. 

The temperature to which water must be heated before it 
boils depends, in the first place, on the pressure of the 
atmosphere, so that the greater the pressure, the higher the 
boiling temperature. But the temperature requires to be 
raised above that at which the pressure of steam is equal to 


‘ 


a a 


+ 


Se SS 


} 
i 
ht 


Boiling. 3 25 


| that of the atmosphere, for the pressure of the vapour has 
| to overcome not only the pressure due to the atmosphere 
| and a certain depth of water, but that cohesion between the 
parts of the water of which the effects are visible in the 
tenacity of bubbles and drops. Hence it is possible to 
_ heat water 20° F. above its boiling point without ebullition. 
_ Ifasmall quantity of metal-filings are now thrown into the 
_ water, the vapour by forming itself against the angular 
surface of these filings gets an advantage over the cohesion 
_ of the water, and produces a violent boiling, almost amount- 
_ ing to an explosion. 
If a current of steam from a boiler is passed into a vessel 
_ of cold water, we have first the condensation of steam, 
_accompanied with a very loud simmering noise, and a rapid 
heating of the water. When the water is sufficiently heated, 
_ the steam is not condensed, but escapes in bubbles, and 
_ the water is now boiling. If the boiler is at a high pres- 
sure, the steam from it will be at a temperature much above 
the boiling point in the open air, but in passing through 
the water in the open vessel it will cause some of it to 
_ evaporate, and when it issues from the water the temperature 
| will be exactly that of the boiling point. For this reason, 
in finding the boiling point of a thermometer the instru- 
ment should not be allowed to dip in the water, but should 
be held in the steam. 
As an instance of a different kind, let us suppose that 
_ the water is not pure, but contains some salt, such as 
_ common salt, or sulphate of soda, or any other substance 
' which tends to combine with water, and from which the 
_ water must separate before it can evaporate. Water con- 
_ taining such substances in solution requires to be brought 
_ to a temperature higher than the boiling point of pure 
_ water before it will boil. Water, on the other hand, con- 
| taining air or carbonic acid, will boil at a lower temperature 
_ than pure water till the gas is expelled. 
__ If steam at 100° C. is passed into a vessel containing a 


Le, 
4 


7 
. 


Se ee 


re 


ee ae a es 


ee om a 
a. * 


Ee 


ree oes 


26 Introduction. 


strong solution of one of the salts we have mentioned, — 
which has a tendency to combine with water, the conden- — 
sation of the steam will be promoted by this tendency, 
and will go on even after the solution has been heated 
far above the ordinary boiling point, so that by passing” 
steam at 100° C, into a strong solution of nitrate of soda, — 
Mr. Peter Spence‘ has heated it up to 121°1 C. 

The steam, however, which escapes, is still at roo° C. 

If water at a temperature below 100° C. be placed in a ~ 
vessel, and if by means of an air-pump we reduce the pres- 
sure of the ait on the surface of the water, evaporation goes | 
on and the surface of the water becomes colder than the ~ 
interior parts. If we go on working the air-pump, the 
pressure is reduced to that of vapour of the temperature of the | 
interior of the fluid. The water then begins to boil, exactly } 
as in the ordinary way, and as it boils the temperature | 
rapidly falls, the heat being expended in evaporating the 7 
water. 

This experiment may be performed without an air-pump | 
in the following way: Boil water in a flask over a gas- | 
flame or spirit-lamp, and while it is boiling briskly cork the 
flask, and remove it from the flame. The boiling will soon 
cease, but if we now dash a little cold water over the flask, 
some of the steam in the upper part will be condensed, the 
pressure of the remainder will be diminished, and the water 
will begin to boil again. The experiment may be made | 
more striking by plunging the flask entirely under cold } 
water. The steam will be condensed as before, but the | 
water, though it is cooled more rapidly than when the cold | 
water was merely poured on the flask, retains its heat longer 
than the steam, and continues to boil for some time. ; 


1 Transactions of the British Association, 1869, p. 75. 


Laws of Gases. ry 


ON THE GASEOUS STATE. 


_. The distinguishing property of gases is their power of 

| indefinite expansion. As the pressure is diminished the. 
' volume of the gas not only incteases, but before the pressure 

_ has been reduced to zero the volume of the gas has become 

greater than that of any vessel we can put it in. 

This is the property without which a substance cannot 

_ be called a gas, but it is found that actual gases fulfil with 

"greater or less degrees of accuracy certain numerical laws, 

which are commonly referred to as the ‘Gaseous Laws.’ 


LAW OF BOYLE. 


The first of these laws expresses the relation between the 

| pressure and the density of a gas, the temperature being 

_ constant, and is usually stated thus: ‘The volume of a 
_ portion of gas varies inversely as the pressure.’ 

q This law was discovered by Robert Boyle, and published 

_ by him in 1662, in an appendix to his ‘ New Experiments, 

_ Physico-mechanical, &c., touching the Spring of the Air.’ 

_ Mariotte, about 1676, in his treatise ‘De la Nature de 

_ PAir,’ enunciated the same law, and carefully verified it, and it 

_ is generally referred to by Continental writers as Mariotte’s 

a law. 

This law may also be stated thus : 

_ The pressure of a gas is proportional to its density. 

__ Another statement of the same law has been proposed by 

Professor Rankine, which I think places the law in a very 
Clear light. 

If we take a closed and exhausted vessel, and introduce y 

into it one grain of air, this air will, as we know, exert a 
_ Certain pressure on every square inch of the surface of the 

~ vessel. If we now introduce a second grain of air, then this 

7 ‘second grain will exert exactly the same pressure on the 

"sides of the vessel that it would have exerted if the first grain 


| doo 


28 Introduction. 


had not been there before it, so that the pressure will now_ 
be doubled. Hence we may state, as the property of a_ 
perfect gas, that any portion of it exerts the same pressure ~ 
against the sides of a vessel as if the other portions had not | 
been there. | 
Dalton extended this law to mixtures of gases of different © 
kinds. | 

We have already seen that if several different portions of | 
the same gas are placed together in a vessel, the pressure on 
any part of the sides of the vessel is the sum of the pres- | 
sures which each portion would exert if placed by itself in 
the vessel. 

Dalton’s law asserts that the same is true for portions of 
different gases placed in the same vessel, and that the 
pressure of the mixture isthe sum of the pressures due to the 
several portions of gas, if introduced separately into the | 
vessel and brought to the same temperature. 

This law of Dalton is sometimes stated as if portions of | 
gas of different kinds behave to each other in a different | 
manner from portions of gas of the same kind, and we are 
told that when gases of different kinds are placed in the 
same vessel, each acts as if the other were a vacuum. 

This statement, properly understood, is correct, but it | 
seems to convey the impression that if the gases had been | 
of the same kind some other result would have happened, 
whereas there is no difference between the two cases. 

Another law established by Dalton is that the maximum 
density of a vapour in contact with its liquid is not affected — 
by the presence of other gases. It has been shown by 
M. Regnault that when the vapour of the substance has a 
tendency to combine with the gas, the maximum density — 
attainable by the vapour is somewhat increased. | 

Before the time of Dalton it was supposed that the cause — 
of evaporation was the tendency of water to combine with — 
air, and that the water was dissolved in the air just as salt is” 
dissolved in water. 


Gases and Vapours. 29 


; Dalton showed that the vapour of water is a gas, which 
just at the surface of the water has a certain maximum 
‘density, and which will gradually diffuse itself through the 
space above, whether filled with air or not, till, if the space is 
| limited, the density of the vapour is a maximum throughout, 
or, if the space is large enough, till the water is all dried up. 
' The presence of air is so far from being essential to this 
| process that the more air there is, the slower it goes on, 
because the vapour has to penetrate through the air by the 
slow process of diffusion. 
_ The phenomenon discovered by Regnault that the density 
of vapour is slightly increased by the presence of a gas 
which has a tendency to combine with it, is the only instance 
‘in which there is any truth in the doctrine of a liquid being 
held in solution by a gas. 
_ The law of Boyle is not perfectly fulfilled by any actual 
gas. Itis very nearly fulfilled by those gases which we are 
“not able to condense into liquids, and among other gases it 
‘is most nearly fulfilled when their temperature is much above 
4 their point of condensation. 
_ When a gas is near its point of condensation its density 
“imcreases more rapidly than. the pressure. When it is 
actually at the point of condensation the slightest increase of 
‘pressure condenses the whole of it into a liquid, and in the 
‘liquid form the density increases very slowly with the 
" pressure. 


LAW OF CHARLES. 


_ The second law of gases was discovered by Charles,! but 
_ 1s commonly referred to as that of Gay-Lussac or of Dalton.? 
: ‘Tt ey be stated thus : 


? Professor of Physics at the Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers, Paris. 
_ Bornr746. Died 1823. Celebrated as having first employed hydrogen 
. - in balloons. 
| #? Dalton, in 1801, first published this law. Gay-Lussac pubdskad 
it, in 1802, independently of Dalton. In his memoir, however (Anz. 


30 Introduction. 


The volume of a gas under constant pressure expands — 
when raised from the freezing to the boiling temperature by 
the same fraction of itself, whatever be the nature of the gas. 

It has been found by the careful experiments of M. — 
Regnault, M. Rudberg, Prof. B. Stewart, and others that the 
volume of air at constant pressure expands from 1 to 173665 
between o° C. and roo® C. Hence 30 cubic inches of 
air at o° C. would expand to about 41 cubic inches at 
100° C, 

If we admit the truth of Boyle’s law at all temperatures, ~ 
and if the law of Charles is found to be true for a particular © 
pressure, say that of the atmosphere, then it is easy to show — 
that the law of Charles must be true for every other pressure. 
For if we call the volume v and the pressure p, then we 
may call the product of the numerical value of the volume ~ 
and pressure v P, and Boyle’s law asserts that this pro- 
duct is constant, provided the temperature is constant. If 
then we are further informed that when P has a given | 
value v is increased from 1 to 13665 when the temperature — 
rises from the freezing point to the boiling point, the product 
Vv P will be increased in the same proportion at that particular — 
pressure. But v p we know by Boyle’s law does not depend on ~ 
the particular pressure, but remains the same for all pressures _ 
when the temperature remains the same. Hence, whatever © 
be the pressure, the product v Pp will be increased in the 
proportion of 1 to 1°3665 when the temperature rises from © 
i. 10200" °C. 

The law of the equality of the dilatation of gases, which, as _ 
originally stated, applied only to the dilatation from o° C. 
to 100° C., has been found to be true for all other tempera-— 
tures for which it has hitherto been tested. 


de Chimie, xiii. p. 157 [1802]), he states that Citizen Charles had 
remarked, fifteen years before the date of his memoir, the equality of 
the dilatation of the principal gases ; but, as Charles never published — 
these results, he had become acquainted with them by mere chance. 


The Gaseous State. 31 


It appears, therefore, that gases are distinguished from 
other forms of matter, not only by their power of indefinite 
' expansion so as to fill any vessel, however large, and by the 
great effect which heat has in dilating them, but by the 
uniformity and simplicity of the laws which regulate these 
‘changes. In the solid and liquid states the effect of a 
given change of pressure or of temperature in changing the 
volume of the body is different for every different substance. 
On the other hand, if we take equal voluines of any two 
gases, measured at the same temperature and pressure, 
their volumes will remain equal if we afterwards bring them 
both to any other temperature and pressure, and this 
although the two gases differ altogether in chemical nature 
‘and in density, provided they are both in the perfectly gaseous 
condition. 
| This is only one of many remarkable properties which 

point out the gaseous state of matter as that in which its 
' physical properties are least complicated. 

_ In our description of the physical properties of bodies as 

Telated to heat we have begun with solid bodies, as those 
“which we can most easily handle, and have gone on to 
liquids, which we can keep in open vessels, and have now 
“come to gases, which will escape from open vessels, and 
'which are generally invisible. This is the order which is 
' Most natural in our first study of these different states. But 
_ assoon as we have been made familiar with the most prominent 
features of these different conditions of matter, the most 
“scientific course of study is in the reverse order, beginning 
“with gases, on account of the greater simplicity of their laws, 
then advancing to liquids, the more complex laws of which 
are much more imperfectly known, and concluding with 
the little that has been hitherto discovered about the con- 
stitution of solid bodies. 


CHAPTER II. 


ON THERMOMETRY, OR THE THEORY OF TEMPERATURE. 


Definition of Temperature.—Zhe temperature of a body 
is its thermal state considered with reference to its power of 
communicating heat to other bodies. 

Definition of Higher and Lower Temperature.—// when 
two bodies are placed in thermal communication, one of the 
bodies loses heat, and the other gains heat, that body which gives 
out heat is said to have a higher temperature than that which 
receives heat from it. 

Cor. Jf when two bodies are placed in thermal communica- 
tion neither of them loses or gains heat, the two bodies are 
said to have equal temperatures or the same temperature. The 
two bodies are then said to be in thermal equilibrium. We 
have here a means of comparing the temperature of any 
two bodies, so as to determine which has the higher 
temperature, and a test of the equality of temperature 
which is independent of the nature of the bodies tested. 

But we have no means of estimating numerically the differ- 
ence between two temperatures, so as to be able to assert 
that a certain temperature is exactly halfway between two 
other temperatures. 

Law of Equal Temperatures.— Bodies whose temperatures 
are equal to that of the same body have themselves equal tem- 
peratures. ‘This law is not a truism, but expresses the fact 
that if a piece of iron when plunged into a vessel of water 
is in thermal equilibrium with the water, and if the same 
piece of iron, without altering its temperature, is transferred 
to a vessel of oil, and is found to be also in thermal equi- 
librium with the oil, then if the oil and water were put 
into the same vessel they would themselves be in thermal 


Comparison of Temperatures. ° 33 


equilibrium, and the same would be true of any other three 
substances. 

This law, therefore, expresses much more than Euclid’s 
axiom that ‘Things which are equal to the same thing are 
equal to one another,’ and is the foundation of the whole 
science of thermometry. For if we take a thermometer, 
such as we have already described, and bring it into in- 
timate contact with different bodies, by plunging it into 
liquids, or inserting it into holes made in solid bodies, we 
find that the mercury in the tube rises or falls till it has 
reached a certain point at which it remains stationary. We 
then know that the thermometer is neither becoming hotter 
nor colder, but is in thermal equilibrium with the surround- 
ing body. It follows from this, by the law of equal tem- 
peratures, that the temperature of the body is the same as 
that of the thermometer, and the temperature of the thermo- 
meter itself is known from the height at which the mer- 
cury stands in the tube. 

Hence the reading, as it is called, of the thermometer— 
that is, the number of degrees indicated on the scale by the 
top of the mercury in the tube—informs us of the tem- 
perature of the surrounding substance, as well as of that of 
the mercury in the thermometer. In this way the thermo- 
_ meter may be used to compare the temperature of any 
_ two bodies at the same time or at different times, so as 
_ to ascertain whether the temperature of one of them is 
higher or lower than that of the other. We may compare 
in this way the temperatures of the air on different days ; 
we may ascertain that water boils at a lower temperature at 
the top of a mountain than it does at the sea-shore, and that 
ice melts at the same temperature in all parts of the world. 
_ / For this purpose it would be necessary to carry the same 
‘thermometer to different places, and to preserve it with 
great care, for if it were destroyed and a new one made, 
we should have no certainty that the same temperature is 
indicated by the same reading in the two thermometers. 

D 


Thus the SUserennOnE of ‘temperature reco led durit 44 
sixteen years by Rinieri! at Florence lost their scientific 
value after the suppression of the Accademia del Cimento, — 4 
and the supposed destruction of the thermometers with — 
which the observations were made. But wnen Antinori in — 
1829 discovered a number of the very thermometers used | 
in the ancient observations, Libri? was able to compare them _ 
with Réaumur’s scale, and thus to show that the climate of — 
‘Florence has not been rendered sensibly colder in winter — 
by the clearing of the woods of the Apennines. 4 
_ In the construction of artificial standards for the measure- 
‘ment of quantities of any kind it is desirable to have the | 
means of comparing the standards together, either directly, — 
or by means of some natural object or phenomenon which q 
is easily accessible and not liable to change. Both methods 4 
are used in the preparation of thermometers. 4 
We have already noticed two natural phenomena which’ ! 
take place at definite temperatures—the melting of ice and : 
the boiling of water. The advantage of employing these — 
temperatures to determine two points on the scale of the — 
thermometer was pointed out by Sir Isaac Newton (‘Scala | 
' Graduum Caloris,’ Phil. Trans. 1701). ae 
The first of these points of reference is commonly called 2 
the Freezing Point. To determine it, the thermometer is © 
placed ina on filled with pounded ice or snow thoroughly 4 
moistened with water. . If the atmospheric temperature be. 
above the freezing point, the melting of the ice will ensure 
the presence of water in the vessel. As long as every part 
of the vessel contains a mixture of water and ice its tem-— 
perature remains uniform, for if heat enters’ the vessel it 
can only melt some of the ice, and if heat escapes from — 
the vessel some of the water will freeze, but the"mixture can | 
be made neither hotter nor colder till all the'i ice is melted 
or all the water frozen. 


1 Pupil of Galileo ; died 1647. 
? Annales de Cane e de Physique, xiv. (1830). 


which the water must be raised 


Lemperatures of Reference. 35 


The thermometer is completely immersed in the mixture 
of ice and water for a sufficient time, so that the mercury 
has time to reach its stationary point. The position of the 
top of the mercury in the tube is 
then recorded by making a scratch BG 
on the glass tube. We shall call 
this mark the Freezing Point. It 
may be determined in this way with 
extreme accuracy, for, as we shall 
see afterwards, the temperature of 
melting ice is very nearly the same 
under very different pressures. 

The other point of reference is 
called the Boiling Point. The tem- 
perature at which water boils de- 
pends on the pressure of the atmo- 
sphere. The greater the pressure of 
the air on the surface of the water, 
the higher is the temperature to 


before it begins to boil. 
To determine the Boiling Point, the stem of the thermo- 
meter is passed through a hole in the lid of a tall vessel, 


in the lower part of which water is made to boil briskly, so 


that the whole of the upper part, where the thermometer is 
placed, is filled with steam. When the thermometer has 
acquired the temperature of the current of steam the stem 
is drawn up through the hole in the lid of the vessel till the 
top of the column of mercury becomes visible. A scratch 
is then made on the tube to indicate the boiling point. 

In careful determinations of the boiling point no part of 
the thermometer is allowed to dip into the boiling water, 
because it has been found by Gay-Lussac that the temperature 


‘of the water is not always the same, but that it boils at 


different temperatures in different kinds of vessels. It has 


been shown, however, by Rudberg that the temperature of 
D2 


& . ca vs Sarat ? 
®Q , as Ped ‘ . % 
26 j mometry. if 


the steam which escapes from boiling water is ‘the same in 
every kind of vessel, and depends only on the pressure at 
the surface of the water. Hence the thermometer is not 
dipped in the water, but suspended in the issuing steam. To 
ensure that the temperature of the steam shall be the same 
when it reaches the thermometer as when it issues from the 
boiling water, the sides of the vessel are sometimes protected 
by what is called a steam-jacket. A current of steam is 
made to play over the out- 
side of the sides of the 
vessel. The vessel is thus © 
raised to the same tempe- 
rature as the steam itself, so — 
that the steam cannot be © 
cooled during its passage 
from the boiling water to 
the thermometer. 

For instance, if we take © 
any tall narrow vessel, as 
a coffee-pot, and cover its mouth and part of its sides : 
with a wider vessel turned upside down, taking care that — 
there shall be plenty of room for the ‘steam to escape, then j 
if we boil a small quantity of water in the coffee-pot, athermo- — 
meter placed in the steam above will be raised to the — 
exact temperature of the boiling point of water corresponding — 
to the state of the barometer at the time. 7 

To mark the level of the mercury on the tube of the 
thermometer without cooling it, we must draw it up through — 
a cork or a plug of india-rubber in the steam-jacket through 
which the steam passes till we can just see the top of the 
column of mercury. A mark must then be scratched on the 
glass to register the boiling point. This experiment of 
exposing a thermometer to the steam of boiling water is an 
important one, for it not only supplies a means of gradu-— 
ating thermometers, and testing them when they have been 
graduated, but, since the temperature at which water boils © 


ee a 


Scale of the Thermometer. 37 


depends on the pressure of the air, we may determine the 


pressure of the air by boiling water when we are not able to 
measure it by means of the appropriate instrument, the 
barometer. 

We have now obtained two points of reference marked by 
scratches on the tube of the thermometer—the freezing point 


and the boiling point. We shall suppose for the present 


that when the boiling point was marked the barometer 
happened to indicate the standard pressure of 29'905 
inches of mercury at 32° F. at the level of the sea in the 
latitude of London. In this case the boiling point is 
the standard boiling point. In any other case it must be 
corrected. 

Our thermometer will now agree with any other properly 
constructed thermometer at these two temperatures. 

In order to indicate other temperatures, we must construct 
a scale—that is, a series of marks—either on the tube itself or 
on a convenient part of the apparatus close to the tube and 
well fastened to it. 

For this purpose, having settled what values we are to give 


_to the freezing and the boiling points, we divide the space 


between those points into as many equal parts as there are 
degrees between them, and continue the series of equal divi- 
sions up and down the scale as far as the tube of the thermo- 
meter extends. 

Three different ways of doing this are still in use, and, 
as we often find temperatures stated according to a 


‘different scale from that which we adopt ourselves, it is 
‘necessary to know the principles on which these scales are 


formed. 

The Centigrade scale was introduced by Celsius.! In it 
the freezing point is marked o° and called zero, and the 
boiling point is marked 100°. 

The obvious simplicity of this mode of dividing the space 
between the points of reference into 100 equal parts and 


! Professor of Astronomy in the University of Upsala. 


1 
a7, 
; 


calling each of these a degree, and reckoning all temperatures . 


in degrees from the freezing point, caused it to be very — 


generally adopted, along with the French decimal system of — 


measurement, by scientific men, especially on the Continent — 


of Europe. It is true that the advantage of the decimal 
system is not so great in the measurement of temperatures as 
in other cases, as it merely makes it easier to remember the 
freezing and boiling temperatures, but the graduation is not 
too fine for the roughest purposes, while for accurate 
measurements the degrees may be subdivided into tenths and 
hundredths. 

The other two scales are called by the names of those who 
introduced them. 

Fahrenheit, of Dantzig, about 1714, first constructed 
thermometers comparable with each other. In Fahrenheit’s 
scale the freezing point is marked 32°, and the boiling point 
212°, the space between being divided into 180 equal parts, 
and the graduation extended above and below the points of 
reference. A point 32 degrees below the freezing point is 

called zero, or o°, and temperatures below this are indicated 
by the number of degrees below zero. 

This scale is very generally used in English-speaking 
countries for purposes of ordinary life, and also for those of 
science, though the Centigrade scale is coming into use 
among those who wish their results to be readily followed by 
foreigners. 

The only advantages which can be ascribed to Fahrenheit’s 
scale, besides its early introduction, its general diffusion, and 
its actual employment by so many of our countrymen, are 
that mercury expands almost exactly one ten-thousandth of 
its volume at 142° F. for every degree of Fahrenheit’s scale, 
and that the coldest temperature which we can get by 
mixing snow and salt is near the zero of Fahrenheit’s 
scale. 

To compare temperatures given in Fahrenheit’s scale with 


temperatures given in the Centigrade scale we have only to a 


4 


Thermometric Scales. 39 © 


_ remember that o° Centigrade is 32° Fahrenheit, and that five 
degrees Centigrade are equal to nine of Fahrenheit. 

_ The third thermometric scale is that of Réaumur. In this 
scale the freezing point is marked o° and the boiling point 
80°. Iam not aware of any advantage of this scale. It is 
used to some extent on the Continent of Europe for medical 
and domestic purposes. Four degrees of Réaumur corre- 
spond to five Centigrade and to nine of Fahrenheit. 

The existence of these three thermometric scales furnishes 
an example of the inconvenience of the want of uniformity in 
_ systems of measurement. The whole of what we have said 
about the comparison of the different scales might have 
been omitted if any one of these scales had been adopted by 
all who use thermometers. Instead of spending our time in 


7 describing the arbitrary proposals of different men, we should 


have gone on to investigate the laws of heat and the pro- 
perties of bodies. 

We shall afterwards have occasion to use a scale differing 
in its zero-point from any of those we have considered, but 


e _ when we do so we shall bring forward reasons for its adoption 
_ depending on the nature of things and not on the predilec- 
tions of men. 


___ If two thermometers are constructed of the same kind of 
_ glass, with tubes of uniform bore, and are filled with the same 
_ liquid and then graduated in the same way, they may be con- 


Fe _ sidered for ordinary purposes as comparable instruments ; 
. _ so that though they may never have been actually com- 
re pared together, yet in ascertaining the temperature of any- 

thing there will be very little difference whether we use the 


one thermometer or the other. 

_ But if we desire great accuracy in the measurement of 

_ temperature, so that the observations made by different. 

_ observers with different instruments may be strictly com- 
parable, the only satisfactory method is by agreeing to 

_ choose one thermometer as a standard and comparing all the 

bs others with it. 


—“— 
Ee 
\ 
¢ 
« 
| 
% 
z 
2 
=. 
2 
| 
% 
+ 
Be 
he 
gules 
aE 
“3 


40 Thermometry. 


All thermometers ought to be made with tubes of as 

uniform bore as can be found ; but for a standard thermometer 

s the bore should be calibrated—that is to say, its size should be 
measured at short intervals all along its length. 

For this purpose, before the bulb is blown, a small quantity . 

; 


of mercury is introduced into the tube and moved along the 

tube by forcing air into the tube behind it. This is done by 
squeezing the air out of a small india-rubber ball which is) ~ 
fastened to the end of the tube. | 

If the length of the column of mercury remains exactly , 
the same as it passes along the tube, the bore of the tube 
must be uniform ; but even in the best tubes there is always 
some want of uniformity. 

But if we introduce a short column of mercury into the 
tube, then mark both ends of the column, and move it on its 
own length, till one end comes exactly to the mark where 
. the other end was originally, then mark the other end, and 
: move it on again, we shall havea series of marks on the tube 
Bas such that the capacity of the tube between any two consecu- 

tive marks will be the same, being equal to that of the 

column of mercury. 

By this method, which was invented by Gay-Lussac, a 
number of divisions may be marked on the tube, each of 
which contains the same volume, and though they will pro- 
bably not correspond to degrees when the tube is made up 
into a thermometer, it will be easy to convert the reading of 
this instrument into degrees by multiplying it by a proper 
factor, and in the use of a standard instrument this trouble is 
readily undertaken for the sake of accuracy. . 

The tube having been prepared in this way, one end is 
heated till it is melted, and it is blown into a bulb by forcing 

Fs air in at the other end of the tube. In order to avoid 
introducing moisture into the tube, this is done, not by the 
mouth, but by means of a hollow india-rubber ball, which is 
fastened to the end of the tube. 


Construction of « Thermometer. 41 


The tube of a thermometer is generally so narrow that 
mercury will not enter it, for a reason which we shall explain 
when we come to the properties of liquids. Hence the 
following method is adopted to fill the thermometer. By 
rolling paper round the open end of 
the tube, and making the tube thus pics 
formed project a little beyond the 
glass tube, a cavity is formed, into 
which a little mercury is poured. 
The mercury, however, will not run 
down the tube of the thermometer, 
partly because the bulb and tube are 
already full of air, and partly because 
the mercury requires a certain pres- 
sure from without to enter so narrow 
a tube.. The bulb is therefore gently 
heated so as to cause the air to ex- 
pand, and some of the air escapes 
through the mercury. When the bulb 
cools, the pressure of the air in the 
bulb becomes less than the pressure 
of the air outside, and the difference 
of these pressures is sufficient to 

make the mercury enter the tube, 
when it runs down and partially fills 
the bulb. 

In order to get rid of the remainder of the air, and of any 

_ moisture in the thermometer, the bulb is gradually heated 
till the mercury boils. The air and steam escape along 

_ with the vapour of mercury, and as the boiling continues the 
_ last remains of air are expelled through the mercury at the 
top of the tube. When the boiling ceases, the mercury runs 
back into the tube, which is thus perfectly filled with mereury. 
_____ While the thermometer is still hotter than any temperature 
_ at which it will afterwards be used, and while the mercury or 


42 Thermometry. 


its vapour completely fills it, a blowpipe flame is made to 
play on the top of the tube, so as to melt it and close the end 
of the tube. The tube, thus closed with its own substance, 
is said to be ‘hermetically sealed.’ ! 

There is now nothing in the tube but mercury, and when 
the mercury contracts so as to leave a space above it, this 
space is either empty of all gross matter, or contains only 
the vapour of mercury. If, in spite of all our precautions, 
there is still some air in the tube, this can easily be ascertained 
by inverting the thermometer and letting some of the mer- 
cury glide towards the end of the tube. If the instrument 
is perfect, it will reach the end of the tube and completely 
fill it. If there is air in the tube the air will form an elastic 
cushion, which will prevent the mercury from reaching the 
end of the tube, and will be seen in the form of a small 
bubble. 

We have next to determine the freezing and boiling points, 
as has been already described, but certain precautions have 
still to be observed. In the first place, glass is a substance 
in which internal changes go on for some time after it 
has been strongly heated, or exposed to intense forces. 
In fact, glass is in some degree a plastic body. It is 
found that after a thermometer has been filled and sealed 
the capacity of the bulb diminishes slightly, and that this 
change is comparatively rapid at first, and only gradually 
becomes insensible as the bulb approaches its ultimate con- 
dition. It causes the freezing point to rise in the tube to 
0°3 or o°'s5, and if, after the displacement of the zero, the 
mercury be again boiled, the zero returns to its old place 
and gradually rises again. . 

This change of the zero-point was discovered by M. 
Flaugergues.?_ It may be considered complete in from four to 


‘ «From Hermes or Mercury, the imagined inventor of chemistry.’— 
Sonnson’s Dict. 
* Ann. de Chimie et de Physique, xxi. p. 333 (1822). 


Comparison of Thermometers. 43 


six months.' In order to avoid the error which it would 
introduce into the scale, the instrument should, if possible, 
have its zero determined some months after it has been 
filled, and since even the determination of the boiling point 
of water produces a slight depression of the freezing point 
(that is, an expansion of the bulb), the freezing point should 
not be determined after the boiling point, but rather 
before it. 

When the boiling point is determined, the barometer is 
probably not at the standard height. The mark made on 
the thermometer must, in graduating it, be considered to 
represent, not the standard boiling point, but the boiling 
point corresponding to the observed height of the baro- 
meter, which may be found from the tables. 

To construct a thermometer in this elaborate way is by 
no means an easy task, and even when two thermometers have 
been constructed with the utmost care, their readings at 
points distant from the freezing and boiling points may not 
agree, on account of differences in the law of expansion of 
the glass of the two thermometers. These differences, how- 
ever, are small, for all thermometers are made of the same 
description of glass. 

But since the main object of thermometry is that all 
thermometers shall be strictly comparable, and since thermo- 
meters are easily carried from one place to’ another, the 
best method of obtaining this object is by comparing all 
thermometers either directly or indirectly with a single 
standard thermometer. For this purpose, the thermometers, 
after being properly graduated, are all placed along with the 
standard thermometer in a vessel, the temperature of which 
can be maintained uniform for a considerable time. Each 
thermometer is then compared with the standard thermometer. 


1 Dr. Joule, however, finds that the rise of the freezing point of a 
delicate thermometer has been going on for twenty-six years, though the 
changes are now exceedingly minute.—Phil. Soc. Manchester, Feb. 22, 


1870. 


A table of corrections is made for each thermometer 
by entering the reading of that thermometer, along with 
_ the correction which must be applied to that reading to 
reduce it to the reading of the standard thermometer. 
This is called the proper correction for that reading. If 
it is positive it must be added to the reading, and if negative 
it must be subtracted from it. 

By bringing the vessel to various temperatures, the cor- 
rections at these temperatures for each thermometer are 
ascertained, and the series of corrections belonging to each 
_ thermometer is made out and preserved along with that 
thermometer. 

Any thermometer may be sent to the Observatory at 
_ Kew, and will be returned with a list of corrections, by the 
application of which, observations made with that thermo- 
meter become strictly comparable with those made by the 
standard thermometer at Kew, or with any other thermometer 
similarly corrected. The charge for making the comparison 
is very small compared with the expense of making an 
original standard thermometer, and the scientific value of 
observations made with a thermometer thus compared is 
greater than that of observations made with the most elabo- 
rately prepared thermometer which has not been compared 
with some existing and known standard instrument. 

_I have described at considerable length the processes by 
which the thermometric scale is constructed, and those by 
which copies of it are multiplied, because the practical 

_ establishment of such a scale is an admirable instance of 
the method by which we must proceed in the scientific 
_ observation of a phenomenon such as temperature, which, for 
the present, we regard rather as a gua/ity, capable of greater 
or less intensity, than as a guantity which may be added to 
or subtracted from other quantities of the same kind. 

A temperature, so far as we have yet gone in the science 
of heat, is not considered as capable of being added to _ 
another temperature so as to form a temperature which is 


Temperature considered as a Quality. 45 


the sum of its components. When we are able to attach a 
distinct meaning to such an operation, and determine its 
result, our conception of temperature will be raised to the 
rank of a quantity. For the present, however, we must be 
content to regard temperature as a quality of bodies, and be 
satisfied to know that the temperatures of all bodies can be 
referred to their proper places in the same scale. 

For instance, we have a right to say that the temperatures 
of freezing and boiling differ by 180° Fahrenheit ; but we 
have as yet no nght to say that this difference is the same 
as that between the temperatures 300° and 480° on the 
same scale. Still less can we assert that a temperature of 

244° F. = 32°+212° 
is equal to the swum of the temperatures of freezing and 
boiling. In the same way, if we had nothing by which to 
measure time except the succession of our own thoughts, 
we might be able to refer each event within our own ex- 
perience to its proper chronological place in a series, but 
we should have no means of comparing the interval of time 
between one pair of events with that between another pair, 
unless it happened that one of these pairs was included 
within the other pair, in which case the interval between the 
first pair must be the smallest. It is only by observation of 
the uniform or periodic motions of bodies, and by ascertain- 
ing the conditions under which certain motions are always 
accomplished in the same time, that we have been enabled 
to measure time, first by days and years, as indicated by 
the heavenly motions, and then by hours, minutes, and 
seconds, as indicated by the pendulums of our clocks, till 
we are now able, not only to calculate the time of vibration 
of different kinds of light, but to compare the time of vibra- 
tion of a molecule of hydrogen set in motion by an electric 
discharge through a glass tube, with the time of vibration 
of another molecule of hydrogen in the sun, forming part of 
some great eruption of rosy clouds, and with the time of 
vibration of another molecule in Sirius which has not 


transmitted its vibrations to our earth, but has simply — 
prevented vibrations arising in the body of that star from 
_ reaching us. 

In a subsequent chapter we shall consider the further 
progress of our knowledge of Temperature as a Quantity. 


ON THE AIR THERMOMETER. 


_ The original thermometer invented by Galileo was an 
air thermometer. It consisted of a glass bulb with a long 
neck. ‘The air in the bulb was heated, and then the: neck 
was plunged into a coloured liquid. As the air in the bulb 
cooled, the liquid rose in the neck, and the higher the 
liquid the lower the temperature of the air in the bulb. 
By putting the bulb into the mouth of a patient, and noting 
the point to which the liquid was driven down in the tube, a 
physician might estimate whether the ailment was of the 
nature of a fever or not. Such a thermometer has several 
_ obvious merits. It is easily constructed, and gives larger 
indications for the same change of temperature than a thermo- 
meter containing any liquid as the thermometric sub- 
stance. Besides this, the air requires less heat to warm it 
‘than an equal bulk of any liquid, so that the air thermo- 
meter is very rapid in its indications. The great incon- 
venience of the instrument as a means of measuring tem- 
perature is, that the height of the liquid in the tube depends 
on the pressure of the atmosphere as well as on the tem- 
_ perature of the airin the bulb. The air thermometer cannot 
therefore of itself tell us anything about temperature. We 
- must consult the barometer at the same time, in order to 
correct the reading of the air thermometer. Hence the air 
thermometer, to be of any scientific value, must be used 
along with the barometer, and its readings are of no use 
till after a process of calculation has been gone through. 
This puts it at a great disadvantage compared with the 
mercurial thermometer as a means of ascertaining tempera- 


The Air Thermometer. 47 


tures. But if the researches on which we are engaged are 
of so important a nature that we are willing to undergo the 
labour of double observations and numerous calculations, 
than the advantages of the air thermometer may again pre- 
ponderate. 

We have seen that in fixing a scale of temperature after 
marking on our thermometer two temperatures of reference 
and filling up the interval with equal divisions, two thermo- 
meters containing different liquids will not in general agree 
except at the temperatures of reference. 

If, on the other hand, we could secure a constant pressure 
in the air thermometer, then if we exchange the air for any 
other gas, all the readings will be exactly the same provided 
the reading at one of the temperatures of reference is the 
same. It appears, therefore, that the scale of temperatures 
as indicated by an air thermometer has this advantage over 
the scale indicated by mercury or any other liquid or solid, 
that whereas no two liquid or solid substances can be made to 
agree in their expansion throughout the scale, all the gases 
agree with one another. In the absence of any better 
reasons for choosing a scale, the agreement of so many 
substances is a reason why the scale of temperatures fur- 
nished by the expansion of gases should be considered as of 
great scientific value. In the course of our study we 
shall find that there are scientific reasons of a much higher 
order which enable us to fix on a scale of temperature, 
based not on a probability of this kind, but on a more inti- 
mate knowledge of the properties of heat. This scale, so 
far as it has been investigated, is found to agree very closely 
with that of the air thermometer. 

There is another reason, of a practical kind, in favour of 
the use of air as a thermometric substance, namely, that air 
remains in the gaseous state at the lowest as well as the 
highest temperatures which we can produce, and there are 
no indications in either case of its approaching to a change 
of state. Hence air, or one of the permanent gases, is of 


the greatest use in estimating temperatures lying far outside — 
of the temperatures of reference, such, for instance, as the — 
_ freezing point of mercury or the melting point of silver. 

We shall consider the practical method of using air as a 
thermometric substance when we come to Gasometry. In 
the meantime let us consider the air thermometer in its 
simplest form, that of a long tube of uniform bore closed at 
one end, and containing air or some other gas which is 
separated from the outer air by a short column of mercury, 


Fic. 5. oil, or some other liquid which is 
een eae capable of moving freely along the 
Brae Ch fae tube, while at the same time it pre- 


vents all communication between the 


Co) are ; 
Es ‘Sy confined air and the atmosphere. 
a, eS Ft 
Bal) ee We shall also suppose that the pres- 
oe . . . * 
¥ ey sure acting on the confined air is in 
ae 212° Boiling. SOMe way maintained constant dur- 
ing the course of the experiments 
we are going to describe. 
The air thermometer is first sur- 
ce L| 32°F reezing, TOunded with ice and ice-cold water. 
0° Let us suppose that the upper surface 
—38°8 |4 —37°9 Mer- of the air now stands at the point 
cury freezes an gta 
marked ‘ Freezing.’ The thermometer 
is then surrounded with the steam 
Natterer’s lowest 


observed || temperature. TiSing from water boiling under an 
ce ie aca atmospheric pressure of 29"905 inches 
of mercury. Let the surface of the 
; enclosed air now stand at the point 
marked ‘ Boiling.’ In this way, the 

two temperatures of reference are to 

ei as aaa be marked on the tube. 

To complete the scale of the 

thermometer we must divide the distance between boiling and 
freezing into a selected number of equal parts, and carry 
this graduation up and down the tube beyond the freezing 
and boiling points with degrees of the same length. 


Absolute Zero. — 49 


Of course, if we carry the graduation far enough down 
the tube, we shall at last come to the bottom of the tube. 
What will be the reading at that point? and what is meant 
by it? 

To determine the reading at the bottom of the tube is a 
very simple matter. We know that the distance of the 
freezing point from the bottom of the tube is to the distance 
of the boiling point from the bottom in the proportion of 
1 to 1°3665, since this is the dilatation of air between the 
freezing and the boiling temperatures. Hence it follows, by 
an easy arithmetical calculation, that if, as in Fahrenheit’s 
scale, the freezing point is marked 32°, and the boiling 
point 212°, the bottom of the tube must be marked 
—459°'13. If, as in the Centigrade scale, the freezing point 
is marked 0°, and the boiling point 100°, the bottom of the 
tube will be marked —272°°85. This, then, is the reading at 
the bottom of the scale. 

The other question, What is meant by this reading? 
requires a more careful consideration. We have begun by 
defining the measure of the temperature as the reading 
of the scale of our thermometer when it is exposed:to that 
temperature. Now if the reading could be observed at the 
bottom of the tube, it would imply that the volume of the 
air had been reduced to nothing. It is hardly necessary to 
say that we have no expectation of ever observing such a 
reading. If it were possible to abstract from a substance all 
the heat it contains, it would probably still remain an 
extended substance, and would occupy a certain volume. 
Such an abstraction of all its heat from a body has never 
been effected, so that we know nothing about the tem- 
perature which would be indicated by an air thermometer 
placed in contact with a body absolutely devoid of heat. 
This much we are sure of, however, that the reading would 
be above — 59°13 F. 

It is exceedingly convenient, especially in dealing with 
questions relating to gases, to recxon temperatures, not from 

E 


: the freezing point, or from Fahrenheit’s zero, but from the — 

_ bottom of the tube of the air thermometer. 

_ This point is then called the absolute zero of the air 
thermometer, and temperatures reckoned from it are called 
absolute temperatures. It is probable that the dilatation of 

a perfect gas is a little less than 1°3665. If we suppose it 

1'366, then absolute zero will be —460° on Fahrenheit’s | 
scale, or — 273°} Centigrade. 

If we add 460° to the ordinary reading on Fahrenheit’s 

scale, we shall obtain the absolute temperature in Fahren- 
_ heit’s degrees. 

If we add 273°} to the Centigrade reading, we shall obtain - 
the absolute temperature in Centigrade degrees. 

We shall often have occasion to speak of absolute 
temperature by the air thermometer. When we do so we 
- mean nothing more than what we have just said—namely, 

temperature reckoned from the bottom of the tube of the air 
‘thermometer. We assert nothing as to the state of a body 
deprived of all its heat, about which we have no experimental 
knowledge. 

One of the most important applications of the conception 
of absolute temperature is to simplify the expression of the 
two laws discovered respectively by Boyle and by Charles. 
_ The laws may be combined into the statement that the 
— product of the volume and pressure of any gas ts proportional 

to the absolute temperature. 

For instance, if we have to measure quantities of a gas by 
their volumes under various conditions as to temperature 
and pressure, we can reduce these volumes to what they 
- would be at some standard temperature and pressure. 

Thus if v, Pp, T be the actual volume, pressure, and absolute 
temperature, and v, the volume at the standard pressure Po, 
and the standard temperature To, then 

VP __ Vo Py 


Absolute Temperatures. or 


If we have only to compare the relative quantities of the 
gas in different measurements in the same series of experi- 
ments, we may suppose Py and Ty, both unity, and use the 


quantity — without always multiplying it by - ° which is 
0 


a constant quantity.! 

The great scientific importance of the scale of temperature 
as determined by means of the air or gas thermometer arises 
from the fact, established by the experiments of Joule and 
Thomson, that the scale of temperature derived from the 
expansion of the more permanent gases is almost exactly the 
same as that founded upon purely thermodynamic considera- 
tions, which are independent of the peculiar properties of the 
thermometric body. This agreement has been experimentally 
verified only within a range of temperature between o° C. 
and 1oo° C. If, however, we accept the molecular theory of 
gases, the volume of a perfect gas ought to be exactly pro- 
portional to the absolute temperature on the thermodynamic 
scale, and it is probable that as the temperature rises the 
properties of real gases approximate to those of the theo- 
retically perfect gas. 

All the thermometers which we have considered have 
been constructed on the principle of measuring the expansion 
of a substance as the temperature rises. In certain cases it is 
convenient to estimate the temperature of a substance by the 
heat which it gives out as it cools to a standard temperature. 
Thus if a piece of platinum heated in a furnace is dropped 
into water, we may form an estimate of the temperature of 
the furnace by the amount of heat communicated to the 
water. Some have supposed that this method of estimating 
temperatures is more scientific than that founded on expan- 
sion. It would be so if the same quantity of heat always 
caused the same rise of temperature, whatever the original 


| 1 For a full account of the methods of measuring gases the student is 
referred to Bunsen’s Gasometry, translated by Roscoe. 
E2 


temperature of the body. But the specific heat of most 
substances increases as the temperature rises, and it in- 
creases in different degrees for different substances, so that 
this method cannot furnish an absolute scale of temperature. 
It is only in the case of gases that the specific heat of a given 
mass of the substance remains the same at all temperatures. 
There are two methods of estimating temperature which 
are founded on the electrical properties of bodies. We 
cannot, within the limits of this treatise, enter into the. 
_ theory of these methods, but must refer the student to works 
on electricity. One of these methods depends on the fact 
that in a conducting circuit formed of two different metals, 
if one of the junctions be warmer than the other, there will 
be an electromotive force which will produce a current of 
electricity in the circuit, and this may be measured by 
_ means ofa galvanometer. In this way very minute differences 
of temperature between the ends of a piece of metal may be 
detected. ‘Thus if a piece of iron wire is soldered at both 
ends to a copper wire, and if one of the junctionsis ata place 
where we cannot introduce an ordinary thermometer, we may 
ascertain its temperature by placing the other junction in a 
‘vessel of water and adjusting the temperature of the water 
till no current passes. The temperature of the water will 
then be equal to that of the inaccessible junction. 

Electric currents excited by differences of temperature in 
different parts of a metallic circuit are called thermo-electric 
currents. An arrangement by which the electromotive forces — 
arising from a number of junctions may be added together 
is called a thermopile, and is used in experimentson the 
heating effect of radiation, because it is more sensitive to 
changes of temperature caused by small quantities of heat 
than any other instrument. ‘ 

Professor Tait' has found that if 7, and 7, denote the © 
temperatures of the hot and cold junction of two metals, 


1 Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1870-71. 
iS ei A Ry 1954, 


ee a: C sas ¥ . - 


Electrical Thermometric Methods. 53 


the electromotive force of the circuit formed by these two’ 
metals is 

A(4, —4 [r —4(4 + 4)], 
where A is a constant depending on the nature of the metals, 
and T is a temperature also depending on the metals, 
such that when one junction is as much hotter than T as the 
other is colder, no current is produced. tT may be called the 
neutral temperature for the two metals. For copper and 
iron it is about 284° C. 

The other method of estimating the temperature of a place 
at which we cannot set a thermometer is founded on the 
increase of the electric resistance of metals as the tempe- 
rature rises. This method has been successfully employed 
by Mr. Siemens.! Two coils of the same kind of fine platinum 
wire are prepared so as to have equal resistance. Their 
ends are connected with long thick copper wires, so that the 
coils may be placed if necessary a long way from the galva- 
nometer. ‘These copper terminals are also adjusted so as to 
be of the same resistance for both coils. The resistance of 
the terminals should be small as compared with that of the 
coils. One of the coils is then sunk, say to the bottom of 
the sea, and the other is placed in a vessel of water, the 
temperature of which is adjusted till the resistance of both 
coils is the same. By ascertaining with a thermometer the 
temperature of the vessel of water, that of the bottom of the 
sea may be deduced. 

Mr. Siemens has found that the resistance of the metals 
may be expressed by a formula of the form 


R=avT+Prd+y, 
where R is the resistance, T the absolute temperature, and 
a B y coefficients. Of these a is the largest, and the re- 
sistance depending on it increases as the square root of the 
absolute temperature, so that the resistance increases more 
slowly as the temperature rises. The second term, ( 7, is 


1 Proceedings of the Royal Soctety, April 27, 1871. 


Sh Calorimetry. 


proportional to the temperature and may be attributed to 
the expansion of the substance. The third term is con- 
Stant. 


CHAPTER III. 


CALORIMETRY. 


Havine explained the principles of Thermometry, or the 
method of ascertaining temperatures, we are able to under- 
stand what we may call Calorimetry, or the method of 
measuring quantities of heat. 

When heat is applied to a body it produces effects of 
various kinds. In most cases it raises the temperature of 
the body ; it generally alters its volume or its pressure, and in 
certain cases it changes the state of the body from solid to 
liquid or from liquid to gaseous. 

Any effect of heat may be used as a means of measuring 
quantities of heat by applying the principle that when two 
equal portions of the same substance in the same state are 
acted on by heat in the same way so as to produce the 
same effect, then the quantities of heat are equal. 

We begin by choosing a standard body, and defining the 
standard effect of heat upon it. Thus we may choose a 
pound of ice at the freezing point as the standard body, and 
we may define as the unit of heat that quantity of heat which 
must be applied to this pound of ice to convert it into a 
pound of water still at the freezing point. This is an 
example of a certain change of state being used to define 
what is meant by a quantity of heat. This unit of heat was 
brought into actual use in the experiments of Lavoisier and 
Laplace. 

In this system a quantity of heat is measured by the 
number of pounds (or of grammes) of ice at the freezing 


ee 


The Unit of Heat. 55 


point which that quantity of heat would convert into water 
at the freezing point. 

We might also employ a different system of measurement 
by defining a quantity of heat as measured by the number of 
pounds of water at the boiling point which it would convert 
into steam at the same temperature. 

This method is frequently used in determining the amount 
of heat generated by the combustion of fuel. 

Neither of these methods requires the use of the thermo- 
meter. 

Another method, depending on the use of the thermo- 
meter, is to define as the unit of heat that quantity of heat 
which if applied to unit of mass (one pound or one gramme) 
of water at some standard temperature (that of greatest 
density, 39° F. or 4° C., or occasionally some temperature 
more convenient for laboratory work, such as 62° F. or 15° C.), 
will raise that water one degree (Fahrenheit or Cenngiade 4 
in temperature. 

According to this method a quantity of heat is measured 
by the quantity of water at a standard temperature which that 
quantity of heat would raise one degree. 

All that is assumed in these methods of measuring heat is 
that ifit takes a certain quantity of heat to produce a certain 
effect on one pound of water in a certain state, then to produce 
the same effect on another similar pound of water will 
require as much heat, so that twice the quantity of heat 
is required for two pounds, three times for three pounds, 
and so on. 

We have no right to assume that because a unit of heat 
raises a pound of water at 39° F. one degree, therefore two 
units of heat will raise the same pound two degrees ; for the 
quantity of heat required to raise the water from 40° to 41° 
may be different from that which raised it from 39° to 40°. 
Indeed, it has been found by experiment that more heat 
is required to raise a pound of water one degree at high 
temperatures than at low ones. 


Opa if we measute heat aoeoniihiy to iis of the meth 
; ores described, either by the quantity of a particular kind | 
of matter which it can change from one easily observed state 
to another without altering its temperature, or by the 
quantity of a particular kind of matter which it can raise 

from one given temperature to another given temperature, 

we may treat quantities of heat as mathematical quantities, 
and add or subtract them as we please. 

We have, however, in the first place to establish that the 
heat which by entering or leaving a body in any manner 
produces a given change in it is a quantity strictly com- 

_ parable with that which melts a pound of ice, and differs 
from it only by being so many times greater or less. 
_ In other words, we have to show that heat of all kinds, 

whether coming from the hand, or hot water, or steam, or red- 
hot iron, or a flame, or the sun, or from any other source, can 
be measured in the same way, and that the quantity of each 
‘required to effect any given change, to melt a pound of ice, 
to boil away a pound of water, or to warm the water from one 
temperature to another, is the same from whatever source the 
heat comes. 

To find whether these effects depend on anything except 
the quantity of heat received—for instance, if they depend in 
any way on the temperature of the source of heat—suppose 

two experiments tried. In the first a certain quantity of heat 
(say the heat emitted by a candle while an inch of candle is 
- consumed) is applied directly to melt ice. In the second the 
same quantity of heat is applied to a piece of iron at the 
freezing point so as to warm it, and then the heated iron is 
placed in ice so as to melt a certain quantity of ice, while the 
iron itself is cooled to its original temperature. 
If the quantity of ice melted depends on the temperature 
_ of the source from whence the heat proceeds, or on any 
_ other circumstance than the quantity of the heat, the quan- 
tity melted will differ in these two cases ; for in the first the 
- heat comes directly from an exceedingly hot flame, and in 


fat dy Soe erg ee Se ee Oe Sees oe ee Re baht 
ee ea Gt eS hs eek ao Atay y 
a ee 3 " . 


, 


All Heat is of the same kind. 57 


the second the same quantity of heat comes from compara- 
tively cool iron. 

It is found by experiment that no such difference exists, 
and therefore heat, considered with respect to its power of 
warming things and changing their state, is a quantity strictly 
capable of measurement, and not subject to any variations 
in quality or in kind. 

Another principle, the truth of which is established by 
calorimetrical experiments, is, that if a body in a given state 
is first heated so as to make it pass through a series of states 
defined- by the temperature and the volume of the body 
in each state, and if it is then allowed to cool so as to 
pass in reverse order through exactly the same series of 
states, then the quantity of heat which entered it during the 
heating process is equal to that which left it during the 
cooling process. By those who regarded heat as a sub- 
stance, and called it Caloric, this principle was regarded 
as self-evident, and was generally tacitly assumed. We shall 
show, however, that though it is true as we have stated it, 

yet, if the series of states during the process of heating is 
different from that during the process of cooling, the quan- 
tities of heat absorbed and emitted may be different. In 
fact heat may be generated or destroyed by certain pro- 
cesses, and this shows that heat is not a substance. By 
finding what it is produced from, and what it is reduced to, 
we may hope to determine the nature of heat. 

In most of the cases in which we measure quantities of 
heat, the heat which we measure is passing out of one body 
into another, one of these bodies being the calorimeter 
itself. We assume that the quantity of heat which leaves 
the one body is equal to that which the other receives, 
provided, 1st, that neither body receives or parts with heat 
to any third body; and, 2ndly, that no action takes place 
among the bodies except the giving and receiving of heat. 

The truth of this assumption may be established ex- 
perimentally by taking a number of bodies at different 


Foire to ay given to or taken foe pie jpsiedes to bring i 
‘it to a certain standard temperature. If the bodies are 
now brought to their original temperatures, and allowed to _ 
exchange heat among themselves in any way, then the total 
quantity of heat required to be given to the system to bring _ 
it to the standard temperature will be found to be the same 
as that which would be deduced from the results in the first 
case. i 
We now proceed to describe the experimental methods 
by which these results may be verified, and by which quanti- 
ties of heat in general may be measured. . 
In some of the earlier experiments of Black on the heat — 
required to melt ice and to boil water, the heat was applied 
by means of a flame, and as the supply of heat was assumed 
to be uniform, the quantities of heat supplied were inferred — 
to be proportional to the time during which the supply — 
‘continued. A method of this kind is obviously very im- — 
perfect, and in order to make it at all accurate would need ~ 
numerous precautions and auxiliary investigations with 
respect to the laws of the production of heat by the flame — 
and its application to the body which is heated. Another — 
method, also depending on the observation of time, is more 
- worthy of confidence. We shall describe it under the name 
of the Method of Cooling. 


ICE CALORIMETERS. 


Wilcke, a Swede, was the first who employed the melting _ 
of snow to measure the heat given off by bodies.in cooling. — 
The principal difficulty in this method is to ensure that all — 
the heat given off by the body is employed in melting the | 
ice, and that no other heat reaches the ice so as to melt it, © 
or escapes from the water so as to freeze it. This condition — 
was first fulfilled by the calorimeter of Laplace and La- — 
voisier, of which the description is given in the Memoirs of — 


he Ice Calorimeter. 59 


the French Academy of Sciences for 1780. The instrument 
itself is preserved in the Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers 
at Paris. 
This apparatus, which aes 

afterwards received the 
name of Calorimeter, con- 
sists of three vessels, one 
within another. 


The first or innermost 4 oN 
} Wea Sa \ 
vessel, which we may call ke Sey a 


the receiver, is intended to 
hold the body from which 
the heat to be measured 
escapes. It is made of 
thin sheet copper, so that 
the heat may readily pass 
into the second vessel. The 
second vessel, or calorimeter proper, entirely surrounds the 
first. The lower part of the space between the two vessels is 
filled with broken ice at the freezing (or melting) point, and 
the first vessel is then covered by means of a lid, which is 
itself a vessel full of broken ice. When the ice melts in this 
vessel, whether in the lower part or in the cover of the first 
vessel, the water trickles down and passes through a drainer, 
which prevents any ice from escaping, and so runs out into a 
bottle set to catch it. The third vessel, which we may call 
the ice jacket, entirely surrounds the second, and is furnished, 
like the second, with an upper lid to cover the second. Both 
the vessel and the lid are full of broken ice at the freezing 
point, but the water formed by the melting of this ice is 
carried off to a vessel distinct from that which contains the 
water from the calorimeter proper. 

Now, suppose that there is nothing in the receiver, and 
that the temperature of the surrounding air is above the 
freezing point. Any heat which enters the outer vessel 
will melt some of the ice in the jacket, and will not pass on, 


60 | Calorimetry. | : 4 7 


and no ice will be melted in the calorimeter. As long as 
there is ice in the jacket and in the calorimeter the tem- 
perature of both will be the same, that is, the freezing point, 
and therefore, by the law of equilibrium of heat, no heat 
will pass through the second vessel either outwards or 
inwards. Hence, if any ice is melted in the calorimeter, 
the heat which melts it must come from the receiver. 

Let us next suppose the receiver at the freeztng tempera- 
ture ; let the two lids be carefully lifted off for an instant, and 
a body at some higher temperature introduced into the re- 
ceiver ; then let the lids be quickly replaced. Heat will pass 
from the body through the sides of the receiver into the 
calorimeter, ice will be melted, and the body will be cooled, 
and this process will go on till the body is cooled to the 
freezing point, after which there will be no more ice 
melted. 

If we measure the water produced by the melting of the 
ice, we may estimate the quantity of heat which escapes 
from the body while it cools from its original temperature to 
the freezing point. The receiver is at the freezing point at 
the beginning and at the end of the operation, so that the 
heating and subsequent cooling of the receiver does not 
influence the result. 

Nothing can be more perfect than the theory and design 
of this apparatus. It is worthy of Laplace and of Lavoisier, 
and in their hands it furnished good results. 

The chief inconvenience in using it arises from the fact 
that the water adheres to the broken ice instead of draining 
away from it completely, so that it is impossible to estimate 
accurately how much ice has really been melted. 

To avoid this source of uncertainty, Sir John Herschel 
proposed to fill the interstices of the ice with water at the 
freezing point, and to estimate the quantity of ice melted by 
the contraction which the volume of the whole undergoes, 
since, as we shall afterwards see, the volume of the water is 
less than that of the ice from which it was formed. I am 


Bunsen’s Calorimeter. 61. 


not aware that this suggestion was ever developed into an 
experimental method. 

Bunsen,! independently, devised a calorimeter founded on 
the same principle, but in the use of which the sources 
of error are eliminated, and the physical constants deter- 
mined with a degree of precision seldom before attained 
in researches of this kind. 

Bunsen’s calorimeter, as devised by its author, is a small 
instrument. The body which is to 
give off the heat which is to be 
measured is heated in a test-tube 
placed in a current of steam of 
known temperature. It is then 
dropped, as quickly as may be, into 
the test-tube T of the calorimeter, 
which contains water at 32° F. The 
body sinks to the bottom and gives 
off heat to the water. The heated water does not rise in the 
tube, for the effect of heat on water between 32° and 39° F. 
is to increase its density. It therefore remains surrounding 
the body at the bottom of the tube, and its heat can escape 
only by conduction either upwards through the water, or 
through the sides of the tube, which, being thin, afford a 
better channel. The tube is surrounded by ice at 32° 1 
the calorimeter, c, so that as soon as any part of the water 
in the tube is raised to a higher temperature, conduction 
takes place through the sides, and part of the ice is melted. 
This will go on till everything within the tube is again 
reduced to 32° F., and the whole quantity of ice melted by 
heat from within is an accurate measure of the heat which 
the heated body gives out as it cools to 32° F. 

To prevent any exchange of heat between the calorimeter 
c and surrounding bodies, it is placed in a vessel s filled with 
snow gathered when new fallen and free from smoke. This 


Fic. 7. 


1 Pogg. Anz. Sept. 1870, and Phil, Mey. 1871. 


substance, unless the temperature of the rocm is below 32°, 
- goon acquires and long maintains the temperature of 32° F. 
In preparing the calorimeter, it is filled with distilled water, 
- from which every trace of air must be expelled by a careful 
_ process of boiling. If there is air in the water, the process 
of freezing expels it and produces bubbles of air, the volume 
of which introduces an error of measurement. The lower 
part of the calorimeter contains mercury, and communicates 
with a bent tube also containing mercury. The upper part 
of this tube is bent horizontally, and is carefully calibrated 
and graduated. As the mercury and the vessel are always 
at the temperature 32° F., they are of constant volume, and 
any changes in the position of the mercury in the graduated 
tube are due to the melting of ice in the calorimeter, and 
the consequent diminution of volume of the mass of ice and 
water in it. 

The motions of the extremity of the column of mercury 
being proportional to the quantities of heat emitted from 
the test-tube into the calorimeter, it is easy to see how 
quantities of heat may be compared. In fact, Bunsen has 
made satisfactory determinations of the specific heat of those 

rare metals, such as indium, of which only a few grammes 
have been obtained. 
_. To prepare the calorimeter for use, ice must be formed 
in the calorimeter round the test-tube. For this purpose, 
Bunsen causes a current of alcohol, cooled below 32° by a 
freezing mixture, to flow to the bottom of the test-tube and 
up along its sides. In this way the greater part of the water 
in the calorimeter is soon frozen. When the apparatus has 
been left for a sufficient time in the vessel containing snow, 
the temperature of this ice rises to 32° F., and the apparatus 
_is ready for use. A great many experiments may be made 
after one freezing of the water.! . 


1 See Pogg. Ann. Sept. 1870, or Phil. Mag. 1871. 


Experiments for the Student. 63 


METHOD OF MIXTURE. 


The second calorimetric method is usually called the 
Method of Mixture. This name is given to all the processes 
in which the quantity of heat which escapes from one body 
is measured by the increase of temperature it produces in 
another body into which it escapes. The most perfect 
method of ensuring that all the heat which escapes from the 
one body passes into the other is to mix them, but in many 
cases to which the method is now applied this cannot be 
done. 

We shall illustrate this method by a few experiments, 
which can be performed by the student without any special 
apparatus. A few experiments of this kind actually per- 
formed by himself will give the student a more intelligent 
interest in the subject, and will give him a more lively faith 

_ in the exactness and uniformity of nature, and in the inac- 
curacy and uncertainty of our observations, than any reading 
of books, or even witnessing elaborate experiments performed 
by professed men of science. 

_ I shall suppose the student to have a thermometer, the 
bulb of which he can immerse in the liquids of which the 
temperature is to be measured, and I shall suppose the 
graduation of the thermometer to be that of Fahrenheit, as 

_ it is the most common in this country. 

To compare the effects of heat on water and on lead, take 
astrip of sheet lead, weighing, say, one pound, and roll it 

into the form of a loose spiral, so that when it is dropped 
into water the water may play round every part of it freely. 

Take a vessel of a convenient shape, such that the roll of 
lead when placed in the vessel will be well covered with a 
pound of water. 

Hang up the lead by a fine string and dip it in a saucepan 
of boiling water, and continue to boil it till it is thoronghly 

heated. _ While this is going on weigh out a pound of cold 


water in your vessel, ‘and ascertain its temperature withe 
the thermometer. Then lift the roll of lead out of the 
boiling water, hold it in the steam till the water is drained 
off, and immerse it as quickly as possible in the cold water 
in the vessel. By means of the string you may stir it about in 
the water so as to bring it in contact with new portions of the 
water, and to prevent it from giving its heat directly to the 
sides of the vessel. 

From time to time observe the temperature of the water 
as indicated by the thermometer. In a few minutes the 
temperature of the water will cease to rise, and the experi- 
ment may then be stopped and the calculation begun. 

I shall suppose (for the sake of fixing our ideas) that the 
temperature of the water before the hot lead was put in was 
57° F., and that the final temperature, when the lead ceased 
to impart heat to the water, was 62° F. If we take as our 
unit of heat that quantity of heat which would raise a pound 
of water at 60° F. one degree, we have here five units of heat 
imparted to the water by the lead. 

Since the lead was for some time in boiling water, and 
was afterwards held in the steam, we may assume its original 
temperature to be 212° (this, however, should be tested by the 
thermometer). During the experiment the lead cooled 150°— 
from 212° to 62°—and gave out, as we have seen, five units 
of heat to the water. Hence the difference of the heat of a 
pound of lead at 212° and at 62° is five units ; or the same 
quantity of heat which will heat a pound of water five degrees 
from 57° to 62° will heat a pound of lead 150 degrees from 
62° to 212°. If we assume, what is nearly though not 
exactly true, that the quantity of heat required to heat the | 
lead is the same for each degree of rise of temperature, then — 
we might say that to raise a pound of lead five degrees 
requires only one thirtieth part of the heat required to raise 
a pound of water five degrees. . 

We have thus made a comparison of the effects of heaton — 
lead and on water. We have found that the same quantity 


ST ee Pe Se a eT 


“Tk ae ne ks 


Thermal Capacity of a Body. 65 


of heat would raise a pound of lead through thirty times as 
many degrees as it would raise a pound of water, and we 
have inferred that to produce any moderate change of 
temperature ona pound of lead requires one-thirtieth of the 
heat required to produce the same change on an equal weight 
of water. 

This comparison is expressed in scientific language by 
saying that the capacity of lead for heat is one-thirtieth of 
that of an equal weight of water. 

Water is generally taken as a standard substance with 
which other substances are compared, and the fact which we 
have stated above is expressed in a still more concise manner 
by saying that the specific heat of lead is 34. 

The fact that when equal weights of quicksilver and water 
are mixed together the resulting temperature is not the mean of 
the temperatures of the ingredients was known to Boerhaave 
and Fahrenheit. Dr. Black, however, was the first to explain 
this phenomenon and many others by the doctrine which he 
established, that the effect of the same quantity of heat in 
raising the temperature of the body depends not only on the 
amount of matter in the body, but on the kind of matter of 
which it is formed. Dr. Irvine, Black’s pupil and assistant, 
gave to this property of bodies the name of Capacity for 
Heat. The expression Specific Heat was afterwards intro- 
duced by Gadolin, of Abo, in 1784. 

I-think we shall secure accuracy, along with the greatest 
conformity to established custom, by defining these terms 
thus : 


DEFINITION OF THE CAPACITY OF A BODY. 


The capacity of a body for heat is the number of units of © 
heat required to raise that body one degree of temperature. 

We may speak of the capacity for heat of a particular 
thing, such as a copper vessel, in which case the capacity 
depends on the weight as well as on the kind of matter. 

F 


_ The capacity of a particular thing is often expressed by 
stating the quantity of water which has the same capacity. 
We may also speak of the capacity for heat of a substance, 
such as copper, in which case we refer to unit of mass of the, | 
_ substance. 


DEFINITION OF SPECIFIC HEAT. 


The Specific Heat of a body is the ratio of the quantity of — j 
heat required to raise that body one degree to the quantity 
required to raise an equal weight of water one degree. 

The specific heat therefore is a ratio of two quantities of 
the same kind, and is expressed by the same number, what- 

ever be the units employed by the observer, and whatever 
thermometric scale he adopts. 

It is very important to bear in mind that these phrases 
mean neither more nor less than what is stated in these defi- 
nitions. 

Irvine, who contributed greatly to establish the fact that 
the quantity of heat which enters or leaves a body depends 
on its capacity for heat multiplied by the number of degrees 
through which its temperature rises or falls, went on to 
assume that the whole quantity of heat in a body is equal to 

_ its capacity multiplied by the total temperature of the body, 
reckoned from a point which he called the absolute zero. 
This is equivalent to the assumption that the capacity of the 
body remains the same from the given temperature down- 

_ wards to this absolute zero. The truth of such an assump- 
tion could never be proved by experiment, and its falsehood 

is easily established by showing that the specific heat of 

most liquid and solid substances is different at different 
temperatures. F 
The results which Irvine, and others long after him, 
deduced by calculations founded on this assumption are not _ 
only of no value, but are shown to be so by their incon- 4 
sistency with each other. . 
We shall now return to the consideration of the experiment _ 


Nee a ee ee a te ee! Oe 
Pah td a in ‘ Pi 
if 


a) 


Specific Heat of a Substance. 67 


with the lead and water, in order to show how it can be 
made more accurate by attending to all the circumstances of 
the case. I have purposely avoided doing so at first, as my 
object was to illustrate the meaning of ‘ Specific Heat.’ 

In the former description of the experiment it was 
assumed, not only that all the heat which escapes from the 
lead enters the water in the vessel, but that it remains in 
the water till the conclusion of the experiment, when the 
temperatures of the lead and water have become equalised. 

The latter part of this assumption cannot be quite true, 
for the water must be contained in a vessel of some kind, 
and must communicate some of its heat to this vessel, and 
also must lose heat at its upper surface by evaporation, &c. 

If we could form the vessel of a perfect non-conductor of 
heat, this loss of heat from the water would not occur; but 
no substance of which a vessel can be formed can be con- 
sidered even approximately a non-conductor of heat ; and if 
we use a vessel which is merely a slow conductor of heat, it is 
very difficult, even by the most elaborate calculations, to 
determine how much heat is taken up by the vessel itself 
during the experiment. 

A better plan is to use a vessel which is a very good 
conductor of heat, but of which the capacity for heat is 
small, such as a thin copper or silver vessel, and to prevent 


_ this vessel from parting rapidly with its heat by polishing 


its outer surface, and not allowing it to touch any large 
mass of metal, but rather giving it slender supports and 
placing it within a metal vessel having its inner surface 


polished. 


In this way we shall ensure that the heat shall be quickly 
distributed between the water and the vessel, and may con- 
sider their temperatures at all times nearly equal, while the 


_ loss of heat from the vessel will take place slowly and. at a 
_ Yate which may be calculated when we know the temperature 
of the vessel and of the air outside. 


For this purpose, if we intended to make a very elaborate 
F2 


68 Calorimetry. 


experiment, we should in the first place determine the 
capacity for heat of the vessel by a separate experiment, and 
then we should put into the vessel about a pound of warm 
water and determine its temperature from minute to minute, 
while at the same time we observe with another thermometer 
the temperature of the air inthe room. In this way we should 
obtain a set of observations from which we might deduce the 
rate of cooling for different temperatures, and compute the 
rate of cooling when the vessel is one, two, three, &c., 
degrees hotter than the air; and then, knowing the tempe- 
rature of the vessel at various stages of the experiment for 
finding the specific heat of lead, we should be able to calcu- 
late the loss of heat from the vessel due to the cooling during 
the continuance of the experiment. 

But a much simpler method of getting rid of these diffi- 
culties is by the method of making two experiments—the first 
with the lead which we have described, and the second with 
hot water, in which we endeavour to make the circumstances 
which cause the loss of heat as similar as we can to those in 
the case of the lead. 

For instance, if we suppose that the specific gravity of lead 
is about eleven times that of water, if instead of a pound of 
lead we use one-eleventh of a pound of water, the bulk of the 
water will be the same as that of the lead, and the depth of 
the water in the vessel will be equally increased by the lead 
and the water. 

If we also suppose that the specific heat of lead is one- 
thirtieth of that of water, then the heat given out by a pound 
of lead in cooling 150° will be equal to the heat given out 
by one-eleventh of a pound of water in cooling 55°. 

Hence, if we take one-eleventh of a pound of water at 55° 
above 62°, that is at 117°, and pour it into the vessel with 
the water as before at 57°, we may expect that the level of 
the water will rise as much as when the hot lead was put in, 
and that the temperature will also rise to about the same 
degree. The only difference between the experiments, as 


Method of Double E-xperiments. 69 


far as the loss of heat is concerned, is, that the warm water 
will raise the temperature of the cold water in a much 
shorter time than the hot lead did, so that if we observe the 
temperature at the same time after the mixture in both 
cases, the loss by cooling will be greater with the warm water 
than with the hot lead. 

In this way we may get rid of the chief part of the diffi- 
culty of many experiments of comparison. Instead of 
making one experiment, in which the cooling of the lead is 
compared with the heating of the water and the vessel, 
including an unknown loss of heat from the outside of the 
vessel, we make two experiments, in which the heating 
of the vessel and the total loss of heat shall be as nearly ag 
possible the same, but in which the heat is furnished in the 
one case by hot lead, and in the other by warm water. 
The student may compare this method with the method of 
double weighing invented by. Pere Amiot, but commonly 
known as Borda’s method, in which first the body to be 
weighed, and then the weights, are placed in the same scale, 
and weighed against the same counterpoise. 

We shall illustrate this method by finding the effect of steam 
in heating water, and comparing it with that of hot water. 
Take a kettle, and make the lid tight with a little flour and 
water, and adapt a short india-rubber tube to the spout, and 
atin or glass nozzle to the tube. Make the water in the kettle 
boil, and when the steam comes freely through the nozzle 
dip it in cold water, and you will satisfy yourself that the 
steam is rapidly condensed, every bubble of steam as it 
issues collapsing with a sharp rattling noise. 

Having made yourself familiar with the general nature of 
the experiment of the condensation of steam, you may 
proceed to measure the heat given out to the water. For 
this purpose, put some cold water in your vessel, say about 
three-quarters of a pound. Weigh the vessel and water 
carefully, and observe the temperature of the water ; then, 
while the steam flows freely from the nozzle, condense steam 


Sat. ee 
io fo ite ae 
oe th 


=a 


" 
, 
hier 
ee 
=e 
‘a! 
if 
A 


ae ae 


ag ot eer ee «5 
: 


Sr 
spt 


Y 5 a Calorimetry. 
in the water for a short time, and remove the nozzle ; observe 


the temperature and weigh the water in its vessel again, 
taking note of the time of the experiment. 


Let us suppose the original weight . 5,000 grains 
Weight after the condensation of steam . 5,100 grains 
Hence the weight of steam condensed is. 100 grains 
Temperature of water at first. ; ‘ 55° F. 
Temperature at the end of experiment : 77° S35 
Rise of temperature . : 5 : ‘ 22. 


Let us now make a second experiment, as like the first 
as we can, only differing from it by the use of hot water 
instead of steam to produce the rise of temperature. 

It is impossible in practice to ensure that everything shall 
be exactly the same, but after a few trials we may select a 
method which will nearly, if not quite, fulfil the conditions. 

Thus it is easy to bring the vessel and cold water to the 
same weight as before, namely, 5,000 grains ; but we shall 
suppose the temperature now to be 56° F. instead of 55°. 
We now pour in water at 176° F. gradually, so as to make this 
experiment last about as long as the first, and we find that 
the temperature is now 76°, and the weight 6,000 grains. 
Hence 1,000 grains of water cooling 100° raise the vessel 
and its contents 22°. ; 

Assuming that the specific heat of water is the same at 
all temperatures, which is nearly, though by no means 


exactly, true, the quantity of: heat given out by the water 


in the second experiment is equal to what would raise 
100,000 grains of water one degree. 

In the experiment with the steam the temperatures were 
nearly though not exactly equal, but the rise of temperature 
was greater in the proportion of 22 to 20, Hence we may 
‘conclude that the quantity of heat which produced this 
heating effect in the experiment with steam was greater than 
in the experiment with water in the same proportion. This 
makes the heat given out by the steam equal to that which — 
would raise 110,000 grains of water one degree. 


Latent Heat of Steam. 71 


This was done by the condensation and subsequent 
cooling of 100 grains of steam. Let us begin with the heat 
given out by the too grains of water at 212° F., into which 
the steam is condensed. It is cooled from 212° to 77° or 
135°, and gives out therefore an amount of heat which 
would raise 13,500 grains of water one degree. But the 
whole effect was 110,000, so that there is an amount of 
heat which would raise 96,500 grains of water one degree, 
which must be given out during the condensation of the 
steam, and before the cooling begins. Hence each grain 
of steam in condensing gives out as much heat as would 
raise 965 grains of water 1° F. or 536 grains 1° Centi- 
grade. 

The fact that steam at the boiling point gives out a large 
quantity of heat when it is condensed into water which is 
still at the same temperature, and the converse fact that in 
order to convert water at the boiling temperature into steam 
of the same temperature a large quantity of heat must 
be communicated to it, was first clearly established by 
Black in 1757. 

He expressed it by saying that the latent heat of steam 
is 965° F., and this form of expression is still in use, and 
we should take it to mean neither more nor less than what 
we have just stated. 

Black, however, and many of his followers, supposed heat 
to be a substance which when it makes a thing hot is 
sensible, but which when it is not perceived by the hand 
or the thermometer still exists in the body in a latent or 
concealed state. Black supposed that the difference between 
boiling water and steam is, that steam contains a great deal 
more caloric than the hot water, so that it may be con- 
sidered a compound of water and caloric; but, since this 
additional caloric produces no effect on the temperature, 
_ but lurks concealed in the steam ready to appear when it is 
condensed, he called this part of the heat latent heat. 

In considering the scientific value of Black’s discovery of 


72 Calorimetry. 


latent heat, and of his mode of expressing it, we should 
recollect that Black himself in 1754 was the discoverer of the 
fact that the bubbles formed when marble is put into an acid 
consist of a real substance different from air, which, when free, 
is similar to air in appearance, but when fixed may exist in 
liquids and in solids. This substance, which we now call 
carbonic acid, Black called fixed air, and this was the first 
gaseous body distinctly recognised as such. Other airs or 
gases were afterwards discovered, and the impulse given to 
chemistry was so great, on account of the extension of the 
science to these attenuated bodies, that most philosophers 
of the time were of opinion that heat, light, electricity, and 
magnetism, if not the vital force itself, would sooner or later 
be added to the list. Observing, however, that the gases 
could be weighed, while the presence of these other agents 
could not be detected by the balance, those who admitted 
them to the rank of substances called them imponderable 
substances, and sometimes, on account of their mobility, 
imponderable fluids. 

The analogy between the free and fixed states of carbonic 
acid and the sensible and latent states of heat encouraged 
the growth of materialistic phrases as applied to heat ; and 
it is evident that the same way of thinking led electricians to 
the notion of disguised or dissimulated electricity, a notion 
which survives even yet, and which is not so easily stripped 
of its erroneous connotation as the phrase ‘latent heat.’ 

It is worthy of remark that Cavendish, though one of the 
greatest chemical discoverers of his time, would not accept 
the phrase ‘latent heat.’ He prefers to speak of the 
generation of heat when steam is condensed, a phrase 
inconsistent with the notion that heat is matter, and 
objects to Black’s term as relating ‘to an hypothesis 
depending on the supposition that the heat of bodies is 
owing to their containing more or less of a substance 
called the matter of heat ; and, as I think Sir Isaac Newton’s 
opinion that heat consists in the internal motion of the 


Latent Heat. 73 


particles of bodies much the most probable, I chose to use 
the expression, “heat is generated.”’! 

We shall not now be in danger of any error if we use 
latent heat as an expression meaning neither more nor less 
than this : 

DeEFINITION.—Latent heat is the quantity of heat which 
must be communicated to a body in a given state in order 
to convert it into another state without changing its tempera- 
ture. 

We here recognise the fact that heat when applied to a 
body may act in two ways—by changing its state, or by 
raising its temperature—and that in certain cases it may act 
by changing the state without increasing the temperature. 

The most important cases in which heat is thus employed 
are— 

1. The conversion of solids into liquids. This is called 
melting or fusion. In the reverse process of freezing or 
solidification heat must be allowed to escape from the body 
to an equal amount. 

2. The conversion of liquids (or solids) into the gaseous 
state. This is called evaporation, and its reverse condensa- 
tion. 

3. When a gas expands, in order to maintain the tem- 
perature constant, heat must be communicated to it, and 
this, when properly defined, may be called the latent heat of 
expansion. 

4. There are many chemical changes during which heat is 
generated or disappears. 

In all these cases the quantity of heat which enters or 
leaves the body may be measured, and in order to express 
the result of this measurement in a convenient form, we 
may call it the latent heat required for a given change in the 
substance. 

We must carefully remember that all that we know about 
heat is what occurs when it passes from one body to another, 


1 Phil. Trans. 1783, quoted by Forbes. Dissertation VI. Eucyc. Brit. 


74 Elementary Dynamical Principles, 
and that we must not assume that after heat has entered 
a substance it exists in the form of heat within that 
substance. That we have no right to make such an 
assumption will be abundantly shown by the demonstration 
that heat may be transformed into and may be produced 
from something which is not heat. 

Regnault’s method of passing large quantities of the 
substance through the calorimeter will be described in 
treating of the properties of gases, and the Method of 
Cooling will be considered in the chapter on Radiation. 


CHAPTER IV. 
ELEMENTARY DYNAMICAL PRINCIPLES. 


In the first part of this treatise we have confined ourselves 
to the explanation of the method of ascertaining the tem- 
perature of bodies, which we call thermometry, and the 
method of measuring the quantity of heat which enters or 
leaves a body, and this we call calorimetry. Both of these 
are required in order to study the effects of heat upon bodies; 
but we cannot complete this study without making measure- 
ments of a mechanical kind, because heat and mechanical 
force may act on the same body, and the actual result 
depends on both actions. I propose, therefore, to recall to 
the student’s memory some of those dynamical principles 
which he ought to bring with him to the study of heat, and 
which are necessary when he passes from purely thermal 
phenomena, such as we have considered, to phenomena in- 
volving pressure, expansion, &c., and which will enable him 
afterwards to proceed to the study of thermodynamics 
proper, in which the relations of thermal phenomena among 
themselves are deduced from purely dynamical principles, 
The most important step in the progress of every 


oot eet ot a rr ee 


Measurement of Quantities. . 75 


science is the measurement of quantities. Those whose 
curiosity is satisfied with observing what happens have 
occasionally done service by directing the attention of others 
to the phenomena they have seen ; but it is to those who 
endeavour to find out how much there is of anything that 
we owe all the great advances in our knowledge. 

Thus every science has some instrument of precision, 
which may be taken as a material type of that science which 
it has advanced, by enabling observers to express their 
results as measured quantities. In astronomy we have 
the divided circle, in chemistry the balance, in heat the 
thermometer, while the whole system of civilised life may 
be fitly symbolised by a foot rule, a set of weights, and a 
clock. I shall, therefore, make a few remarks on the 
measurement of quantities. 

Every quantity is expressed by a phrase consisting of two 
components, one of these being the name of a number, and 
the other the name of a thing of the same kind as the 
quantity to be expressed, but of a certain magnitude agreed 
on among men as a standard or unit. 

Thus we speak of two days, of forty-eight hours. 

Each of these expressions has a numerical part and a 
denominational part, the numerical part being a number, 
whole or fractional, and the denominational part being the 
name of the thing, which is to be taken as many times as is 
indicated by the number. 

If the numerical part is the number ome, then the quantity 
is the standard quantity itself, as when we say one pound, 
or one inch, or one day. A quantity of which the numerical 
part is unity is called a unit. When the numerical part is 
some other number, the quantity is still said to be referred to, 
or to be expressed in terms of that quantity which would be 


' denoted if the number were ove, and whichis called the unit. 


In all cases the unit is a quantity of the same kind as the 


" quantity which is expressed by means of it. 


In many cases several units of the same kind are in use, 


76 Elementary Dynamical Principles. 


as miles, yards, feet, and inches, as measures of length ; cubic 
yards, gallons, and fluid ounces, as measures of eapacity ; 
besides the endless variety of units which have been adopted 
by different nations, and by different districts and different 
trades in the same nation. 

When a quantity given in terms of one unit has to be ex- 
pressed in terms of another, we find the number of times 
the second unit is contained in the first, and multiply this 
by the given number. 

Hence the numerical part of the expression of the same 
quantity varies inversely as the unit in which it is to be ex- 
pressed, as in the example, two days and forty-eight hours, — 
which mean the same thing. 

There are many quantities which can be defined in terms 
of standard quantities of a different kind. In this case we 
make use of derived units. For instance, as soon as we 
have fixed on a measure of length, we may define by means 
of it not only all lengths, but also the area of any surface, 
and the content of any space. For this purpose, if the foot 
is the unit of length, we construct, by Euclid I. 46, a square 
whose side is a foot, and express all areas in terms of this 
square foot, and by constructing a cube whose edge is 
a foot we have defined a cubic foot as a unit of capacity. 

We also express velocities in miles an hour, or feet in a 
second, &c. 

In fact, all quantities with which we have to do in dynamics 
may be expressed in terms of units derived by definition from 
the three fundamental units—of Length, Mass, and Time. 


STANDARD OF LENGTH. 

It is so important to mankind that these units should be 
well defined that in all civilised nations they are defined by 
the State with reference to material standards, which are pre- 
served with the utmost care. For instance, in this country 
it was enacted by Parliament! ‘that the straight line or 


1 18 & 19 Vict. c. 72, July 30, 1855. 


Units of Length. 7 


distance between the centres of the transverse lines in the 
two gold plugs in the bronze bar deposited in the office 
of the Exchequer shall be the genuine standard yard 
at 62° F., and if lost it shall be replaced by means of its 
copies.’ 

The authorised copies here referred to are those which are 
preserved at the Royal Mint, the Royal Society of London, 
the Royal Observatory at Greenwich, and the New Palace 
at Westminster. Other copies have been made with great 
care, and with these all measures of length must be com- 
pared. 

The length of the Parliamentary standard was chosen so 
as to be as nearly as possible equal to that of the best 
standard yards formerly used in England. ‘The State, there- 
fore, endeavoured to maintain the standard of its ancient 
magnitude, and by its authority it has defined the actual 
magnitude of this standard with all the precision of which 
modern science is capable. 

The métre derives its authority as a standard from a law 
of the French Republic in 1795. 

It is defined to be the distance between the ends of a rod 
of platinum made by Borda,! the rod being at the tempera- 
ture of melting ice. This distance was chosen without 
reference to any former measures used in France. It was 
intended to be a universal and not a national measure, and 
was derived from Delambre and Mechain’s measurement of 
the size of the earth. The distance measured along the 
earth’s surface from the pole to the equator is nearly ten 
million of métres. If, however, in the progress of geodesy, a 
different result should be obtained from that of Delambre, 
the métre will not be altered, but the new result will be 
expressed in the old métres. The authorised standard of 
length is therefore not the terrestrial globe, but Borda’s 


1 Métre conforme 4 la loi du 18 Germinal, an III. Présenté le 
4 Messidor, an VII. 


4 et 
A aa 


78 Elementary Dynamical Principles. 


platinum rod, which is much more likely to be accurately 
measured. 

The value of the French system of measures does not 
depend so much on the absolute values of the units adopted 
as on the fact that all the units of the same kind are 
connected together by a decimal system of multiplication 
and division, so that the whole system, under the name of 
the metrical system, is rapidly gaining ground even in 
countries where the old national system has been carefully 
defined. 

The métre is 39°37079 British inches. 


STANDARD OF MASS. 


By the Act above cited a weight of platinum marked 
“P. S. 1844, 1 lb.,’ deposited in the office of the Exchequer, 
‘shall be the legal and genuine standard measure of weight, 
and shall be and be denominated the Imperial Standard 
Pound Avoirdupois, and shall be deemed to be the only 
standard measure of weight from which all other weights and 
other measures having reference to weight shall be derived, 
computed, and ascertained, and one equal seven-thousandth 
part of such pound avoirdupois shall be a grain, and five 
thousand seven hundred and sixty such grains shall be and 
be deemed to bea pound troy. If at any time hereafter the 
said Imperial Standard Pound Avoirdupois be lost or in any 
manner destroyed, defaced, or otherwise injured, the Com- 
missioners of Her Majesty’s Treasury may cause the same to 
be restored by reference to or adoption of any of the copies 
aforesaid,’ or such of them as may remain available for that 
purpose.’ 

The construction of this standard was entrusted to Pro- 
fessor W. H. Miller, who has given an account of the 
methods employed in a paper,? which may be here referred 
to as a model of scientific accuracy. 


1 In the same places as the Standards of Length. 
2 Phil, Trans. 1856, p. 753- 


Units of Mass. 79 


The French standard of mass is the Kilogramme des 
Archives, made of platinum by Borda, and is. intended to 
represent the mass of a cubic décimétre of distilled water 
at the temperature 4° C. 

The actual determination of the density of water is an 
operation which requires great care, and the differences 
between the results obtained by the most skilful observers, 
though small, are a thousand times greater than the differ- 
ences of the results of a comparison of standards by weighing 
them. The differences of the values of the density of water 
as found by careful observers are as much as a thousandth 
part of the whole, whereas the method of weighing admits 
of an accuracy of within one part in five millions. 

Hence the French standards, though originally formed 
to represent certain natural quantities, must be now con- 
sidered as arbitrary standards, of which copies are to be 
taken by direct comparison. The French or metric system 
has the advantage of a uniform application of the decimal 
method, and it is also in many cases convenient to remember 
that a cubic métre of water is a tonne, a cubic décimétre a 
kilogramme, a cubic centimétre a gramme, and a cubic 
millimétre a milligramme, the water being at its maximum 
density or at about 4° C. 

In 1826 the British standard of mass was defined by 
saying that a cubic inch of water at 62° F. contains 252°458 
grains, and though this is no longer a legal definition, we 
may take it as a rough statement of a fact, that a cubic inch 
of water weighs about 252°5 grains, a cubic foot about 1,000 
ounces avoirdupois, and a cubic yard about three-quarters of 
aton. Of these estimates the second is the furthest from 
the truth. 

Professor Miller has compared the British and French 
standards, and finds the Kilogramme des Archives equal to 
15432°34874 grains. 

From these legal definitions it will be seen that what is 
generally called a standard of weight is a certain piece of 


athe 3) ie 
A, 


lementary D 


_ platinum—that is, a particular body the quantity of matter in 
which is taken and defined by the State to bea pound ora _ 
_kilogramme. 

- The weight strictly so called—that is, the tendency of this 
body to move downwards—is not invariable, for it depends 
on the part of the world where it is placed, its weight being 
greater at the poles than at the equator, and greater at the 
level of the sea than at the top of a mountain. 

What is really invariable is the quantity of matter in the 
body, or what is called in scientific language the mass of the 

body, and even in commercial transactions what is generally 
aimed at in weighing goods is to estimate the quantity of 
matter, and not to determine the force with which they tend 
downwards. 

In fact, the only occasions in common life in which it is 

required to estimate weight considered as a force is when we ~ 
have to determine the strength required to lift or carry _ 
things, or when we have to make a structure strong enough 

to support their weight. In all other cases the word weight _ 
must be understood to mean ¢he guantity of the thing as 

determined by the process of weighing against ‘standard 

nights, 

As a great deal of confusion prevails on this subject in 
ordinary language, and still greater confusion has been | 
introduced into books on mechanics by the notion that a — 
pound isa certain force, instead of being, as we have seen, a 
certain piece of platinum, or a piece of any other kind of | 
matter equal in mass to the piece of platinum, I have — 
thought it worth while to spend some time in defining ~ 
accurately what is meant by a pound and a kilogramme. 


‘i 


ON THE UNIT OF TIME. 


All nations derive their measures of time from the — 
apparent motions of the heavenly bodies. The motion 9 
rotation of the earth about its axis is very nearly indeed — 
uniform, and the measure of time in which one day is nel 


Unit of Time. 81 


to the time of revolution of the earth about its axis, or more 
exactly to the interval between successive transits of the first 
point of Aries, is used by astronomers under the name of 
sidereal time. 

Solar time is that which is given by a sun-dial, and is 
not uniform. A uniform measure of time, agreeing with 
solar time in the long run, is called mean solar time, and is 
that which is given bya correct clock. A solar day is longer 
than a sidereal day. In all physical researches mean solar 
time is employed, and one second is generally taken as the 
unit of time. 

The evidence upon which we form the conclusion that 
two different portions of time are or are not equal can only 
be appreciated by those who have mastered the principles 
of dynamical reasoning. I can only here assert that the 
comparison, for example, of the length of a day at present 
with the length of a day 3,000 years ago is by no means 
an unfruitful enquiry, and that the relative length of these 
days may be determined to within a small fraction of a 
second. This shows that time, though we conceive it 
merely as the succession of our states of consciousness, is 
capable of measurement, independently, not only of our 
mental states, but of any particular phenomenon whatever. 


ON MEASUREMENTS FOUNDED ON THE THREE 
FUNDAMENTAL UNITS. 


In the measurement of quantities differing in kind from 
the three units, we may either adopt a new unit independently 
for each new quantity, or we may endeavour to define a unit 
of the proper kind from the fundamental units. In the latter 
case we are said to use a system of units. For instance, if 
we have adopted the foot as a unit of length, the systematic 
unit of capacity is the cubic foot. 

The gallon, which is a legal measure in this country, is 

unsystematic considered as a measure of capacity, as it 
G 


contains the awkward number of 277°274 cubic inches. The ; 
gallon, however, is never tested by a direct measurement of 
its cubic contents, but by the condition that it must contain 
ten pounds of water at 62° F. 

DEFINITION OF DeEnsity.—TZhe density of a body is 
measured by the number of units of mass in unit of volume 
of the substance. 

For instance, if the foot and the ee be taken as 
fundamental units, then the density of anything is the 
number of pounds in a cubic foot. The density of water 
is about 62°5 pounds to the cubic foot. In the metric 
system, the density of water is one tonne to the stére, one 
kilogramme to the litre, one gramme to the cubic centi- 
métre, and one milligramme to the cubic millimétre. 

We shall sometimes have to use the word rarity, to 
signify the inverse of density, that is, the volume of unit of — 
mass of a substance. 

DEFINITION OF SPECIFIC GRAVITY.—TZhe specific gravity — 
of a body is the ratio of tts density to that of some standard 
substance, generally water. 

Since the specific gravity of a body is the ratio of two — 
things of the same kind, it is a numerical quantity, and has — 
the same value, whatever national units are employed by — 
those who determine it. Thus, if we say that the specific | 
gravity of mercury is about 13°5, we state that mercury — 
is about thirteen and a half times heavier than an equal bulk | 
of water, and this fact is independent of the way in which 
we measure either the mass or the volume of the liquids. 

DEFINITION OF UNIFORM VELOcITY.—TZhe velocity of a — 
body moving uniformly is measured by the number of units of 
length travelled over in unit of time. 4 

Thus we speak of a velocity of so many feet or metres — 
per second. 4 

DEFINITION OF MomMENTUM.—Zhe momentum of a body.is 
measured by the product of the velocity of the body into. i 
number of units of mass in the body. 


i DEFINITION OF Foren, — force is whatever changes or 
tends to change the motion of a body by altering either its direc- 
tion or tts magnitude ; and a force acting on a body is measured 
by the momentum it produces in its own direction in unit 
of time. 
__ For instance, the weight of a pound acting on the pound 
itself at London would, if it acted for a second, produce a 
_ velocity of about 32°1889 feet per second in the mass itself, 
_ whichis one pound. Hence, in the British system the weight 
4 of one pound at London is 32°1889 British units of force. 
In Paris the weight of a gramme allowed to fall freely 
for one second would generate in the gramme a velocity of 
- 9°80368 métres per second, so that the weight of a gramme 
_ at Paris is 9°80868 metrical units of force. 
It is so convenient, especially when all our experiments 
are conducted in the same place, to express forces in terms 
_ of the weight of a pound or a gramme, that in all countries 
the first measurements of forces were made in this way, and 
_a force was described as a force of so many pounds’ weight 
_ or grammes’ weight. It was only after the measurements of 
ig forces made by persons in different parts of the world had 
_ to be compared that it was found that the weight of a 
pound or a gramme is different in different places, and 
depends on the intensity of gravitation, or the attraction of 
the earth; so that for purposes of accurate comparison all 
forces must be reduced to absolute or dynamical. measure 
as explained above. We shall distinguish the measure by 
comparison with weight as the gravitation measure of force. 
To reduce forces expressed in gravitation measure to abso- 
lute measure, we must multiply the number denoting the 


avity expressed in the same metrical system. The value 
the force of gravity is a very important number in ali 
' scientific calculations, and it is generally denoted by the 
letter g. The quantity g may be defined in any of the 


Sisa umber expressing the velocity virion in a. 
ous in unit of time. : 
g is a number expressing twice the distance through which a . 
- body falls in unit of time. ‘a 
g is a number expressing the weight of unit of mass. ins 
iboats, measure. q 
The value of g is generally determined at any place bi 4 
experiments with the pendulum. These experiments re- — 
quire great care, and the description of them doed not — 
belong to our present subject. The value of g may be — 
found with sufficient accuracy for the present state of science — 
by means of the formula, . 
g=c (1 —0'0025659 cos 2 ») | {r _ (2 mae ae oH i 
In this formula, G is yr force of gravity at the mean level 
‘of the sea in latitude 45° 
G = 32'1703 feet, or 9°80533 metres. : 
d is the latitude of the place. The formula shows that the! 
force of gravity at the level of the sea increases from the 
equator to the poles. The last factor of the formula is 
intended to represent the effect of the height of the place of 
observation above the level of the sea in diminishing the 
force of gravity. If the observations were carried on in a 
balloon, or on the top of a tower, the force of gravity would 
vary, according to Newton’s law, inversely as the square of 
the distance from the centre of the earth, but since observa~ 
tions are usually made on or near the surface of a part of 
the earth which is above the level of the sea, the effect of 
the attraction of the ground which is raised above the sea- 
level must be taken into account... This is done by a 
method investigated by Poisson,! and expressed in the le 
factor of the above formula. , 
‘The symbol p represents the mean density of the whole 
earth, which is probably about 54 times that of water. p 


1 Traité de Mécanique, t. ii. p. 629. 


P ayy 


ts 
BN ites Bie Bho il et 


Weight. 85 


‘represents the mean density of the ground just below the 
_ place of observation, which may be taken at. about 24 
_ times the density of water, so that we may write 


, 


LAE 
4 mae 1°32 nearly. 
2 is the height of the place above the level of the sea, in 
feet or metres, and + is the radius of the earth : 


r = 20,886,852 feet, or 6,366,198 métres. 


For rough purposes it is sufficient to remember that in 
_ Britain the force of gravity is about 32°2 feet, and in France’ 
~ about 9°8 métres. 

The reason why, in all accurate measurements, we have 
‘to take account of the variation of the force of gravity in 
different places is, that the absolute value of any force, such 
as the pressure of air of a given density and temperature, 
_ depends entirely on the properties of air, and not on 
_ the force of gravity at the place of observation. If, 
; therefore, this pressure has been observed in gravitation 
" measure, that is, in pounds on the square inch, or in inches 
_ of mercury, or in any way in which the weight of some 

Substance is made to furnish the measure of the pressure, then 

the results so obtained will be true only as long as the 
force of gravity is the same, and will not be true without 
correction at a place in a different latitude from the place of 
observation. Hence the use of reducing all measures of 
force to absolute measure. 
In a rude age, before the invention of means for 
_ Overcoming friction, the weight of bodies formed the chief 
‘Obstacle to setting them in motion. It was only after 
_ Some progress had been made in the art of throwing 
missiles, and in the use of wheel-carriages and floating 
vessels, that men’s minds became practically impressed 
with the idea of mass as distinguished from weight. Ac- 
cordingly, while almost all the metaphysicians who dis- 
cussed the qualities of matter assigned a prominent place to 


SS eee og 


7 Sete oar Pe ea Sr 
86 = Elementary Dynamical Principles. 


weight among the primary qualities, few or none of them 
perceived that the sole unalterable property of matter is its 
mass. At the revival of science this property was expressed 
by the phrase ‘the inertia of matter ;’ but while the men of 
science understood by this term the tendency of the body 
to persevere in its state of motion (or rest), and considered 
it a measurable quantity, those philosophers who were un- 
acquainted with science understood inertia in its literal 
sense as a quality—mere want of activity or laziness. 

Even to this day those who are not practically familiar 
with the free motion of large masses, though they all admit 
the truth of dynamical principles, yet feel little repugnance 
in accepting the theory known as Boscovich’s—that sub- 
stances are composed of a system of points, which are 
mere centres of force, attracting or repelling each other. It 
is probable that many qualities of bodies might be explained 
on this supposition, but no arrangement of centres of force, 
however complicated, could account for the fact that a body 
requires a certain force to produce in it a certain change 
of motion, which fact we express by saying that the body 
has a certain measurable mass. No part of this mass can 
be due to the existence of the supposed centres of force. 

I therefore recommend to the student that he should 
impress his mind with the idea of mass by a few experiments, 
such as setting in motion a grindstone or a well-balanced 
wheel, and then endeavouring to stop it, twirling a long 
pole, &c., till he comes to associate a set of acts and sensa- 
tions with the scientific doctrines of dynamics, and he will 
never afterwards be in any danger of loose ideas on these 
subjects. He should also read Faraday’s essay on Mental 
Inertia,! which will impress him with the proper meta- 
vhorical use of the phrase to express, not laziness, but 
habitude. 


1 Life, by Dr. Bence Jones, vol. i. p. 268, 


sae eAPE reli NG aly 2 ogee ala eda ek i ar 


Te ee ee eee eT be 


——— 


as Ph oo Ee ek 


ON WORK AND ENERGY. 


Work is done when resistance is overcome, and the quantity 
of work done is measured by the product of the resisting 
force and the distance through which that force is over- 
come. 

Thus, if a body whose mass is one pound is lifted one 
foot high in opposition to the force of gravity, a certain 
amount of work is done, and this quantity is known among 
engineers as a foot-pound. 

If a body whose mass is twenty pounds is lifted ten feet, 
this might be done by taking one of the pounds and raising it 
first one foot and then another till it had risen ten feet, and 


_ then doing the same with each of the remaining pounds, so 
_ that the quantity of work called a foot-pound is performed 


200 times in raising twenty pounds ten feet. Hence the 
work done in lifting a body is found by multiplying the weight 


of the body in pounds by the height in feet. The result 


is the work in foot-pounds. 
The foot-pound is a gravitation measure, depending on 
the force of gravity at the place. To reduce it to absolute 


_ measure we must multiply the number of foot-pounds by the. 


force of gravity at the place. 
The work done when we raise a heavy body is done in 


- overcoming the attraction of the earth. Work is also done 


when we draw asunder two magnets which attract each 
other, when we draw out an elastic cord, when we compress 
air, and, in general, when we apply force to anything which 
moves in the direction of the force. 

There is one case of the application of force to a moving 


body which is of great importance, namely, when the force 


is employed in changing the velocity of the body. 
Suppose a body whose mass is M (M pounds or M grammes) 
to be moving in a certain direction with a velocity which 


_ we shall call v, and let a force. which we shall call F, be 


¥ 
fe 


ele et 


Lat 2 lementary Dynamical Principles, 


applied to the body in the direction of its motion. Let us 


consider the effect of this force acting on the body for a 


very small time tT, during which the body moves through 
the space s, and at the end of which its velocity is 2’. 

To ascertain the magnitude of the force F, let us consider 
the momentum which it produces in the body, and the time 
during which the momentum is produced. 

The momentum of the beginning of the time T was Mz, 
and at the end of the time Tit was Mz’, so that the momentum 
produced by the force F acting for the time T is Mv’ — Mv. 

But since forces are measured by the momentum produced 
in unit of time, the momentum produced by F in one unit 
of time is F, and the momentum produced by F in T units o} 
time is FT. Since the two values are equal, 


FT = M(v’—7). 


This is one form of the fundamental equation of dynamics. 
If we define the impulse of a force as the average value of 
the force multiplied by the time during which it acts, then 
this equation may be expressed in words by saying that 
the impulse of a force is equal to the momentum produced 
by it. 

We have next to find s, the space described by the body 
during the time T. If the velocity had been uniform, the 
space described would have been the product of the time 


_by the velocity. When the velocity is not uniform the time 


must be multiplied by the mean or average velocity to get 
the space described. In both these cases in which average 
force or average velocity is mentioned, the time is sup- 
posed to be subdivided into a number of equal parts, and 
the average is taken of the force or of the velocity for all these 
divisions of the time. Jn the present case.in which the 
time considered is so small that the change of velocity is also 
small, the average velocity during the time T may be taken 
as the arithmetical mean of the velocities at the beginning 
and at the end of the time, or $(7 + v’). 


Hence the space described is 


shu + v’)r. 
This may be considered as a kinematical equation, since 


it depends on the nature of motion only, and not on that 
of the moving body. 


If we multiply together these two equations we get 
FTs = $m(v?—v?)T ; 
and if we divide by T we find 
Fs = $mv?—4iwv?. 

Now Fs is the work done by the force F acting on the 
body while it moves in the direction of F through a space s. — 
If we also denote 4mz?, the mass of the body multiplied by 
half the square of its velocity, by the expression the kinetic « 
energy of the body, then 4mv’? will be the kinetic energy 
after the action of the force F through a space s. 

We may now express the equation in words by saying 
that the work done by the force F in setting the body in 
motion is measured by the increase of kinetic energy during 
the time that the force acts. 

We have proved that this is true when the interval of time 
during which the force acts is so small that we may consider 
the mean velocity during that time as equal to the arithme- 
tical mean of the velocities at the beginning and end of the 
time. This assumption, which is exactly true when the 
force is uniform, is approximately true in every case when 
the time considered is small enough. 

By dividing the whole time of action ‘of the force into 
small parts, and proving that in each of these the work done 
by the force is equal to the increase of kinetic energy of the _ 
body, we may, by adding the different portions of the work 
and the different increments of energy, arrive at the result _ 
that the total work done by the force is equal to the total 
increase of kinetic energy. 

If the force acts on the body in the direction opposite to” 


_ the motion, the kinetic energy of the body will be diminished — 


00% Elementary Dynamical Principles. 
instead of increased, and the force, instead of doing work on 
the body, will be a resistance which the body in its motion 
overcomes. Hence a moving body can do work in over- 
coming resistance as long as it is in motion, and the work 
done by the moving body is equal to the diminution of its 
kinetic energy, till, when the body is brought to rest, the 
whole work it has done is equal to the whole kinetic energy 
which it had at first. 

We now see the appropriateness of the name kinetic 
energy, which we have hitherto used merely as a name for 
the product 4mz?. For the energy of a body may be 
defined as the capacity which it has of doing work, and is 
measured by the quantity of work which it can do. The 
kinetic energy of a body is the energy which it has in 
virtue of being in motion, and we have just shown that its 

value may be found by multiplying the mass of the body by 
half the square of the velocity. 

In our investigation we have, for the sake of simplicity, 
supposed the force to act in the same direction as the 
motion. ‘To make the proof perfectly general, as it is given 
in treatises on dynamics, we have only to resolve the actual 
force into two parts, one in the direction of the motion and 
the other at right angles to it, and to observe that the part 

"at right angles to the motion can neither do any work on the 
body nor change the velocity or the kinetic energy, so that 
the whole effect, whether of work or of alteration of kinetic 
energy, depends on the part of the force which is in the 
direction of the motion. 

The student, if not familiar with this subject, should refer 
to some treatise on dynamics, and compare the investigation 
there given with the outline of the reasoning given above. 
Our object at present is to fix in our minds what is meant 
by Work and Energy. 

The great importance of giving a name to the quantity 
which we call Kinetic Energy seems to have been first recog- 
nised by Leibnitz, who gave to the product of the mass by 


the square of the velocity the name of Vis 
- twice the kinetic energy. 

‘Newton, in a scholium to his Third Law of Motion, has 
s‘ated the relation between work and kinetic energy in a 
manner so perfect that it cannot be improved, but at the 
same time with so little apparent effort or desire to attract. 
attention that no one seems to have been struck with the 
great importance of the passage till it was pointed out 
recently by Thomson and Tait. 

The use of the term Energy, in a scientific sense, to express 
the quantity of work a body can do, was introduced by Dr. 
Young (‘ Lectures on Natural Philosophy,’ Lecture VIII.). 

The energy of a system of bodies acting on one another 
with forces depending on their relative positions is due partly 
to their motion, and partly to their relative position. 

That part which is due to their motion was called Actual 
Energy by Rankine, and Kinetic Energy by Thomson an 
Tait. 2 

That part which is due to their relative position depends 

upon the work which the various forces would do if the 
‘bodies were to yield to the action of these forces. This is 
called the Sum of the Tensions by Helmholtz, in his cele- 
brated memoir on the ‘ Conservation of Force.’!_ Thomsor. 
called it Statical Energy, and Rankine introduced the term 
Potential Energy, a very felicitous name, since it not only 
signifies the energy which the system has not in possession, 
but only has the power to acquire, but it also indicates that 
it is to be found from what is called (on other grounds) the 
Potential Function. 

Thus when a heavy body has been lifted to a certain 
height above the earth’s surface, the system of two bodies, it 
and the earth, have potential energy equal to the work 


which would be done if the heavy body were allowed to” 


descend till it is stopped by the surface of the earth. 
If the body were allowed to fall freely, it would acquire 


1 Berlin, 1847. Translated in Taylor’s Scientific Memoirs, Feb. 1853. 


Viva. This is. 


vk 


6 ee 
es te ee 
Pie PATNA 


A ae ie 


ee 


ay 


velocity, and the kinetic energy acquire 


; eee re 


d would be exactly 


equal to the potential energy lost in the same time. 


It is proved in treatises on dynamics that if, in any system 


of bodies, the force which acts between any two bodies is in 


the line joining them, and depends only on their distance, 
and not on the way in which they are moving at the time, 
then if no other forces act on the system, the sum of the 
potential and kinetic energy of all the bodies of the system 


will always remain the same. 


This principle is called the Principle of the Conservation 


of Energy ; it is of great importance in all branches of science, - 


and the recent advances in the science of heat have been 
chiefly due to the application of this principle. 
We cannot indeed assume, without evidence of a satis- 


factory nature, that the mutual action between any two parts 


of a real body must always be in the line joining them, and 
must depend only on their distance. We know that this is 


a the case with respect to the attraction of bodies at a distance, 


but we cannot make any such assumption concerning the 
internal forces of bodies of whose internal constitution we 


know next to nothing. 


We cannot even assert that all energy must be either 


Ri . . . ” 
_ potential or kinetic, though we may not be able to conceive 


any other form. Nevertheless, the principle has been de- 


- monstrated by dynamical reasoning to be absolutely true for 


systems fulfilling certain conditions, and it has been proved 


by experiment to be true within the limits of error of obser- 
_ vation, in cases where the energy takes the forms of heat, 
- magnetisation, electrification, &c., so that the following state- 


ment is one which, if we cannot absolutely affirm its neces- 
sary truth, is worthy of being carefully tested, and traced 
into all the conclusions which are implied in it. 


_ GENERAL STATEMENT OF THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY. 


© The total energy of any body or system of bodies is a 


ral fe 


 guantity which can neither be increased nor diminished by any 


oy eat. 


aa 


Se WR ry ee ee eee 


wt? 


4 


; Jap - the forms of which energy ts susceptible,’ 


must be equal to the energy which the system communicates __ 


_and at the end of the cycle, and in particular it has the same 


‘be. increased to any extent, and it can also be destroyed, 


If by the application of mechanical force, heat, or any 
other kind of action to a body, or system of bodies, it is — 
made to pass through any series of changes, and at last to 
return in all respects to its original state, then the energy 
communicated to the system during this cycle of operations — 


to other bodies during the cycle. ; 
For the system is in all respects the same at the beginning _ 


amount of energy in it; and therefore, since no interna] — 
action of the system can either produce or destroy energy, — 
the quantity of energy which enters the system must be 
equal to that which leaves it during the cycle. 

The reason for believing heat not to be a substance 
is that it can be generated, so that the quantity of it may 


though this operation requires certain conditions to be 
fulfilled. 

The reason for believing heat to be a form of energy is 
that heat may be generated by the application of work, and | 
that for every unit of heat which is generated a certain — 
quantity of mechanical energy disappears. Besides, work 
may be done by the action of heat, and for every foot- — 
pound of work so done a certain quantity of heat is put out — 
of existence. 

Now when the appearance of one thing is strictly con- — 
nected with the disappearance of another, so that the 
amount which exists of the one thing depends on and can ~ 
be calculated from the amount of the other which has dis- 
appeared, we conclude that the one has been formed at the 
expense of the other, and that they are both forms of the 
same thing. 

Hence we conclude that heat is energy in a peculiar 
form. The reasons for believing heat as it exists in a hot 


2 Sathya 


Stresses and Strains. 
body to be in the form of kinetic energy—that is, that the 


particles of the hot body are in actual though invisible 
motion—will be discussed afterwards. 


CHAPTER.:¥. 


ON THE MEASUREMENT OF PRESSURE AND OTHER INTERNAL 
FORCES, AND OF THE EFFECTS WHICH THEY PRODUCE. 


Every force acts between two bodies or parts of bodies. 
If we are considering a particular body or system of bodies, 
then those forces which act between bodies belonging to this 
system and bodies not belonging to the system are called 
External Forces, and those which act between the different 
parts of the system itself are called Internal Forces. 

If we now suppose the system to be divided in imagina- 
tion into two parts, we may consider the forces external to 
one of the parts to be, first, those which act between that 
part and bodies external to the system, and, second, those 
which act between the two parts of the system. The com- 
bined effect of these forces is known by the actual motion 
or rest of the part to which they are applied, so that, if we 
know the resultant of the external forces on each part, we 
can find that of the internal forces acting between the two 
parts. 

Thus, if we consider a pillar supporting a statue, and 
imagine the pillar divided into two parts by a horizontal 
plane at any distance from the ground, the internal force 
between the two parts of the pillar may be found by con- 
sidering the weight of the statue and that part of the pillar 
which is above the plane. The lower part of the pillar 
presses on the upper part with a force which exactly counter- 
balances this weight. This force is called a Pressure. 
In the same way we may find the internal force acting 
through any horizontal section of a rope which supports a 


heavy body to be a Tension equal to the weight of the 


# heavy body and of the part of the rope below the imaginary i 
section. Poe: 
The internal force in the pillar is called Longitudinal 
Pressure, and that in the rope is called Longitudinal Tension. ¥ 
If this pressure or tension is uniform over the whole hori- 


zontal section, the amount of it per square inch can be 
found by dividing the whole force by the number of square 
inches in the section. 

The internal forces in a body are called Stresses, and =. 
longitudinal pressure and tension are examples of particular 
kinds of stress. It is shown in treatises on Elasticity that 
the most general kind of stress at any point of a body may 
be represented by three longitudinal pressures or tensionsin 
directions at right angles to each other. i 


For instance, a brick in a wall may support a vertical = 
pressure depending on the height of the wall above it, and a4 
also a horizontal pressure in the direction of the length of = 
the wall, depending on the thrust of an arch abutting against ° we 
the wall, while in the direction perpendicular to the face of 
the wall the pressure is that of the atmosphere. Be: 

In solid bodies, such as a brick, these three pressures may | “@ 
be all independent, their magnitude being limited only by ‘ee 
the strength of the solid, which will break down if the force 
applied to it exceeds a certain amount. BO: 

In fluids, the pressures in all directions must be equal, a 


because the very slightest difference between the pressures ; 
in the three directions is sufficient to set the fluidinmotion. 

The subject of fluid pressure is so important to what => 
follows that I think it worth while, at the risk of repeating = 
what the student ought to know, to state what we mean by Be. 
a fluid, and to show from the definition that he pressures in 
all directions are equal. 

DEFINITION OF A FLUID.—A fluid ts a body the contiguous 
parts of which act on one another with a pressure which is 
perpendicular to the surface which separates those parts, 


Since the pressure is entirely perpendicular to the sur- 


face, there can be no friction between the parts of a fluid 
in contact. 

Theorem.—The pressures in any two directions at a point 
of a fluid are equal. For, let the plane 
of the paper be that of the two given 
directions, and draw an isosceles triangle 
whose sides are perpendicular to the two 

‘3 directions respectively, and consider the 
equilibrium of a small triangular prism 

R of which this triangle is the base. Let 

P Q be the pressures perpendicular to the sides, and R 


Fic. 8. 
Q 


_ that perpendicular to the base. Then, since these three 


forces are in equilibrium, and since R makes equal angles 
with P and Q, Pp and Q must be equal. But the forces on 
which Pp and Q act are also equal; therefore the pressures 
referred to unit of area on these forces are equal, which was 
to be proved. 

A great many substances may be found which perfectly 
fulfil this definition of a fluid when they are at rest, and they 
are theréfore called fluids. But no existing fluid fulfils the 
definition when it is in motion. Ina fluid in motion the 
pressures at a point may be greater in one direction than 
in another, or, what is the same thing, the force between 
two parts may not be perpendicular to the surface which 
separates those parts. 

If a fluid could be found which fulfilled the definition 
when in motion as well as when at rest, it would be called a 
Perfect Fluid. All actual fluids are imperfect, and exhibit 
the phenomenon of internal friction or viscosity, by which 
their motion after being stirred about in a vessel is gradually 
stopped, and the energy of the motion is converted into 
heat. 

The degree of viscosity varies from that of tar to that of 
water, or ether, or hydrogen gas, but no actual fluid is perfect 
in the sense of the definition when in motion. 


‘Sota, We wihelams hd Wen EA. ee ck MAT age NG Rea UM pIToO Comm ny eating yon 
yes meee > ANS t aon Rea saci af bai Rita ae oe tks 


a 


Pressure in a Fluid. 97 


The pressure af any point of a fluid is the ratio of the 
whole pressure on a small surface to the area of that surface 
when the area of the surface is made to diminish indefinitely, 
but so that the centre of gravity of the surface always coincides 
with the given point. 

This pressure is sometimes called hydrostatic pressure, to 
distinguish it from longitudinal pressure. Both kinds of 
pressure are measured by the number of units of force in the 
pressure on unit of area ; for instance, in pounds’ weight on 
the square inch or square foot, and in kilogrammes’ weight 
on the square métre. Both these measures are gravitation 
measures, and must be multiplied by the value of the inten- 
sity of gravity to reduce them to absolute measures. 

Pressures are also measured in terms of the height of a 
column of water or of mercury, which would produce by its 
weight an equal pressure. Thus a pressure of 16 feet of 
water is nearly equal to 1,000 pounds’ weight on the square 
foot, and a pressure of 4 inches of water is more nearly equal 
to 101 grains’ weight on the square inch, 

In the metrical system the pressure of water on a surface 
at any depth is expressed by the product of the depth into 
the area of the surface. If we employ the métre as the 
measure of length, the pressure will be expressed in tonnes’ 
weight, but if we use the decimétre, centimétre, or millimetre, 
the pressure will be expressed in kilogrammes, grammes, 
or milligrammes respectively, in gravitation measure. 

The density of mercury at o° C. is 13°596 times that of 
water at 4°C. Hence the pressure due to a given depth of 
mercury is about 13°6 times that of an equal depth of water. 

The Barometer.—The pressure of the air is generally 
measured by means of the mercurial barometer. This baro- 
meter consists of a glass tube closed at one end and filled 
with mercury, from which all air and moisture are expelled 
by boiling it in the tube. The tube is then placed with its 
open end in a vessel of mercury, and its closed end raised 
till the tube is vertical The mercury is found to stand at 

H 


Bir BEER HE Se Dee EP EI NRO ce IMR A ir eS ee 
; : : $ 4 ores ag ON! SP ene ay pages Se 
ee += VOUS EL) Sat aes 


ree 


98 Stresses and Strains. 


a certain level in the tube, the height of which above the 
level of the mercury in the vessel or cistern is called the 
height of the barometer. 

The surface of the mercury in the cistern is exposed to 
the pressure of the air, while the surface of the mercury in 
the tube is exposed only to the pressure of whatever is in 
the tube above it. The only known substance which can 
be there is the vapour of mercury, the pressure of which at 
ordinary temperatures is so small that it may be neglected, 
so that the pressure of the air may be measured by that 
due to the difference of level of the mercury in the tube 
and in the cistern. 

The pressure of the atmosphere is, as we know, very 
variable, and is different in different places ; but for various 
purposes it is convenient to use, as a large unit of pressure, 
a pressure not very different from the average atmospheric 
pressure at the mean level of the sea. This unit of pressure 
is called an atmosphere, and is used in measuring pressures 
in steam-engines and boilers. Its exact value in the metrical 
system is the pressure due to a depth of 760 millimétres of 
mercury at o°® C. at Paris, where the force of gravity is 
980868 métres. This is equal to 1°033 kilogrammes’ weight 
on the square centimétre. In absolute measure it is equal 
to 1,013,237, the gramme, the centimétre, and the second 
being the fundamental units. 

In the British system an atmosphere is defined as the 
pressure due to a depth of 29°905 inches of mercury at 
32° F. at London, where the force of gravity is 32°1889 feet, 
and is, roughly, 14 pounds’ weight on the square inch. It is 
therefore 0°99968 of the atmosphere of the metrical system. 


ON THE ALTERATION OF THE DIMENSIONS AND VOLUME 
OF BODIES BY MECHANICAL FORCES AND BY HEAT. 


We have seen that effects of the same kind in changing 
the form or volume of bodies are produced by mechanical 
force and by heat. We cannot therefore fully understand 


Strains. 


the effects of heat alone on these bodies without at the same 
time considering those of mechanical force. 

We have first to explain, from a purely geometrical point 
of view, the various kinds of change of form of which a body 
is capable, considering only those cases in which every part 
of the body undergoes a similar change of form. We shall 
use the word strain to express generally any alteration of 
form of a body. 

Longitudinal Strain.—Suppose the body to be elongated 
or compressed in one direction only, so that if two points 
in the body lie in a line parallel to this direction, their 
distance will be increased or diminished in a certain ratio, 
but if the line joining the points be perpendicular to this 
direction the length of the line will not be altered. 

This is called longitudinal extension or compression, or 
more generally longitudinal strain, and is measured by the 
fraction of its original length by which any longitudinal line 
in the body is elongated or contracted. 

General Strain.—Such an alteration of the form of the 
body may take place simultaneously or successively in 
three directions at right angles to each other. -This system 
of three longitudinal strains is shown in treatises on the 
motion of continuous bodies to be the most general kind of 
strain of which a body is capable. 

We shall, however, only consider two cases in particular. 

1st. Jsotropic Strain—When the strains in the three 
directions at right angles to each other are all equal, the 
form of the body remains similar to itself, and it expands 
or contracts equally in all directions, as most solid bodies do 
when heated. ; 

Since each of the three longitudinal strains of which this 
strain is compounded increases or diminishes the volume 
by a fraction of itself equal to the value of the longitudinal 
strain, it follows that when each of the strains is a -very small 
fraction, the total increment of volume is: equal to the 


original volume multiplied by the sum of-the three strains. 
H2 


100 Stresses and Strains. 


The ratio of the increment of volume to the original volume 
is called the cubical expansion when positive, or the cubical 
contraction when negative, and it appears, from what we 
have said, that when the strains are small the cubical expansion 
is equal to the sum of the longitudinal extensions, or, when 
these are equal, to three times the longitudinal extenvion. 

2nd. Shearing Strain.—The other particular case is when 
the dimensions of the body are extended in one direction in 
the ratio of a to 1, and contracted in a perpendicular direc- 
tion in the ratio of 1 toa. In this case there is no altera- 
tion of volume, but the body is distorted. 


WORK DONE BY A STRESS ON A BODY WHOSE FORM IS 
CHANGING OR IS UNDERGOING A STRAIN. 


We shall in the first place suppose that the stress con- 
tinues constant during the change of form which we consider. 
If during a considerable change of form the stress undergoes 
considerable change, we may divide the whole operation into 
parts, during each of which we may regard the stress as 
constant, and find the total work by summation. 

The general rule is that, if the stress and the strain are of 
the same type, the work done on unit of volume during any 
strain is the product of the strain into the average value of 
the stress. 

If, however, the stress be of a type conjugate to the strain, 
no work is done. | 

Thus, if the stress be a longitudinal one, we must multiply | 
the average value of the stress by the longitudinal strain in , 
the same direction, and the result is not affected by the 
magnitude of the longitudinal strains in directions at right 
angles to the stress. 

If the stress be a hydrostatic pressure, we must multiply 
the average value of this pressure by the cubical compression 
to find the work done on. the body per unit of volume, and 
the result is not affected by any strain of distortion which 
does not change the volume of the body. 


4 
4 
; 


| its volume is’ diminished is equal to the product of the 


Mace the work: dotie by external forsee on a fluid when 


average pressure into the diminution of volume, and if 
the fluid expands and overcomes the resistance of external 
forces, the work done by the fluid is measured by the pro- 
duct of the increase of volume, into the average pressure 
during that increase. 

The consideration of the work gained or lost during the 
change of volume of a fluid is so important that we shall 
calculate it from the beginning. 


WORK DONE BY A PISTON ON A FLUID. 


Let us suppose that the fluid is in communication with a 
cylinder in which a piston is free Fic. 9. 
to slide. 

Let the area of the face of the 
piston be denoted by a. 

Let the pressure of the fluid 
He denoted by 7’ on unit of atea, 

Then the whole pressure of the fluid on the face of the 
piston will be a/, and if Pp is the external force which keeps 
the piston in equilibrium, P = ag. Now let the piston be 
pressed inwards against the fluid through a distance +. 
The volume of the cylinder occupied by the fluid will be 
diminished by a volume v = aa, because the volume of a 
cylinder is equal to the area of its base multiplied by its 
height. 

If the force P continues uniform, or if P is the average 
value of the external force during this motion, the work 
done by the external force will be w = px. 

If we put for P its value in terms of J, the at of the 
fluid per unit of area, this becomes 


= Apx ; 


and if we remember that ax is equal to v, this becomes 


w = Vf, 


er the work done by the piston against the fluid is equal to 


the diminution of the volume of the fluid multiplied by the 
average value of the hydrostatic pressure. 


It will be observed that this result is independent of the 
area of the piston, and of the form and capacity of the 


vessel with which the cylinder communicates. 

If, for convenience, we suppose that the area of the piston 
is unity, then putting A ='1 we shall have P = gp andv = 4, 
so that the linear distance travelled by the piston is nu- 
merically equal to the volume displaced. 


ON INDICATOR DIAGRAMS, . 


I shall now describe a 
method of studying the action 
of a fluid of variable volume, 
which was invented by James 


the steam-engine, and of which 
the construction has been 
gradually perfected, till it is 
» how capable of tracing every 


16) a b c 


in the most rapidly working engines. 

At present, however, I shall use this method as a means 
of explaining and representing to the eye the working of a 
fluid. This use of the indicator diagram, which was intro- 
duced by Clapeyron, has been greatly saa by eg: 
in his work on the steam-engine. 

Let 0 v be a horizontal straight line, and of a vernal 
line. On 0 v (which we shall call the line of volumes) take 
distances 0 a, 0 6, 0 ¢ to represent the volume occupied by 


the fluid at different times, and at @ dc erect perpendiculars 


@A, OB, CC, representing, on a convenient scale, the pressure 
of the fluid at these different times. 


Watt, as a practical method of | 
determining the work done by 


part of the action of the steam | 


(For instance, we may suppose that, in the scale of volumes, 
one inch, measured horizontally, represents a volume equal > 
to a cubic foot ; and that in the scale of pressures, one inch, 
measured vertically, represents a pressure of 1,000 pounds’ 

_ weight on the square foot.) 

Let us now suppose that the volume increases from 0 @ 
to o 4, while the pressure remains constant, so that a A= 0B. 

Then the increase of volume is measured by a 4, and the ea: 
pressure which is overcome by the expansion of the fluid by Fe 
@ A or 6B, so that the work done by the fluid is represented a 
by the product of these quantities, or a 4, a A, that is, the Be 
area of the rectangle a a d B. os 

On the scale which we have assumed, every square inch 
of the area of the figure a B 4 a represents 1,000 foot-pounds 
of work. 

We have supposed the pressure to remain constant during 
the change of volume. If this is not the case, but if the ; 
pressure changes from 4 B to ¢c, while the volume changes 3 
from 04 to o«, then if we take 4c small enough, we may 
suppose the pressure to change uniformly from the one 
value to the other, so that we may take the mean value of 
the pressure to be 4(8 6 + cc). Multiplying this by <¢, 
we get $(8 6 + cc) b<¢, which is the well-known expression 
for the area of the strip B ccd, supposing BC a straight 
line. 

The work done by the fluid is therefore still equal to the 
area enclosed by Bc, the two vertical lines from its extre- 
mities, and the horizontal line o v. 

In general, if the volume and pressure of the fluid are made 
to vary in any manner whatever, and if a point Pp be made at 
the same time to move so that its horizontal distance from the 
line 0 f represents the volume which the fluid occupies at 
_ that instant, while its vertical distance from ov represents 
the hydrostatic pressure of the fluid at the same instant, and as 
if, at the beginning and end of the path traced by P, vertical ‘a 
lines be drawn to meet 0 7, then, if the path of P does not pe! 


<a 


Sos 
vo | 


se SA " : . 
Se se ere 
ee Se Ae we ee ee 


ge a 


104 Stresses and Strains. 


intersect itself, the area between these boundaries represents 


the work done by the fluid against external forces, if it 
lies on the right-hand side of the path of the tracing 
point. If the area lies on the left-hand side of the path, it 
represents the work done by the external forces on the 
fluid. 

If the path of P returns into itself so as to form a loop or 


Fic. rm, 


Poe | ‘3 


Richards’s Indicator. 


closed figure, then the vertical lines at the beginning and end 
of the path will coincide, so that it is unnecessary to draw 
them, and the work will be represented by the area of the 
loop itself. If P in its circuit goes round the loop in the 
direction of the hands of a watch, then the area represents 
the work done by the fluid against external forces ; but if P 
goes round the loop in the opposite direction, the area of 


the loop represents the work done by the external forces on 
the fluid. 

In the indicator as constructed by Watt and improved by 
McNaught and Richards, the steam or other fluid is put in 
connection with a small cylinder containing a piston. When 
the fluid presses this piston and raises it, the piston presses 
against a spiral spring, so constructed that the distance 
through which the spring is compressed is proportional 
to the pressure on the piston. In this way the height of the 
piston of the indicator is at all times a measure of the pressure 
of the fluid. 

The piston also carries a pencil, the point of which presses 
lightly against a sheet of paper which is wrapped round a 
vertical cylinder capable of turning round its axis. 

This cylinder is connected with the working piston of the 
engine, or with some part of the engine which moves along 
with the piston, in such a way that the angle through which 
the cylinder turns is always proportional to the distance 
through which the working piston has moved. 

If the indicator is not connected with the steam pipe, 
the cylinder will turn beneath the point of the pencil, and 
a horizontal line will be drawn on the paper. This line 
corresponds to 0 v, and is called the line of no pressure. 

But if the steam be admitted below the indicator piston, 
the pencil will move up and down, while the paper moves 
horizontally beneath it, and the combined motion will trace 
out a line on the paper, which is called an indicator diagram. 

When the engine works regularly, so that each stroke is 
similar to the last, the pencil will trace out the same curve 
at every stroke, and by examining this curve we may learn 
much about the action of the engine. In particular, the area 
of the curve represents the amount of work done by the 
steam at each stroke of the engine. 

If the indicator had been connected with a pump, in 
which the external forces do work on the fluid, the tracing 
point would move in the opposite direction round the 


Re Sy a ee al ee Ss ee re 


<, 
Sali I ere 


fe diagram, and its area would indicate the amount of work 


__. done on the fluid during the stroke. 


by the pressure on the piston, and have not been concerned 

with the cause of the alteration of volume of the fluid. The 
- increase of volume may, for anything we know, arise from 
aD an additional supply being introduced into the cylinder, as 
when steam is introduced from the boiler, and the dimi- 
nution of volume may arise from the escape of the fluid 
from the cylinder. 

As we are now going to use the diagram for the purpose 
of explaining the properties of bodies when acted on by heat 
and by mechanical force, we shall suppose that the body, 
whether fluid or partly solid, is placed in a cylinder with 


distance of the piston from the closed end of the cylinder. 

If at any instant the volume 
of the body is v and its pres- 
sure ~, we represent this fact 
by means of the point P in the 


Fic. 12. 


the line of volumes to repre- 
sent v, and L P vertical to re- 
present 7. 


a point in the diagram may be 
made to indicate the volume 
and the pressure of a body at 
any instant. 

Now let the pressure be increased, the temperature re- 
maining the same, then the volume of the fluid will be 
diminished. (It is manifest that an increase of pressure can 
never produce an increase of volume, for in that case the 
force would produce a motion in the contrary direction to 
that in which it acts, and we should have a source of inex- 
-haustible energy.) 


Hitherto we have confined our attention to the work done _ 


one end closed, and that its volume is measured by the 


diagrain, drawing o L along | 


In this way the position of | 


oe Leb 


the pressure, therefore, increase from 0 F to 0 G, and 
let the consequent diminution of volume be from o L to 
oO M, and complete the rectangle 0 G Q M. 

Then the point p indicates the original and Q the final 
condition of the fluid with respect to pressure and volume, 
and all the intermediate states of the fluid will be repre- 
sented by points in a line, straight or curved, which joins P 
and Q. 

The work done by the pressure on the fluid is represented 
by the area of the figure P Q M L, which is on the left hand 
of the tracing point as it moves along P Q. 

If pF and QM intersect in R, then P R represents the 
actual diminution of volume, and R Q the actual increase of 
pressure. The actual volume is represented by F P, so that 
the cubical compression is represented by the ratio of PR 
to FP. 

DEFINITION OF THE ELASTICITY OF A FLuIp.—TZhe 
elasticity of a fluid under any given conditions tis the ratio 
of any small increase of pressure to the cubical compression 
thereby produced. 

Since the cubical compression is a numerical quantity, 
the elasticity is a quantity of the same kind as a pressure. 

To express the elasticity of the fluid by means of the 
diagram, join P Q by a straight line, and produce it till it 
meets the vertical line 0 g in E ; then F E is a pressure equal 
to the elasticity of the fluid in the state represented by pP, 
and under conditions which cause its state to vary in a 
manner represented by the line P qQ. 

For it is plain that F E is to R Q in the ratio of P F to PR, 
ee se Oe CTEMENt OF pressure * press elasticity. 

PR cubical compression 
PF 

Hence if the relation between the volume and the pres- 
sure of a fluid under certain conditions, as for instance ata 
given temperature, is represented by a curve traced out by P, 
the elasticity of the fluid when in the state represented by p 


ee Me Gr a ¢ “ : oo bah 
Se a A TS kee’ a ee oe eee ed 


wiki HHH ab iti Sol i, 


108 Isothermal Curves. 
may be found. by drawing PE a tangent to the curve at P, 
and p F a horizontal line. The portion F £ of the vertical 
line o £ cut off between these lines represents, on the scale 
of pressures, the elasticity of the fluid. 

We have hitherto supposed that the temperature of the 
body remains the same during its compression from the 
volume P F to the volume Qc. This is the most common 
supposition when the elasticity of a fluid is to be measured. 
But in most bodies a compression produces a rise of tempe- 

"7 rature, and if the heat is not allowed to escape, the effect of 
this will be to make the increment of pressure greater than 
in the case of constant temperature. Hence every substance 
has two elasticities, one corresponding to constant tempera- 
ture, and the other corresponding to the case where no heat 
is allowed to escape. The first value 1s applicable to stresses 
and strains which are long continued, so that the substance 
acquires the temperature of surrounding bodies. The 
second value is applicable to the case of rapidly changing 
forces, as in the case of the vibrations of bodies which 
produce sounds, in which there is not time for the tempe- 
rature to be equalised by conduction. The elasticity in 
these cases is always greater than in the case of uniform 
temperature. 


CHAPTER. V1. 


ON LINES OF EQUAL TEMPERATURE, OR ISOTHERMAL LINES 
ON THE INDICATOR DIAGRAM. 


Ir the pressure is made to vary while the temperature re- 
mains constant, the volume will diminish as the pressure 
increases, and the point P will trace out a line in the diagram 
which is called a line of equal temperature, or an isothermal 
line. By means of this line we can show the whole behaviour 


Their Construction. 


of the substance under various pressures at that particular 
temperature. 

By making experiments on the substance at other tem- 
peratures, and drawing the isothermal lines belonging to 
these temperatures, we can express all the relations between 
the pressure, volume, and temperature of the substance. 

In the diagram, each isothermal line should be marked 
with the temperature to which it corresponds in degrees, 
and the lines should be drawn for every degree, or for every 
ten or every hundred degrees, according to the purpose for 
which the diagram is intended. 

When the volume and the pressure are known, the 
temperature is a determinate quantity, and it is easy to see 
how from any two of these three quantities we can deter- 
mine the third. Thus if the curved lines in the diagram 
are the lines of equal temperature, the temperature cor- 
responding to each being indicated by the numeral at the 
end of the line, we can solve three problems by means of 
this diagram. 

1. Given the pressure and the volume, to find the tempe- 
rature. 

Lay off 0 L on the line of volumes to represent the given 
volume, and o F on the line of pressures to represent the 
given pressure, then draw F P horizontal and tL P vertical, to 
determine the point p. If the point P falls on one of the 
lines of equal temperature, the numeral attached to that line 
indicates the temperature. If the point P falls between two 
of the lines, we must estimate its distance from the two 
nearest lines, and then as the sum of these distances is to the 
distance from the lower line of temperature, so is the dif- 
ference of temperature of the two lines to the excess of the 
true temperature above that of the lower line. 

2. Given the volume and temperature to find the pres- 
sure. 

Lay off 0 L to represent the volume and draw L P vertical, 


and let P be. the point where this line cuts the line of the. 


A e. i C 
li em) - re 
ee a 


“109 


given temperature. 

pressure. ae 
3. Given the pressure and temperature, to find the = 
volume. Mt. 


te) L 


Lay off o F to represent the pressure and draw F P hori- | 
zontal till it meets the line of the given temperature in p, — 
then F P represents the required volume. 


ON THE FORM OF THE ISOTHERMAL CURVES IN DIFFERENT 
CASES, i 


The Gaseous State. 


If the substance is in the gaseous state, as common air is 
at every pressure and temperature to which we have been 
able to subject it, then it is easy to draw the isothermal 
curves by taking account of the laws of Boyle and Charles. 
ouy Boyle's law the product of the volume and the pres’ 


Their Characteristics. ITY: 
sure is aiways the same for the same temperature. Hence, 
in the curve, the area of the rectangle 0 L P F will be the 
same provided Pp be a point in the same isothermal curve. 

The curve which has this property is known in geometry 
by the name of the rectangular hyperbola, the lines 0 v and 
0 p being the asymptotes of the hyperbolas in fig. 13. The 
asymptotes are lines such that a point travelling along the 
curve in either direction continually approaches one or 
other of the asymptotes, but never reaches it. The physical 
interpretation of this is that if a gas fulfils Boyle’s law, and 
if the temperature remain the same— © 

1. Suppose we travel along the curve in the direction 
leading toward o #, that is to say, suppose the pressure 
is gradually increased, then the volume will continually 
diminish, but always slower and slower; for, however much 
we increase the pressure, we can never reduce the volume to 
nothing, so that the isothermal line will never reach the line 
o f, though it continually approaches it. At the same time, 
if Boyle’s law is fulfilled we can always, by doubling the 
pressure, reduce the volume to one half, so that by a suffi- 
cient increase of pressure the volume may be reduced till it 
is smaller than any prescribed quantity. 

2. Suppose we travel in the other direction along the 
curve, that is to say, suppose we increase the volume of the 


vessel which contains the gas, then the point # approaches 


nearer and nearer to the line o v, but never actually reaches: 
it. This shows that the gas will always expand so as to fill 
the vessel, and press upon it with a force represented by the 
distance from o v, and this pressure, though it diminishes as’ 
the vessel is enlarged, will never be reduced to nothing, 
however large the vessel may become. 

Elasticity of a Perfect Gas.—Another property of the 
hyperbola is that if p & be drawn a tangent to the curve, 
at P till it meets the asymptote, FE =o Fr. Now FeE-: 
represents the elasticity of the substance, and o F the pres- 
sure. Hence the elasticity of a perfect gas is numerically” 


112 . Isothermal Curves. 


equal to the pressure, when the temperature is supposed to 
remain constant during the compression. 


The Liquid State. 


In most liquids, the compression produced by the pres- 
sures which we are able to apply is exceedingly small. In 
the case of water, for example, under ordinary circumstances 
as sto temperature, the application of a pressure equal to one 
atmosphere produces a compression of about 46 millionth 
parts of the volume, or 0o'000046. Hence in drawing an 
indicator diagram for a liquid we must represent changes of 
volume on a much larger scale than in the case of gases, if 
the diagram is to have any visible features at all. The 
most. convenient way is to suppose the line 0.L to represent, 
not the whole volume, but the excess of the volume above a 
thousand or a million of the units we employ. 

It is manifest that the relation between the pressure and 
the volume of any substance must be such that no pressure, 
however great, can reduce the volume to nothing. Hence 
the isothermal lines cannot be straight lines, for a straight 
line, however slightly inclined to the line of no volumes 0 F, 
and however distant from it, must cut that line somewhere. 
The limited range of pressures which we are able to produce 
does not in some cases cause sufficient change of volume to 
indicate the curvature of the isothermal lines. We may 
suppose that for the small portion we are able to observe 
they are nearly straight lines. 

The expansion due to an increase of temperature is also 
much smaller in the case of liquids than in the case of 
gases. 

lf, therefore, we were to draw the indicator diagram of a 
liquid on the same scale as that of a gas, the isothermal 
lines would consist of a number of lines very close together, 
nearly vertical, but very slightly inclined towards the line o F. 

If, however, we retain the scale of pressures and greatly 
magnify the scale of volumes, the isothermal lines will be © 


aturated Vapour. 


_ more inclined to the vertical and wider apart, but still very — 
nearly straight lines. Liquids, however, which are near the 
critical point described at the end of this chapter are more 
compressible than even a gas. 


The Solid State. 


In solid bodies the compressibility and the expansion by 
heat are in general smaller than in liquids. Their indicator. 
diagrams will therefore have the same general characteristics 
as those of liquids. 


INDICATOR DIAGRAM OF A SUBSTANCE PART OF WHICH 
IS LIQUID AND PART VAPOUR. 


Let us suppose that a pound of water is placed in a vessel 
and brought to a given temperature, say 212°’F., and that 
by means of a piston the capacity of the vessel is made 
larger or smaller, the temperature remaining the same. If 


we suppose the vessel to be originally very large, say 100 cubic" 


feet, and to be maintained at 212° F., then the whole of the 
water will be converted into steam, which will fill the vessel 
and will exert on it a pressure of about 575 pounds’ weight 
on the square foot. If we now press down the piston, and 
so cause the capacity of the vessel to diminish, the pressure 
will increase nearly in the same proportion as the volume 
diminishes, so that the product of the numbers representing 
the pressure and volume will be nearly constant. When, 
however, the volume is considerably diminished, this product 
begins to diminish, that is to say, the pressure does not in- 
crease so fast as it ought to do by Boyle’s law if the steam 
were a perfect gas. In the diagram, fig. 14, p. 114, the 
relations between the pressure and volume of steam at 212° 
are indicated by the curve a 4. ‘The pressure in atmo- 
spheres is marked on the right hand of the diagram, and the 
volume of one pound, in cubic feet, at the bottom. 

When the volume is diminished to 26°36 cubic feet the 
I 


s 


Isothermal Curves. 


114 


Fic. 14 


ssoroydsounny 


—a ee 


257° 


. 
‘ 
* 
. 
. 
* 
*s. 


y 
‘ 
. 
. 
. 
ry 
* 
. 
— 


° 


/ | 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


22) jJ~-— — — — ——— — — 


Page a SS se, 


0 
= 


50 


30 
Cubic feet. 


Tsothermals for Steam and Water. 


Io 


Water and Steam. 115 


pressure is 2,116 lb., so that the product of the volume 
and pressure, instead of 57,500, is now reduced to 55,770. 
This departure from the law of Boyle, though not very large, 


is quite decided. The pressure and volume of the steam in - 


this state are indicated by the point 2 in the diagram. 

If we now diminish the volume and still maintain the 
same temperature, the pressure will no longer increase, but 
part of the steam will be converted into water ; and as the 
volume continues to diminish, more and more of the steam 
will be condensed into the liquid form, while the pressure 
remains exactly the same, namely, 2,116 pounds’ weight on 
the square foot, or one atmosphere. This is indicated by 
the horizontal line 4 ¢ in the diagram. 

This pressure will continue the same till all the steam is 
condensed into water at 212°, the volume of which will be 
0'016 of a cubic foot, a quantity too small to be represented 
clearly in the diagram. 

As soon as the volume, therefore, is reduced to this value 
there will be no more steam to condense, and any further 
reduction of volume is resisted by the elasticity of water, 
which, as we have seen, is very large compared with that of 
a gas. 

We are now able to trace the isothermal line for water 
corresponding to the temperature 212°. When v is very 
great the curve is nearly of the form of an hyperbola for 
which v P = 57,500. As v diminishes, the curve falls slightly 
below the hyperbola, so that when v = 26°36, v P = 55,770. 
Here, however, the line suddenly and completely alters its 
character, and becomes the horizontal straight line 4 ¢, for 
which P = 2,116, and this straight line extends from 
V = 26°36 to v = 0'016, when another equally sudden 
change takes place, and the line, from being exactly horizon- 
tal, becomes nearly but not quite vertical, nearly in the 
direction ¢ f, for tlie pressure must be increased beyond 
the limits of our experimental methods long before any 


very considerable change is made in the volume of the water. 
12 


RAS REY Op ee fee ik Gee Te FR 
. ee! , * he AS jo GPE. 


rs 
116" Tsothermal Curves. 


The isothermal line in a case of this kind consists of three 
parts: Inthe first part, 2d, it resembles the isothermal lines of a 
perfect gas, but as the volume diminishes the pressure begins 
to be somewhat less than it should be by Boyle’s law. ‘This- 
however, is only when the line approaches the second part 
of its course, 4c, in which it is accurately horizontal. This part: 
corresponds to a state in which the substance exists partly~ 
in. the liquid and partly in the gaseous state, and it extends= 
from the volume of the gas to the volume of the liquid at 
the-same temperature and pressure. The third part of the 
isothermal line is that: corresponding to the liquid state of | 
the substance, and it may be considered as a line which on 
the. scale. of our diagrams would be very nearly vertical, 
and so near to the line'c # that it cannot. be distinguished 
from it. 

Tn the: diagram, fig. 14, the isothermal line of water for 
the temperature: 212° F., the ordinary boiling point, is re- 
presented by a &c p, and that for 302° F. by de fp. 

At the temperature of 302° F. the pressure at which con- 
densation: takes. place is much greater, being 9,966 pounds’ 
weight: on the square foot; and the volume to which the= 
steam: is- reduced before condensation begins is much 
smaller, being 6°153 cubic feet. This is indicated by the 
pointe. At. this. point the product v Pp is 61,321, which is 
considerably less than 65,209, its value when the volume is 
very great. 

At this: point condensation begins and goes on till the 
whole steam is condensed into water at 302° F., the volume 
of which is o'o166. cubic feet. This volume is somewhat 
greater than the volume of the same water at 212° F. 

It- appears, therefore, that as the temperature rises the 
pressure: at: which: condensation occurs is greater. It also 


appears'that the. diminution of volume when condensation — 


takes: place is:less: than at low temperatures, and this for 
two reasons.. The: first: is, thaty the: steam must be reduced 
to a smaller volume. before condensation. begins; and the 


a ie ak ein eel ae 


greater. 


a ib ‘that the volume of the Se liquid when spuitigncsade is 


The dotted line in the diagram indicates the pressures 
sand the volumes at which condensation begins ‘at the 


. ~various temperatures marked on the horizontal parts of the 


_ “isothermal lines. 
i 


‘When the pressure and volume are those indicated by — 
“points above or on the right hand of this curve the whole ~ 
“substance is in the gaseous state. We may call this line the 
steam line. It is not an isothermal line. 

If the scale of the diagram had been large enough to have 
-represented the volume of ‘the condensed water, we-should 

have had another dotted line near the line 0 J, such that for 
‘points on the left hand of this line the whole substance is in 
‘the liquid state. We may call this the water lime. or 
conditions of pressure and volume indicated by points 
between the two dotted lines, the substance is partly in the 
liquid and partly in the gaseous state. If we draw a hori- 
zontal line through the given point ‘till it meets the two 
dotted lines, then the weight of steam is to the weight of 
water as the segment between the point and the water line 
‘is to the segment between the point and the:steam line. In 
“the lower part of the diagram for carbonic acid, fig. 25, _ 
‘p. 120, the isothermal lines are seen to consist of a‘curved _ 
‘portion on the aight hand representing the gaseous 


«state, a horizontal portion representing the process of con- 


»densation, and a nearly vertical -portion ‘representing 
“the liquid state. ‘The right-hand branch of ‘the dotted — 
line, which we must here call the gas line, corresponds — 
=to the steam line ; and the left-hand branch, or liquid line, 


“ecorresponds to the-water line, which was not disfinguish- 


sable in fig. 14. 


Since these two lines, which we have called the steam line 


«and the water line, continually approach each other asthe 


_ temperature is raised, the question naturally arises, Do they — 


“ever meet? ‘The peculiarity of the conditions indicated by 


_ i uh 


paints between these sinks is that the liquid. and its vapour 
can exist together under the same conditions as to tempera- 
ture and pressure without the vapour being liquefied or the 
liquid evaporated. Outside of this region the substance 
must be either all vapour or all liquid. I 
If the two lines meet, then at the pressure indicated by 
the point of meeting there is no temperature at which the ~ 
substance can exist partly as a liquid and partly as a vapour, 
but the substance must either be entirely converted from _ 
the state of vapour into the state of liquid at once and with- | 
out condensation, or, since in this ‘case the liquid and the — 
vapour have the same density, it may be suspected that the 
distinctions we have been accustomed to draw between 
liquids and vapours have lost their meaning. 
The answer to this question has been to a great extent 
supplied by a series of very interesting researches. ; 
In 1822 M. Cagniard de la Tour! observed the effect of 
a high temperature upon liquids enclosed in glass tubes of a 
capacity not much greater than that of the liquiditself. He 
found that when the temperature was raised to a certain 
point, the substance, which till then was partly liquid and 
partly gaseous, suddenly became uniform in appearance 
throughout, without any visible surface of separation, or any 
evidence that the substance in the tube was partly in one 
state and partly in another. 
He concluded that at this temperature the whole became ~ 
gaseous. The true conclusion, as Dr. Andrews has shown, is _ e 
that the properties of the liquid and those of the vapour 
continually approach to similarity, and that, above a certain 
temperature, the properties of the liquid are not separated 
from those of the vapour by any apparent distinction be- 
tween them. a 
In 1823, the year following the researches of Cagniard o. 
de la Tour, Faraday succeeded in liquefying several bodies _ 
hitherto known only in the gaseous form, by pressure alone, a 


1 Annales de Chimte, 2"* série, xxi. et xxii. 


=F 


> effects of ‘aupersture sad pressure on gases. He ee a 
_ that above .a certain temperature, which, in the language of 
_ Dr. Andrews, we may call the critical temperature for the 
c substance, no amount of pressure will produce the pheno- 
- menon which we call condensation, and he supposes that the — 
temperature of 166° F. below zero is probably above the — 
Critical temperature for oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen. . 
Dr. Andrews has examined carbonic acid ,under varied — 
conditions ef temperature and pressure, in order to ascertain — 
-, the relations of the liquid and gaseous states, and has — 
arrived at the conclusion that the gaseous and liquid states — 
; are only widely separated forms of the same condition of — 
q matter, and may be made to pass one into the other with- 
a out any interruption or breach of continuity.! 
Carbonic acid is a substance which at ordinary tempera- a 
tures and pressures is known as a gas. The measurements 
of Regnault and others show that as the pressure increases 
the volume diminishes faster than that of a gas which obeys 
the law of Boyle, and that as the temperature rises the ex- 
pansion is greater than that assigned by the law of Charles. 
The isothermal lines of the diagram of carbonic acid at 
ordinary temperatures and pressures are therefore somewhat 
flatter and also somewhat wider apart than those of thee 
more perfect gases. 
The se a (p. 120) for carbonic acid is diken from Dr. 


ee aT ee ee 
pa > : Soe . 
4 


asa ‘Tiguid j in presence of its vapour. The base line of the | * 
diagram corresponds, not to zero pressure, but to a pressure — 
of 47 atmospheres. 
The lowest of the isothermal lines is that of 13°°1 C. or 
55°°6 F. 
This line shows that at a pressure of about 47 atméepienal 
condensation occurs. The substance is seen to become — 


°) Phil. Trans. 1869; p.575: 


Isothermal Curves. 


120 


Fic. 15. 


/ 
- 
2 
: 
. 
: 
‘ 
: 
. 
. 
‘ 


Pod 


Isothermals of Carbonic Acid. 


eee 


_ properties not differing greatly from those of cold water. 


"separated i into bo dintindt portions, the upper portion elke 
in the state of vapour or gas, and the lower in the state of 


liquid. The upper surface of the liquid can be distinctly 
‘seen, and where this.surface is close to the sides of the glass 
containing the substance it is seen to be curved, as the 
surface of water is in small tubes. 
As the volume ‘is diminished, more of the substance is 
liquefied, till at last the whole is compressed into the liquid 
form. 
I have described this isothermal line at greater length, 
that the student may compare the properties of carbonic acid 
at 55°°6 F. with those of water at 212° F. 
1. The'steam before condensation begins has properties 
agreeing nearly, though not quite, with those of a perfect gas. 
In carbonic acid the volume just before liquefaction com- 
mences is little more than three-fifths of that of a perfect 
gas at the same temperature and pressure. The corresponding © 
isothermal lines for air are given in the diagram, and it 
will be seen how much the carbonic acid isothermal has 
fallen below that of air before liquefaction begins. 
2. The steam when condensed into water occupies less 
than the sixteen-hundredth part of the volume of the steam. 
The liquid carbonic acid, on the other hand, occupies nearly 
a fifth part of its volume just before condensation. We are 
therefore able to draw the dotted line of complete conden- 
sation in this diagram, though in the case of water it would 
have required a microscope to distinguish it from the line of 
no volume. 
3. The steam when condensed into water at 212° has 


Its dilatability by heat and its compressibility by pressure 
are probably somewhat greater than when cold, but not 
enough to be noticed when the measurements are not very 
precise. 

Liquid carbonic acid, as was first observed by Thilorier, 
dilates as the temperature rises to a greater degree than even 


’ NA 


422 22——si«i«*s«*s«C sothermal Curves, 


a gas, and, as Dr. Andrews has shown, it yields to pressure 
much more than any ordinary liquid. From Dr. Andrews’s 
experiments it also appears that its compressibility dimi- _ 
nishes as the pressure increases. These results are apparent 


‘even in.the diagram. It is, therefore, far more compressible 


than any ordinary liquid, and it appears from the experi- 
ments of Andrews that its:compressibility diminishes as. the 
volume is reduced. 

It appears, therefore, that the behaviour of liquid carbonic 
acid under the action of heat and pressure is very different 
from that of ordinary liquids, and in some respects approaches 
to that of a gas. 

If we examine the next of the isothermals of the diagram, 
that for 21°°5 C. or 70°'7 F., the approximation between the 
liquid and the gaseous states is still more apparent. Here 
condensation takes place at about 60 atmospheres of pres- 
sure, and the liquid occupies nearly a third of the volume of 
the gas. The exceedingly dense gas is approaching in its 
properties to the exceedingly light liquid. Still there is a 
distinct separation between the gaseous and liquid states, 
though we are approaching the critical temperature. This 
critical temperature has been determined by Dr. Andrews to 


-be 30°92 C. or 87°7 F. At this temperature, and at a 


pressure of from 73 to 75 atmospheres, carbonic acid appears 
to be in the critical condition. No separation into hquid and 
vapour can be detected, but at the same time very small 
variations of pressure or of temperature produce such great 
variations of density that flickering movements are observed 
in the tube ‘resembling in an exaggerated form the appear- 
ances exhibited during the mixture of liquids of. different 
densities, or when columns of heated air ascend through 
colder strata.’ 

The isothermal line for 31°°1 C. or 88° F. passes above 
this critical point. During the whole compression the sub- 
stance is never in two distinct conditions in different parts of 
the tube. When the pressure is less than 73 atmospheres 


though Beiiy flatter flidh’ that of: a perfect. 
s, resembles it in general features. From 73 to 75 atmo- 
; aie the volume diminishes very rapidly, but byno means 
suddenly, and above this pressure the volume diminishes — 
more gradually than in the case of a perfect gas, but still — 
“more rapidly than in most liquids. . 

In the isothermals for 32°°5 C. or g0°’5 F. and for 35°'5 C. 
or 95°'9 F. we can still observe a slight increase of compres- 
sibility near the same part of the diagram, but in the = 
isothermal line for 48° 1 C. or 118°°6 F. the curve is con- 
cave upwards throughout its whole course, and differs from 
the corresponding isothermal line for a perfect gas only by 
being somewhat flatter, showing that for all ordinary pres- 

sures the volume is somewhat less than that assigned by 
Boyle’s law. 

Still at the temperature of 118°°6 F. carbonic acid hasall 
the properties of a gas, and the effects of heat and pressureon 
it differ from their effects on a perfect gas only by quantities _ 
requiring careful experiments to detect them. ; 

We have no reason to believe that any phenomenon 
similar to condensation would occur, however great a 

____ pressure were applied to carbonic acid at this temperature. 
In fact, by a proper management we can convert car- 
bonic acid gas into a liquid without any sudden change 
of state. pe. 
If we begin with carbonic acid gas at 50° F. we may first 
heat it till its temperature is above 88° F., the critical point. 
We then gradually increase the pressure to, say, 100 atmo- 
spheres. During this process no sign of liquefaction occurs. _ 
Finally we cool the substance, still under the pressure of 
roo atmospheres, to 50° F. During this process no sudden 
change of state can be observed, but carbonic acid at 50° Pe ta 
and under a pressure of 100 atmospheres has all the pro- 
perties of a liquid. At the temperature of 50° F. we cannot ; 
convert carbonic acid gas into a liquid without a sudden 
condensation, but by this process, in which the pressure is 


eh ay SS at a US Sar 
Isothermal Curves, 


applied at a high temperature, we have caused the substance 


to pass from an undoubtedly gaseous to an undoubtedly 
liquid state without at any time undergoing an abrupt change 
similar to ordinary liquefaction. 

I have described the experiments of Dr. Andrews on car- 
bonic acid at greater length because they furnish the most 


-complete view hitherto given of the relation between the 


liquid and the gaseous state, and of the mode in which the 
properties of a gas may be continuously and imperceptibly 
changed into those of a liquid. 

The critical temperatures of most ordinary liquids are 
much higher than that of carbonic acid, and their pressure 
in the critical state is very great, so that experiments on the 
critical state of ordinary liquids are difficult and dangerous. 
M. Cagniard de la Tour estimated the temperature and pres- 
sure of the critical state to be: 


Temperature Pressure 
F 


ahr. (Atmospheres) 
ther =~. ‘ : $ = BOG"'5 37°5 
Alcohol . % : ‘ ee a I1g'0 
Bisulphide of Carbon : , ~ §04°°5 66°5 


Water . . : ; : 3773°°0 — 


In the case of water the critical temperature was so 
high that the water began to dissolve the glass tube which 
contained it. 

The critical temperature of what are called the permanent 
gases is probably exceedingly low, so that we cannot by any 
known method produce a degree of cold sufficient, even 
when applied along with enormous pressure, to condense 
them into the liquid state. 

It has been suggested by Professor James Thomson ! that 
the isothermal curves for temperatures below the critical 
temperature are only apparently, and not really, discon- 
tinuous, and that their true form is somewhat similar in its 
general features to the curve ABCDEFGHK. 

The peculiarity of this curve is, that between the pressures 


1 Proceedings of the Royal Society, 1871, No. 130. 


6 i 
. 3 i & a: Mee rad es. i * ‘ qe + 
indicated by the horizontal lines 8 Fr and D 4, any horizon-_ 
tal line such as c E G cuts the curve in three different — 
points. The literal interpretation of this geometrical cir- 


_ cumstance would be that the fluid at this pressure, and at 


> 


Te 


x 


_ the temperature of the isothermal line, is capable of existing 


in three different states. One of these, indicated by c, 


_ evidently corresponds to the liquid state. Another, indi- 
_ cated by G, corresponds to the gaseous state. At the inter- 


mediate point E£ the slope of the curve indicates that the 


_ volume and the pressure increase and diminish together. 


Fic. 16. 


No substance having this property can exist in stable equili- 
brium, for the very slightest disturbance would make it rush 
into the liquid. or the gaseous state. We may therefore 


confine our attention to the points c and c. 


In our chapter on Intrinsic Energy we shall show that 
for a certain position of the horizontal line c c the differ- 


ence of the intrinsic energy of the substance in the gaseous _ 
and liquid states is greater than for any other position on 
_ the same isothermal line. At the pressure indicated by this 


‘Norizontal.line the liquid will be in equilibrium with its 


~ with the liquid, will be fandenged » : and st "ll: enalien 
_ pressures the liquid, ifin contact with its vapour, will evapo- 
rate. Hence. the isothermal line, as deduced from experi- _ 
ments of the ordinary kind, will consist of the curve ABC, 
the straight line c G, and the curve G K. seid 
But it has been pointed out by Prof. J. Thomson that ss 
by suitable contrivances we may detect the existence of 
other parts of the isothermal curve. We know that the | 
portion of the curve corresponding to the liquid state ex- 
tends beyond the point c; for if the liquid is carefully freed 
from air and other impurities, and is not in contact with 
anything but the sides of a vessel to which it closely ad- 
_ heres, the pressure may be reduced considerably below that 
indicated by the point c, till at last, at some point between ~ 
cand p, the phenomenon of Jdoiling with bumping com- 
mences, as described at p. 25. 
Let us next consider the substance wholly in the state of 
vapour, as indicated by the point k, and let it be kept at the 
same temperature and gradually compressed till it is in the 
_ state indicated by the point c. If there are any drops of 
the liquid in the vessel, or if the vessel affords any facilities 
_ for condensation, condensation will now begin. But if there 
are no facilities for condensation, the pressure may be in- 
creased and the volume diminished till the state of the — 
- vapour is that which is represented by the point Fr. At this 
point condensation must take place if it has not begun 
~ before.! bye 
The existence of this variability in the circumstances of a 
condensation, though seemingly probable, is not as yet — 
_ established by experiment, like that of the variability in the 
circumstances of evaporation. Prof. J. Thomson suggests 
that by investigating the condensation produced by the 
rapid expansion of vapour in a vessel provided with a 


2 See the chapter on Capillarity, 


Adiabatic Curves. 127 


steam-jacket, the existence of this part of the isothermal 
curve might be established. 

The state of things, however, represented by the portion 
of the isothermal curve D E F, can never be realised. in a 
homogenecus mass, for the substance is then in an essentially 
unstable condition, since the pressure increases with the 
volume. We cannot, therefore, expect any experimental’ 
evidence of the existence of this part of the curve, unless, as 
Prof. J. Thomson suggests, this state of things. may exist 
in some part of the thin superficial stratum of transition 
from a liquid to its own gas, in which the phenomena of 
capillarity take place. 


CHAPTER VII. 


ON THE PROPERTIES OF A SUBSTANCE WHEN HEAT 
IS PREVENTED FROM ENTERING OR LEAVING IT. 


HITHERTO we have considered the properties of substance 
only with respect to the volume occupied by a pound of the 
substance, the pressure acting on every square foot or inch, 
and the temperature of the substance, which we have assumed 
to be uniform. We suppose the temperature measured by a 
thermometer, and when, in order to change the state of the 
body, heat must be supplied to it or taken from it, we have 
supposed this to be done without paying any attention to 
the quantity of heat required in each case. For the actual, 
measurements of such quantities of heat we must employ the 
processes described in our chapter on Calorimetry, or others 
equivalent to them. Before entering on these considerations, 
however, we shall examine the very important case in which 
the changes which take place are effected without any 
passage of heat either into the substance from without or out 
of the substance into other bodies. 

For the sake of associating the statement of scientific facts 


128 Adiabatic Curves. 


with mental images which are easily formed, and which pre- 
serve the statements in a form always ready for use, we shall 
suppose that the substance is contained in a cylinder fitted 
with a piston, and that both the cylinder and'the piston are 
absolutely impermeable to heat, so that not only is heat 
prevented from getting out or in by passing completely 
through thecylinder or piston, but'no heat can pass between 
the enclosed substance and the matter of the cylinder or 
piston itself. 

No substance in nature is absolutely impermeable to heat, 
so that the image we have formed can never be fully realised; 
but it is always possible to ascertain, in each particular case, 
that heat has not entered or left the substance, though the 
methods by which this is done and the arrangements by 
which the condition is fulfilled are complicated. In the 
present discussion it would only distract our attention from 
the most important facts to describe the details of physical 
experiments. We therefore reserve any description of actual 
experimental methods till we can explain them in connexion 
with the principles on which they are founded. In explain- 
ing these principles we make use of the most suitable illus- 
trations, without assuming that they are physically possible. 

We therefore suppose the substance placed in a cylinder, 
and its volume and pressure regulated and measured by, a 
piston, and we suppose that during the changes of volume 
and pressure bf the substance no heat either enters it or 
leaves it. 

In order to represent the relation between the volume and 
the pressure, we suppose a curve traced on the indicator 
diagram during the motion of the piston, exactly as in the 
case of the isothermal lines formerly described. The only 
difference is that whereas in the case of the isothermal 
lines the substance was maintained always at one and the 
same. temperature, in the present case no heat is allowed 
to enter or leave the substance, which, as we shall see, is 
a condition of quite a different kind. 


4 vhs, 


The line drawn on the indicator diagram in the latter case 
has been named by Professor Rankine an Adiabatic line, 
because it is defined by the condition that heat is not allowed 
to pass through (dagaivew) the vessel which confines the 
substance. 

Since the properties of the substance under this condition 
_ are completely defined by its adiabatic lines, it will assist us 
in understanding these properties if we associate them with 
the corresponding features of the adiabatic lines. 

The first thing to be observed is that as the volume dimi- 
nishes the pressure invariably increases. In fact, if under any 
circumstances the pressure were to diminish as the volume 
diminishes, the substance would be in an unstable state, and 
would either collapse or explode till it attained a condition 
in which the pressure increased as the volume diminished. 

Hence the adiabatic lines slope downwards from left to 
right in the indicator diagram as we have drawn it. 

If the pressure be continually increased, up to the greatest 
pressure which we can produce, the volume continually 
diminishes, but always slower and slower, so that we cannot 
tell whether there is or is not a limiting volume such that no 
pressure, however great, can compress the substance to a 
smaller volume. 

We cannot, in fact, trace the lines upward beyond a 
certain distance, and therefore we cannot assert anything of 
the upper part of their course, except that they cannot recede 
from the line of pressures, because in that case the volume 
would increase on account of an increase of pressure. 

If, on the other hand, we suppose the piston to be drawn 


Their Definition. 129 


out so as to allow the volume to increase, the pressure will _ 


diminish. 

If the substance is in the gaseous form, or assumes that 
form during the process, the substance will continue to exert 
pressure on the piston even though the volume is enormously 
increased, and we have no experimental reason to believe 
that the pressure would be reduced to nothing, however much 

K 


\ 


the volume were increased. For gaseous bodies, therefore, _ 
the lines extend indefinitely in the direction of the line of 
volumes, continually approaching but never reaching it. 

With respect to substances which are not originally in the 
gaseous form, some of them, when the pressure is sufficiently 
diminished, are known to assume that form, and it is plausibly 
argued that we have no evidence that any substance, however 
solid and however cold, if entirely free from external pres- 
sure, would not sooner or later become dissipated through 
space by a kind of evaporation. 

The smell by which such metals as iron and copper may 
be recognised is adduced as an indication that bodies, 
apparently very fixed, are continually throwing off portions 
of themselves in some very attenuated form, and if in these 
cases we have no means of detecting the effluvium except by 
the smell, in other cases we may be deprived of this evidence 
by the circumstance that the effluvium does not affect our 
sense of smell at all. 

Be this as it may, there are many substances the pressure 
of which seems to cease entirely when the volume has 

Fic. 17. reached a certain value. Be- — 
Veg yond this the pressure, if it 
\ exists, is far too small to be 
\\ measured. The lines of such 
we substances may without sen- 
amare sible error be considered as 
ai: Wes.) ewes meeting the line of volumes 
ow C—C—C—C—C® ~—s witthin the limits of the diagram. 

The next thing to be observed about the adiabatic lines is 
that where they cross the isothermal lines they are always 
inclined at a greater angle to the horizontal line than the 
isothermal lines. 

In other words, to diminish the volume of a substance by 
a given amount requires a greater increase of pressure when 
the substance is prevented from gaining or losing heat than 
when it is kept at a constant temperature. ee 


DohS Pace 


Relation to the Isothermals. 131 


This is an illustration of the general principle ‘that when 
the state of a body is changed in any way by the application 
of force in any form, and if in one case the body is subjected 
to some constraint, while in another case it is free from this 
constraint but similarly circumstanced in all other respects, 
then if during the change the body takes advantage of this 
freedom, less force will be required to produce the change 
than when the body is subjected to constraint. 

_In the case before us we may suppose the condition of 
constant temperature to be obtained by making the cylinder 
of a substance which is a perfect conductor of heat, and 
surrounding it with a very large bath of a fluid which is also a 
perfect conductor of heat, and which has se great a capacity 
for heat that all the heat it receives from or gives off to the sub- 
stance in the cylinder does not sensibly alter its temperature. 

The cylinder in this case is capable of constraiming the 
substance itself, because it cannot get through the sides of 
the cylinder; but it isnot capable of constraining the heat of 
the substance, which can pass freely out or in through the 
walls of the cylinder. 

If we now suppose the walls of the cylinder to become 
perfect non-conductors of heat, everything remains the same, 
except that the heat is no longer free to pass into or out of 
the cylinder. 

If in the first case the motion of the piston gives rise to 
any motion of the heat through the walls, then in the 

second case, when this motion is prevented, more force wilk~ 

_ be required to produce a given motion of the cylinder on 

account of the greater constraint of the system on which the 

_ force acts. 

_ From this we may deduce the effect which the compression 

of a substance has on its temperature when heat is prevented 

from entering or leaving the substance. 

We have seen that in every case the pressure increases 
- more than it does when the temperature remains constant, or 
_ if the increase of pressure be supposed given, the diminution 
kK 2 


SS ae 


SN 


WS-rrrtceee ree eee 


oe" 


sca 


Thermal Lines for Air. 


1a 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
4 
E: 
~ 
3 
23 
eo] 


Ad 


esncocennaneccscsooson=" 


toresensaceneccanenesen® 


meccconnsenasowcensnnnnsonceoasen 
—_—--— 
— 
 poddaadnesanansouscsncenene 
Ccakecdnacnsssnacnsecrsneeent: owes “- 
petestseearo meee 


aw rn ee EE OE ETE EEE ET TST ES 
. D peainapnsnncessnssesenocyresnssiaselepesasea@aneeanenn 


Merwin a= ar aenneasncnernnenes seeenencaseseans 


Se ees ae 


a) et 


of volume is less when the heat is confined. Hence the 
volume after the pressure is applied is greater when the heat 
is confined than when the temperature is constant. 

Far the greater number of substances expand when their 
temperature is raised, so that for the same pressure a greater 
_ volume corresponds to a higher temperature. In these sub- 
stances, therefore, compression produces a rise of temperature 
if heat is not allowed to escape; but if the walls of the 
cylinder permit the passage of heat, as soon as the tempe- 
_ rature has begun to rise heat will begin to flow out, so that 
if the compression is effected slowly the principal thermal 
effect of the compression will be to make the substance part 
_ with some of its heat. The isothermal and adiabatic lines 
_ of air are given in fig. 18, p. 132. The adiabatic lines are 
more inclined to the horizontal than the isothermal lines. 

There are, however, certain substances which contract 
instead of expanding when their temperature is raised. 
_ When pressure is applied to these substances the compression 
_ produced is, as in the former case, less when heat is pre- 
_ vented from passing than when the temperature is maihtained 
constant. The volume after the application of pressure is 
therefore, as before, greater than when the temperature is con- 
stant ; but since in these substances an increase of volume 
indicates a fall of temperature, it follows that, instead of being 


heated, they are cooled by compression, and that, if the walls 
of the cylinder permit the passage of heat, heat will flow in» 
from without to restore the equilibrium of temperature. 
During a change of state, when, at a given pressure, the 
_ volume alters considerably without change of temperature, as 
_ successive portions of the substance pass from the one state 
to the other, the isothermal lines are, as we have already 
remarked, horizontal. The adiabatic lines, however, are 
inclined downwards from left to right. Any increase of 
pressure will cause a portion of the substance to pass into 
that one of the two states in which its volume is least. In 
_ so doing it will give out heat if, as in the case of a liquid and 
its vapour, the substance gives out heat in passing into the 


Se ee bak wi Sa Tita Cl rigs Shes ence 5 


I 34 Adiabatic Cavees 


ie -. denser state ; but if, as in the case of ice and water, the ice 
it requires heat to melt it into the denser form of water, then 
an increase of pressure will cause some of the ice to melt, 
and the mixture will become colder. 

The isothermal and adiabatic lines for steam in presence 
b of water are given in fig. 19, p. 135. The isothermal lines 
i are here horizontal, 

The steam line v v, which indicates the volume of one 
pound of saturated steam, is also drawn on the diagram. Its 
inclination to the horizontal line is less than that of the 

: adiabatic lines. Hence when no heat is allowed to escape, 
an increase of pressure causes some of the water to become 
steam, and a diminution of pressure causes some of the 
steam to be condensed into water. This was first shown by 


a Clausius and Rankine. 
‘: By means of diagrams of the isothermal and adiabatic - 
fe lines the thermal properties of a substance can be com- 


pletely defined, as we shall show in the subsequent chapters. 
As a scientific method, this mode of representing the pro- 
perties of the substance is by far the best, but in order to 
interpret the diagrams, some knowledge of thermodynamics 
is required. As a mere aid to the student in remembering 
; the properties of a substance, the following mode of tracing 
ay the changes of volume and temperature at a constant pres- 
: sure may be found useful, though it is quite destitute of 
those scientific merits which render the indicator diagrams 
so valuable in the investigation of physical phenomena. 

The diagram on p. 137 represents the effect of the appli- 
cation of heat to a pound of ice at o° F. The quantity of 
heat applied to the ice is indicated by the distance measured 

along the base line marked ‘units of heat.’ The volume 

of the substance is indicated by the length of the per- 
pendicular from the base line cut off by the ‘line of 
volume,’ and the temperature is indicated by the length 
cut off by the dotted ‘ line of temperature.’ 

The specific heat of ice is about 0°5, so that it requires 

hs 16 units of heat to raise its temperature from o° F. to 32° F. 
The specific gravity of ice at 32° F. is, according to Bunsen, 


7 
oA 2 
Oy een + 


5 


\ 


rs 


e. | 

. \ + 

‘ % , 
~- 


= 


\ 


Gite earl Tea cana 
wa 


\ 


eae 
ee 


\ 


: gL ee a } 
= | 
a | 


ee 
\ 

\ 
“4 

| 


4 


975 |-————-. 


\ 
ne cach Sareea. Gaerne 


*, 


\ 


\ 


.. 


a 


ee a a a a 
‘s. 


ne 


ar 


pea ef Na oa 


wes|_ 


hae 


\ 


a ee 
a 


Ao 


a 


~s 


be 


ee 


a 
= eats ne 
~ 


— 


oe 


> 


BS Sen ag gs am an mene es meme te ton 


hs 
*s 
Men, 


Naa me es cs sn 


*. 


“ 


= 


se 


ad a cerns oe ait lr em OS eat ns in wn es, ne 


ae. 


se 


her 


at ee ee a a 


: 
z 


a rere ee 


8) eee 


Thermal Lines of Steam «nd Water, 


Tsothermals — — — — — — 


Adiabatics —- - - —--—--— 


team Line Vv V 


Ss 


0'91674, so that its volume, as compared with water at 39°'r, 
is 10908. 

The ice now begins to melt, the temperature remains 
constant at 32° F., but the volume of ice diminishes and 
the volume of water increases, as is represented by the 
line marked ‘volume of ice.’ The latent heat of ice is 
144° F., so that the process of melting goes on till 144 units 
of heat have been applied to the substance, and the whole 
is converted into water at 32° F. 

The volume of the water at 32° F. is, according to 
M. Despretz, 1‘ooo127. Its specific heat is at this tem- 
perature a very little greater than unity ; it is exactly unity 
at 39°1 F., and as the temperature rises the specific heat 


 jncreases, so that to heat the water from 32° F. to 212° F. 


bape eit 
re 


es, 


x 
By 
HG 


requires 182 units instead of 180. The volume of the 
water diminishes as the temperature rises from 32° F. to 
39°'1 F., where it is exactly 1. It then expands, slowly at 
first, but more rapidly as the temperature rises, till at 212° F. 
the volume of the water is 1:04315. 

If we continue to apply heat to the water, the pressure 
being still that of the atmosphere, the water begins to boil. 
For every unit of heat, one nine hundred and sixty-fifth 
part of the pound of water is boiled away and is converted 
into steam, the volume of which is about 1,700 times that of 
the water from which it was formed. The diagram might be 
extended on a larger sheet of paper to represent the whole 
process of boiling the water away. This process would re- 
quire 965 units of heat, so that the whole length of the base 
line from o would be 11°07 inches. At this point the water 
would be all boiled away, and the steam would occupy a 
volume of 1,700 times that of the water. The vertical line 
on the diagram which would represent the volume of the 


steam would be 3,400 inches, or more than 286 feet long. 
The temperature would be still 212° F. If we continue to 


apply heat to the steam, still at the atmospheric pressure, 


its temperature will rise in a perfectly uniform manner at 


- eS wee 
a OX UP tad 
Dna Oso nS y 


BOILING 
AWAY 


——— SS SS SS a 


242° 


WATER BEGINS TO BOIL-------|% 


i) 


the rate of 2°°08 degrees for every unit of heat, the specific 


heat of steam being 0°4805. 

_ The volume of the superheated steam also increases ina 
regular manner, being proportional to its absolute tempe- 
rature reckoned from —g60° F. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


ON HEAT ENGINES, 


HITHERTO the only use we have made of the indicator 
diagram is to explain the relation Letween the volume and the 
pressure of a substance placed in certain thermal conditions. 
The condition that the temperature is constant gave us the 
isothermal lines, and the condition that no communication 
of heat takes place gave us the adiabatic lines. We have 
now to consider the application of the same method to the 
measurements of quantities of heat and quantities of me- 
chanical work. 

At p. 102 it was shown that if the pencil of the indicator 
moves from B to Cc, this shows that the volume of the sub- 
stance has increased from 0 é to 0 ¢, under a pressure which 
was originally B d and finally c ¢. 

The work done by the pressure of the substance against 
the piston during this motion is represented by the area 
B¢c4, and since the volume zwcreases during the process, 
it is the substance which does the work on the piston, 
and not the piston which does the work on the substance. 

In heat engines of ordinary construction, such as steam 
engines and air engines, the form of the path described by 
the pencil depends on the mechanical arrangements of the 
engine, such as the opening and shutting of the valves which 
admit or carry off the steam. 

For the purposes of scientific illustration, and for obtaining 
clear views of the dynamical theory of heat, we shall describe | 


the working of an engine of a species entirely imaginary— 
one which it is impossible to construct, but very easy to- 
understand. ¥ 
This engine was invented and described by Sadi Carnot, 
in his ‘ Réflexions sur la Puissance motrice du Feu,’ pub- — 
lished in 1824. It is called Carnot’s Reversible Engine for — 
reasons which we shall explain. 
All the arrangements connected with this engine are con- 
. trived for the sake of being explained, and are not intended 
to represent anything in the working of real engines. . 
Carnot himself was a believer in the material nature of — 
heat, and was in consequence led to an erroneous statement _ 
of the quantities of heat which must enter and leave the ~ 
engine. As our object is to understand the theory of heat, = 
and not to give an historical account of the theory, we shall 
avail ourselves of the important step which Carnot made, 
while we avoid the error into which he fell. 


Fic. 21. 
ed 
een 
s ds 
A B 
Cc 
HOT COLD 


Let D be the working substance, which may be any sub- _ 
stance whatever which is in any way affected by heat, but, 
for the sake of precision, we shall suppose it to be either air — 
or steam, or partly steam and partly condensed water at the 
same temperature. a 

The working substance is contained in a cylinder fitted — 


with a piston. The walls of the cylinder and the piston are _ : 


supposed to be perfect non-conductors of heat, but the 
bottom of the cylinder is a perfect conductor of heat, and has 
- so small a capacity for heat that the amount of heat required 
to raise its temperature may be left out of account. All the 
communication of heat between the working substance and 
things outside the cylinder is supposed to take place 
_ through this conducting bottom, and the quantities of heat 
_ are supposed to be measured as they pass through. 
a and B are two bodies the temperatures of which are 
maintained uniform. a is kept always hot, at a temperature 
__$, and B is kept always cold, at a temperature T. Cc is a 
____ Stand to set the cylinder on, the upper surface of which is a 
perfect non-conductor of heat. 

Let us suppose that the working substance is at the tem- 
perature T of the cold body B, and that its volume and 
a ee pressure are represented in the in- 
tet? dicator diagram by 0 a and @ 4, the 

point A being on the isothermal line 
B A D corresponding to the lower tem- 
perature T. 

c First Operation.—We now place 
the cylinder on the non-conducting 
stand c, so that no heat can escape, 
“e and we then force the piston down, 
pe. so as to diminish the volume of the 
# substance. As no heat can escape, 

the temperature rises, and the rela- 
_~— tion between volume and pressure 

at any instant will be expressed by 
the pencil tracing the adiabatic line A B, 

We continue this process till the temperature has risen to 
s, that of the hot body a. During this process we have ex- 
pended an amount of work on the substance which is re- 
presented by the area a Bda. If work is reckoned negative 
when it is spent on the substance, we must regard that 
- employed in this first operation as negative. 


Second Operation—We now transfer the cylinder to the 
hot body a, and allow the piston gradually to rise. The 
immediate effect of the expansion of the substance is to 
make its temperature fall, but as soon as the temperature 
begins to fall, heat flows in from the hot body a through the 
perfectly conducting bottom, and keeps the temperature from 
falling below the temperature s. 

The substance will therefore expand at the temperature s, 
and the pencil will trace out the line B c, which is part of the 
isothermal line corresponding to the upper temperature s. 

During this process the substance is doing work by its 
pressure on the piston. The amount of this work is re- 
presented by the area B Cc ¢ 4, and it is to be reckoned 
positive, 

At the same time a certain amount of heat, which we shall 
call H, has passed from the hot body a into the working 
substance. 

Third Operation.—The cylinder is now transferred from the 
hot body a to the non-conducting body c, and the piston is 
allowed to rise. The indicating pencil will trace out the 
adiabatic line c D, since there is no communication of heat, 
and the temperature will fall during the process. When 
the temperature has fallen to T, that of the cold body, 
let the operation be stopped. The pencil will then have 
arrived at D, a point on the isothermal line for the lower 
temperature T. 

The work done by the substance during this process is 
represented by the area c D @¢, and is positive. 

fourth Operation.—The cylinder is placed on the cold 
body s. It has the same temperature as B, so that there is no 
transfer of heat. But as soon as we begin to press down the 
piston heat flows from the working substance into B, so that 
the temperature remains sensibly equal to T during the 
operation. The piston must be forced down till it has 
reached the point at which it was at the beginning of the 
first operation, and, since the temperature is also the same, 


_ the pressure will be the same as at first. 
substance, therefore, after these four operations, has returned 
exactly to its original state as regards esas pressure, and 
temperature. 

During the fourth operation, in which the pencil traces the 
portion D A of the isothermal line for the lower temperature, 
the piston does work on the substance, the amount of which 
is to be reckoned negative, and which is represented by the 
areaD Aa d. 

At the same time a certain amount of heat, which we shall 
denote by 4, has flowed from the working substance into the 
cold body s. 

DEFINITION OF A CyCLE.—A series of operations by which 
the substance is finally brought to the same state in all respects 
as at first is called a Cycle of operations. 

Total Work done during the Cycle——When the piston is 
rising the substance is giving out work ; this is the case in 
_ the second and third operations. When the piston is sinking it 
is performing work on the substance which is to be reckoned 
negative. Hence, to find the work performed by the substance 
we must subtract the area D a B d d, representing the negative 
work, from the positive work, Bc Dp @ 6. The remainder, 
ABCD, represents the useful work performed by the sub- 
stance during the cycle of operations. If we have any diffi- 
culty in understanding how this amount of work can be 
obtained in a useful form during the working of the engine, 
we have only to suppose that the piston when it rises is 
- employed in lifting weights, and that a portion of the weight 
lifted is employed to force the piston down again. As the 
pressure of the substance is less when the piston is sinking 
than when it is rising, it is plain that the engine can raise a 
greater weight than that which is required to complete the 
cycle of operations, so that on the whole there is a balance 
of useful work. 

Transference of Heat during the Cycle.—It is only in the 
second and fourth operations that there is any transfer of 


The working 


is 


heat, for in the first and third the heat is confined by the 
non-conducting stand. 

In the second operation a quantity of heat represented by 
H passes from the hot body a into the working substance at 
the upper temperature s, and in the fourth operation a 
quantity of heat represented by % passes from the working 
substance into the cold body B at the lower temperature T. 

The working substance is left after the cycle of operations 
in precisely the same state as it wasat first, so that the whole 
physical result of the cycle is— 

1. A quantity, H, of heat taken from A at the temperature s. 

2. The performance by the substance of a quantity of 
work represented by a BC D. 

3. A quantity, 2, of heat communicated to B at the tem- 
perature T. 


APPLICATION OF THE PRINCIPLE OF THE CONSERVATION 
OF ENERGY. 


It has long been thought by those who study natural 
forces that in all observed actions among bodies the work 
which is done is merely transferred from one body in which 
there is a store of energy into another, so as to increase the 
store of energy in the latter body. 

The word energy is employed to denote the capacity 
which a body has of performing work, whether this capacity 
arises from the motion of the body, as in the case of a cannon- 
ball, which is able to batter down a wall before it can be 
stopped ; or from its position, as in the case of the weight of a 
clock when wound up, which is able to keep the clock going 
for a week ; or from any other cause, such as the elasticity of - 
a watch-spring, the magnetisation of a compass needle, the 
chemical properties of an acid, or the heat of a hot body. 

The doctrine of the conservation of energy asserts that all 
these different forms of energy can be measured in the same 
way that mechanical work is measured, and that if the whole 
_ energy of any system were measured in this way the mutual 


CS AT meres te ee ee Tals, Se en 


i bai ibis WEN wri tubing On SN te ake) 
Pie: 1 ot pave aS NR ay feria 


A tee 


os ear a OO 4 Lee ee ee Ls hs 
fn Fae ae TERRE Re ge 3 eee 


tag Feat Engines. 
action of the parts of the system can neither increase nor 
diminish its total stock of energy. 

Hence any increase or diminution of energy in a system 
must be traced to the action of bodies external to the 
system. 

The belief in the doctrine of the conservation of energy 
has greatly assisted the progress of physical science, especially 
since 1840. The numerous investigations which have been 
made into the mechanical value of various forms of energy 
were all undertaken by men who believed that in so doing 


. they were laying a foundation fora more accurate knowledge 
tau of physical actions considered as forms of energy. The fact 
7 that so many forms of energy can be measured on the 
S hypothesis that they are all equivalent to mechanical energy, 


and that measurements conducted by different methods are 
consistent with each other, shows that the doctrine con- 
tains scientific truth. 

To estimate its truth from a demonstrative point of view 
we must consider, as we have always to do in making such 
estimates, what is involved in a direct contradiction of the 
doctrine. Ifthe doctrine is not true, then it is possible for 
the parts of a material system, by their mutual action alone, 
and without being themselves altered in any permanent way, 
either to do work on external bodies or to have work done 
on them by external bodies. Since we have supposed the 

_ system after a cycle of operations to be in exactly the same 
state as at first, we may suppose the cycle of operations to 
mt be repeated an indefinite number of times, and therefore the 
system is capable in the first case of doing an indefinite 
quantity of work without anything being supplied to it, and 
in the second of absorbing an indefinite quantity of work 
sf without showing any result. 
ua That the doctrine of the conservation of energy is not 
self-evident is shown by the repeated attempts to discover 
a perpetual motive power, and though such attempts have 
been long considered hopeless by scientific men, these men 


| ~ themselves had repeatedly observed the apparent loss of 


a: expressed in foot-pounds. This is.admitted by all. 


becomes of this energy. 


energy in friction and other natural actions, without making 
any attempt or even showing any desire to ascertain what 


The evidence, however, which we have of the doctrine is _ 
nearly if not quite as complete as that of the conservation of 
matter—the doctrine that in natural operations the quantity 
of matter in a system always remains the same though it may 
change its form. : 

No good evidence has been brought against either of these 
doctrines, and they are as certain as any other part of our 
knowledge of natural things. 

The great merit of Carnot’s method is that he arranges his 
operations in a cycle, so as to leave the working substance 
in precisely the same condition as he found it. We are 
therefore sure that the energy remaining in the working 
substance is the same in amount as at the beginning of the 
cycle. If this condition is not fulfilled, we should have to 
discover the energy required to change the substance from 
its original to its final state before we could make any 
assertion based upon the conservation of energy. 

We have therefore got rid of the consideration of the 
energy residing in the working substance, which is called its 
intrinsic energy, and we have only to compare— 

1. The original energy, which is a quantity H of heat at the 
temperature s of the hot body. This being communicated to 
the working substance, we get for the resulting energy— 

2. A quantity of work done, represented by A B c D; and 

3. A quantity % of heat at the temperature r of the cold 
body. 

The principle of the conservation of energy tells us that 
the energy of the heat H at the temperature s exceeds that 
of the heat % at the temperature r by a quantity of me- 
chanical energy represented by a B C D, which can be easily 


Now Carnot believed heat to be a material substance, 
L 


oi, 7 ¥y Tae eT 
; Va oy e 


146 fleat Engines. 


called caloric, which of course cannot be created or destroyed. 


He therefore concluded that, since the quantity of heat re- 
maining in the substance is the same as at first, H, the quantity 
of heat communicated to it, and %, the quantity of heat 
abstracted from it, must be the same. 

These two portions of heat, however, are, as Carnot 
observed, in different conditions, for H is at the temperature 
of the hot body, and 4 at that of the cold body, and Carnot 
concluded that the work of the engine was done at the 
expense of the fall of temperature, the energy of any 
distribution of heat being greater the hotter the body which 
contains it. 

He illustrated this theory very clearly by the analogy of a 
water-mill. When water drives a mill the water which enters 
the mill leaves itagain unchanged in quantity, but at a lower 
level. Comparing heat with water, we must compare heat 
at high temperature with water at a high level. Water tends 
to flow from high ground to low ground, just as heat tends to 
flow from hot bodies to cold ones. A water-mill makes use 
of this tendency of water, and a heat engine makes use of the 
corresponding property of heat. 

The measurement of quantities of heat, especially when it 
has to be done in an engine at work, is an operation of great 
difficulty, and it was not till 1862 that it was shown experi- 
mentally by Hirn that 4, the heat emitted, is really less than 
H, the heat received by the engine. But it is easy to see 
that the assumption that H is equal to 4 must be wrong. 

For if we were to employ the engine in stirring a liquid, 
then the work A B CD spent in this way would generate an 
amount of heat which we may denote by $ in the liquid. 

The heat H at the high temperature has therefore been 
used, and we find instead of it a quantity 4 at the low 
temperature, and also § at the temperature of the liquid, 
whatever it is. 

But if heat is material, and therefore H = 4, then 2 + § 
is greater than the original quantity H, and heat has been 


Heat is not a Substance. 147 


created, which is contrary to the hypothesis that it is 
material. 

Besides this, we might have allowed the heat H to pass 
from the hot body to the cold body by conduction, either 
directly or through one or more conducting bodies, and in 
this case we know that the heat received by the cold body 
would be equal to the heat taken from the hot body, since 
conduction does not alter the quantity of heat. Hence in 
this case H = 4, but no work is done during the transfer of 
heat. When, in addition to the transfer of heat, work is done 
by the engine, there ought to be some difference in the final 
result, but there will be no difference if % is still equal to H. 

The hypothesis of caloric, or the theory that heat is a kind 
of matter, is rendered untenable, first by the proof given by 
Rumford, and more completely by Davy, that heat can be 
generated at the expense of mechanical work ; and, second, 
by the measurements of Hirn, which show that when heat 
does work in an engine, a portion of the heat disappears. 

The determination of the mechanical equivalent of heat by 
_ Joule enables us to assert that the heat which is required to 

raise a pound of water from 39° F. to 40° F. is mechanically 
equivalent to 772 foot-pounds of work. 
It is to be observed that in this statement nothing is said 
about the temperature of the body in which the heat exists. 
The heat which raises the pound of water from 39° F. to 
40° F. may be taken from a vessel of cold water at 50° F., 
from a red-hot iron heater at 700° F., or from the sun at a 
temperature far above any experimental determination, and 
yet the heating effect of the heat is the same whatever be the 
source from which it flows. When heat is measured as ‘a 
quantity, no regard whatever is paid to the temperature of 
the body in which the heat exists, any more than to the size, 
weight, or pressure of that body, just as when we deter- 
_ mine the weight of a body we pay no attention to its other 
properties. 
Hence if a body in a certain state, as to temperature, Xc., 
L2 


eae 


cia 
ate 
Gs 
zp 
ay 
fut 


ieee 


_heat it is exceedingly convenient to state quantities of heat. 


"eat Engines. 


is capable of heating so many pounds of water from 39° F. to — 
40° F. before it is itself cooled to a given temperature, suy 
40° F., then if that body, in its original state, is stirred about 
and its parts rubbed together so as to expend 772 foot-pounds 
of work in the process, it will be able to heat one pound ~ 
more of water from 39° F. to 40° F. before it is cooledto the — 
given temperature. 

Carnot, therefore, was wrong in supposing that the 
mechanical energy of a given quantity of heat is greater 
when it exists in a hot body than when it exists in a cold — 
body. We now know that its mechanical energy is exactly 
the same in both cases, although when in the hot body it is 
more available for the purpose of driving an engine. 

In our statement of the four operations of Carnot’s engine 
we arranged them so as to leave the result in a state in 
which we can interpret it either as Carnot did, or according 
to the dynamical theory of heat. Carnot himself began with 
the operation which we have placed second, the expansion 
at the upper temperature, and he directs us to continue the ~ 
fourth operation, compression at the lower temperature, till — 
exactly as much heat has lett the substance as entered during - 
the expansion at the upper temperature. The result of this — 
operation would be, as we now know, to expel too much — 
heat, so that after the substance had been compressed on 
the non-conducting stand to its original volume, its tempera- 
ture and pressure would be too low. It is easy to amend the 
directions for the extent to which the outflow of heat is to be. 
permitted, but it is still easier to avoid the difficulty by 
placing this operation last, as we have done. 

We are now able to state precisely the relation between 4, 
the quantity of heat which leaves the engine, and H, the 
quantity received by it. H is exactly equal to the sum of 4, 
and the heat to which the mechanical work represented by, 
ABCD is equivalent. 

In all statements connected with the dynamical theory of 


in foot-pounds at once, instead of first expressing them in 
thermal units and then reducing the result to foot-pounds by 
means of Joule’s equivalent of heat. In fact, the thermal 
- unit depends for its definition on the choice of a standard 
substance to which heat is to be applied, on the 
choice of a standard quantity of that substance, and 
on the choice of the effect to be produced by the heat. 
_ According as we choose water or ice, the grain or the 
_ gramme, the Fahrenheit or the Centigrade scale of tempera- 
tures, we obtain different thermal units, all of which have 
_ been used in different important researches. By expressing * 
quantities of heat in foot-pounds we avoid ambiguity, and, 
_ especially in theoretical reasonings about the working of 
engines, we save a great deal of useless phraseology. 

__ As we have already shown how an area on the indicator 
diagram represents a quantity of work, we shall have no 
_ difficulty in understanding that it may also be taken to re- 
a present a quantity of heat equivalent to the same quantity of 
_ work, that is the same number of foot-pounds of heat. 

__ We may therefore express the relation between H and & 
still more concisely thus : 

_. The quantity, H, of heat taken into the engine at the 
_ upper temperature s exceeds the quantity, %, of heat given 
_ out by the engine at the lower temperature 1 by a quantity 
_ of heat represented by the area a B CD on the indicator 
diagram. 

_ This quantity of heat is, as we have already shown, con- 
verted into mechanical work by the engine. 


am ON THE REVERSED ACTION OF CARNOT’S ENGINE. 


The peculiarity of Carnot’s engine is, that whether it is 
receiving heat from the hot body, or giving it out to the 
cold body, the temperature of the substance in the engine 
_ differs extremely little from that of the body in thermal 
communication with it. By supposing the conductivity of 


the bottom of the cylinder to be ‘sufficiently great, or 16) ie 
supposing the motions of the piston to be sufficiently 


slow, we may make the actual difference of temperature 


which causes the flow of heat to take place as small as we _ 
please. | 

If we reverse the motion of the piston when the substance 
is in thermal communication with a or B, the first effect will 
be to alter the temperature of the working substance, but 
an exceedingly small alteration of temperature will be suf- — 
ficient’ to reverse the flow of heat, if the motion is slow 
enough. 

Now let us suppose the engine to be worked backwards 
by exactly reversing all the operations already described. 
Beginning at the lower temperature. and volume o 4, let it 
be placed on the cold body and expand from volume oa to 
od. It will receive from the cold body a quantity of heat 
h. Then let it be compressed without losing heat to 0 «. 
It will then have the upper temperature s. Let it then be 
placed on the hot body and compressed to volume o 4. It 
will give out a quantity of heat H to the hot body. Finally, 
let it be allowed to expand without receiving heat to volume 
oa, and it will return to its original state. The only difference 
between the direct and the reverse action of the engine is, 
that in the direct action the working substance must be a 
little cooler than A when it receives its heat, and a little 
warmer than B when it gives it out ; whereas in the reverse 
action it must be warmer than A when it gives out heat, and — 
cooler than B when it takes heat in. But by working the 
engine sufficiently slowly these differences may be reduced 
within any limits we please to assign, so that for theo- 
retical purposes we may regard Carnot’s engine as strictly 
reversible. 

In the reverse action a quantity % of heat is taken from 
the cold body 8, and a greater quantity H is given to the — 
hot body a, this being done at the expense of a quantity of — 
work measured by the area A DC B, which also measures — 


ee SS ee PAW es ae we A eee 
. 


Carnot’s Engine Reversed. 151 


the quantity of heat into which this work is transformed 
during the process. 

The reverse action of Carnot’s engine shows us that it is 
possible to transfer heat from a cold body to a hot one, 
but that this operation can only be done at the expense of 
a certain quantity of mechanical work. 

The transference of heat from a hot body to a cold one 
may be effected by means of a heat engine, in which case 
part of it is converted into mechanical work, or it may 
take place by conduction, which goes on of itself, but 
without any conversion of heat into work. It appears, 
therefore, that heat may pass from hot bodies to cold ones 
in two different ways. One of these, in which a highly 
artificial engine is made use of, is nearly, but not quite 
completely, reversible, so that by spending the work we 
have gained, we can restore almost the whole of the heat 
from the cold body to the hot. The other mode of trans- 
fer, which takes place of itself whenever a hot and a cold 
body are brought near each other, appears to be irreversible, 
for heat never passes from a cold body to a hot one of 
itself, but only when the operation is effected by the artificial 
engine at the expense of mechanical work. 

We now come to an important principle, which is en- 
tirely due to Carnot. If a given reversible engine, working 
between the upper temperature s and the lower tempera: 
ture T, and receiving a quantity H of heat at the upper 
temperature, produces a quantity w of mechanical work, 
then no other engine, whatever be its construction, can 
produce a greater quantity of work, when supplied with 
the same amount of heat, and working between the same 
temperatures. 

DEFINITION OF ErriciENcy.—// H is the supply of heat, 
and w the work done by an engine, both measured in foot- 


pounds, then the fraction ~ is called the Efficiency of the 


engine. 


7h ~~ 


Carnot’s principle, then, is that the efficiency of a rever- _ 
sible engine is the greatest that can be obtained with a given 
range of temperature. . 
For suppose a certain engine, M, has a greater efficiency 
between the temperatures s and T than a reversible engine 
N, then if we connect the two engines, so that Mm by its 
direct action drives N in the reverse direction, at each stroke 
of the compound engine n will take from the cold body 
Be iy B the heat %, and by the expenditure of work w give to the 
hot body a the heat u. The engine m will receive this 
a heat H, and by hypothesis will do more work while trans- 
ee ferring it to B than is required to drive the engine Nn. 
_-~--~Hence at every stroke there will be an excess of useful 


e work done by the combined engine. 

oe We must not suppose, however, that this is a violation of 
ae the principle of conservation of energy, for if m does more 
_ work than N would do, it converts more heat into work in 
me every stroke, and therefore M restores to the cold body a 
smaller quantity of heat than N takes from it. Hence, the 


J legitimate conclusion from the hypothesis is, that the com- 
_ bined engine will, by its unaided action, convert the heat 
of the cold body B into mechanical work, and that this 
process may go on till all the heat in the system is converted 
into work. — 

This is manifestly contrary to experience, and therefore 
we must admit that no engine can have an efficiency greater 
than that of a reversible engine working between the same 
temperatures. But before we consider the results of Car- 
not’s principle we must endeavour to express clearly the 
law which lies at the bottom of the reasoning. 

The principle of the conservation of energy, when applied 
to heat, is commonly called the First Law of Thermo- 
dynamics. It may be stated thus : When work is transformed 
into heat, or heat into work, the quantity of work is 
mechanically equivalent to the quantity of heat. 

~The application of the law involves the existence of the 
mechanical equivalent of heat. 


I Mkts Prkeh lh Yc cad = teen 


te, 


Carnot’s principle is not deduced from this law, and 
indeed Carnot’s own statement involved a violation of it. 
The law from which Carnot’s principle is deduced has been 
called the Second Law of Thermodynamics. 

‘Admitting heat to be a form of energy, the second law 
asserts that it is impossible, by the unaided action of natural 
processes, to transform any part of the heat of a body into 
mechanical work, except by allowing heat to pass from that 
body into another at a lower temperature. Clausius, who 
first stated the principle of Carnot in a manner consistent 
with the true theory of heat, expresses this law as follows :— 

It is impossible for a self-acting machine, unaided by any 
external agency, to convey heat from one body to another 
at a higher temperature. 

Thomson gives it a slightly different form :— 

It is impossible, by means of inanimate material agency, 
to derive mechanical effect from any portion of matter by 
cooling it below the temperature of the coldest of the sur- 
rounding objects. 

_ By comparing together these statements, the student will 
be able to make himself master of the fact which they em- 
body, an acquisition which will be of much greater import- 
ance to him than any form of words on which a demon- 
stration may be more or less compactly constructed. 

Suppose that a body contains energy in the form of heat, 
what are the conditions under which this energy or any 
part of it may be removed from the body? If heat in a 
body consists in a motion of its parts, and if we were able 
to distinguish these parts, and to guide and control their 
motions by any kind of mechanism, then by arranging our 
apparatus so as to lay hold of every moving part of the 
body, we could, by a suitable train of mechanism, transfer 
the energy of the moving parts of the heated body to any 
other body in the form of ordinary motion. ‘The heated 
body would thus be rendered perfectly cold, and all its 
thermal energy would be converted into the visible motion 


of some other body. 


Now this" supposition daveWecs a oe contradicnon 
the second law of thermodynamics, but is consistent with 
the first law. The second law is therefore equivalent to a 
denial of our power to perform the operation just described, 
either by a train of mechanism, or by any other method yet 
discovered. Hence, if the heat of a body consists in the 
motion of its parts, the separate parts which move must 


be so small or so impalpable that we cannot in any way lay 


hold of them to stop them. 

In fact, heat, in the form of heat, never passes out of a 
body except when it flows by conduction or radiation into a 
colder body. 

There are several processes by which the temperature of 
a body may be lowered without removing heat from it, such 
as expansion, evaporation, and liquefaction, and certain 
chemical and electrical processes. Every one of these, 
however, is a reversible process, so that when the body is 
brought back by any series of operations to its original state, 
without any heat being allowed to enter or escape during 
the process, the temperature will be the same as before, in 
virtue of the reversal of the processes by which the tempera- 
ture was lowered. But if, during the operations, heat 
has passed from hot parts of the system to cold by con- 
duction, or if anything of the nature of friction has taken 
place, then to bring the system to its original state will 
require the expenditure of work, and the removal of heat. 

_ We must now return to the important result demonstrated 
by Carnot, that a reversible engine, working between two 
given temperatures, and receiving at the higher temperature 
a given quantity of heat, performs at least as much work 
as any other engine whatever working under the same 
conditions. It follows from this that all reversible engines, 
whatever be the working substance employed, have the 
same efficiency, provided they work between the same 
temperature of the source of heat a and the same tempera- 
ture of the refrigerator B. 

Hence Carnot showed that if we choose two tempera- 


s/} os 
Re ee eee ee ae ee a ee o-—~ 


ee ae a eT 


ye Ae 3 AL IY sie ee a APS S ONS oN tee eae eee ghee IC Se 


f 


Carnot's Funetion. 155 


tures differing very slightly, say by y 55 of a degree, the 
efficiency of an engine working between these temperatures 
will depend on the temperature only, and not on the sub- 
stance employed, and this efficiency divided by the differ- 
ence of temperatures is the quantity called Carno?’s function, 
a quantity depending on the temperature only. 

Carnot, of course, understood the temperature to be 
estimated in the ordinary way by means of a thermometer 
of a selected substance graduated according to one of the 
established scales, and his function is expressed in terms of 
the temperature so determined. But W. Thomson, in 1848, 
was the first to point out that Carnot’s result leads to a 
method of defining temperature which is much more 
scientific than any of those derived from the behaviour of 
one selected substance or class of substances, and which 
is perfectly independent of the nature of the substance 
employed in defining it. 


THOMSON’S ABSOLUTE SCALE OF TEMPERATURE, 


Let Ta BC represent the isothermal line corresponding 
to temperature T for a certain substance. For the sake of 
distinctness in the figure, I have supposed the substance to 
be partly in the liquid and partly in the gaseous state, so 
that the isothermal lines are horizontal, and easily dis- 
tinguished from the adiabatic lines, which slope downwards 
to the right. The investigation, however, is quite indepen- 
dent of any such restriction as to the nature of the working 
substance. When the volume and pressure of the substance 
are those indicated by the point a, let heat be applied 
and let the substance expand, always at the temperature 1, 
till a quantity of heat H has entered, and let the state of 
the substance be then indicated by the point B. Let 
the process go on till another equal quantity, H, of heat has 
entered, and let c indicate the resulting state. The process 
may be carried on so as to find any number of points on 


156 Heat Engines. 


the isothermal line, such that for each point passed during 
the expansion of the substance a quantity H of heat has been 
communicated to it. 

Now let a a’ a”, B B’ BB”, c Cc’ Cc” be adiabatic lines drawn 
through a B C, that is, lines 
representing the relation be- 
tween volume and _ pressure 
when the substance is allowed 
to expand without receiving 

eat from without. 

Let? a’ eC and tT’ a’ ER 
be isothermal lines  corre- 
sponding to the temperatures 
T’ and 1”. 

We have already followed 
Carnot’s proof that in a re- 

——______—_—__——— versible engine, working from 
the temperature T of the source of heat to the temperature 1’ 
of the refrigerator, the work w produced by the quantity of 
heat H drawn from the source depends only on T and T’. 

Hence, since A B and B C correspond to equal quantities 
of heat H received from the source, the areas A B B’ A’ and 
BC C’ B’, which represent the corresponding work performed, 
must be equal. 

The same is true of the areas cut off by the adiabatic lines 
from the space between any other pair of isothermal lines. 

Hence if a series of adiabatic lines be drawn so that the 
points at which they cut one of the isothermal lines corre- 
spond to successive equal additions of heat to the substance 
at that temperature, then this series of adiabatic lines will cut 
off a series of equal areas from the strip bounded by any two 
isothermal lines. 

Now Thomson’s method of graduating a scale of tempera- 
ture is equivalent to choosing the points A a’ a”, from which 
to draw a series of isothermal lines, so that the areaa B B’ a’ 
contained between two consecutive isothermals T and 1’ shall 


Fic. 23. 


be equal to the area a’ B’ 8” a” contained between any other 
pair of consecutive isothermals 1’ 7”. 

It is the same as saying that the number of degrees between. 
the temperature T and the temperature 1’ is to be reckoned | 
proportional to the area A B B” a”, 

Of course two things remain arbitrary, the standard tem-— 
perature which is to be reckoned zero, and the size of the 
degrees, and these may be chosen so that the absolute scale | 
corresponds with one of the ordinary scales at the two 
standard temperatures, but as soon as these are determined 
the numerical measure of every other temperature is settled, 
in a manner independent of the laws of expansion of any 
one substance—by a method, in fact, which leads to the same 
result whatever be the substance employed. 

It is true that the experiments and measurements required 
to graduate a thermometer on the principle here pointed out 
would be far more difficult than those required by the — 
ordinary method described in the chapter on Thermometry, 
But we are not, in this chapter, describing convenient methods __ 
or good working engines. Our objects are intellectual, — 
not practical, and when we have established theoretically 
the scientific advantages of this method of graduation, we 
shall be better able to understand the practical methods by 
which it can be realised. 

We now draw the series of isothermal and adiabatic fides ei 
in the following way : 

A particular isothermal line, that of temperature T, is cut 
by the adiabatic lines, so that the expansion of the substance 
¢ between consecutive adiabatic lines corresponds to successive _ 
‘ quantities of heat, each equal to H, applied to the substance. 
: This determines the series of adiabatic lines. 

The isothermal lines are drawn so that the successive — 
isothermals cut off from the space between the pair of _ 
adiabatic lines a a’ A” and B B’ B” equal areas A BBA’, 
he A’, &e, " 

The isothermal lines so determined cut off equal areas — 


‘ 
oni: 
A ee Tea: ee 


wry 7 ° “i hg a ose eee ft ale Cae a ene eee 
' r a _ ut 


158 : Heat Engines. 


from every other pair of adiabatic lines, so that the two 

systems of lines are such that all the quadrilaterals formed 

by two pairs of consecutive lines are equal in area. 
We have now graduated the isothermals on the diagram 

by a method founded on Carnot’s principle alone, and in- | 

dependent of the nature of the working substance, and it is 

easy to see how by altering, if necessary, the interval between 

the lines and the line chosen for zero, we can make the 


graduation agree, at the two standard temperatures, with 
the ordinary scale. 


EFFICIENCY OF A HEAT ENGINE. 


Let us now consider the relation between the heat supplied 
to an engine and the work done by it as expressed in terms 
of the new scale of temperature. 

If the temperature of the source of heat is T, and if H is 
the quantity of heat supplied to the engine at that tempera- 
ture, then the work done by this heat depends entirely on 
the temperature of the refrigerator. Let 1” be the tempera- 
ture of the refrigerator, then the work done by u is represented 
by the area a B B” A”, or, since all the areas between the 
isothermals and the adiabatics are equal, let H c be the area 
of one of the quadrilaterals, then the work done by 8 will be 
Hc(t — 1’). The quantity c depends only on the tem- 
perature T. It is called Carnot’s Function of the tempera- 
ture. We shall find a simple definition of it afterwards. 

This, therefore, is a complete determination of the work 
done when the temperature of the source of heat is T. It 
depends only on Carnot’s principle, and is true whether we 
admit the first law of thermodynamics or not. 

If the temperature of the source is not T, but T’, we must 
consider what quantity of heat is represented by the expan- 
sion a’ B’ along the isothermal tT’. Calling this quantity of 
heat H’, the work done by an engine working between the 
temperatures T’ and 1” is 

w= HC (tT — 1). 


Now Carnot supposed that n’ = u, which would make — 


3 the efficiency of the engine simply ~ = ¢ (1’'— 1"), where € a 


; - is Carnot’s function, a constant quantity on this supposition. 
But according to the dynamical theory of heat, we get by the 
4 first law of thermodynamics 

a H = H—ABBA’, 

; the heat being measured as mechanical work, or 

: H =H —HC(T—T). 

e On this theory, therefore, the efficiency of the engine 
_ working between 1’ and 1” is Leal 
i Ww Hc(r—T’) ae 
i H H—HC(T—T) he 


; Ta! 

7 ee +A hs 
‘ we ie 
” C + - — T. * a 


ON ABSOLUTE TEMPZRATURE. ie 


We have now obtained a method of expressing differences 
__ of temperature in such a way that the difference of two 
4 temperatures may be compared with the difference of two 
_ other temperatures. But we are able to go a step farther 
than this, and to reckon temperature from a zero point | 
defined on thermodynamic principles independently of the — 
properties of a selected substance. We must carefully 
distinguish between what we are doing now on really scientific 
principles from what we did for the sake of convenience in 
describing the air thermometer. Absolute temperature on 
the air thermometer is merely a convenient expression of the 
laws of gases. The absolute temperature as now defined 
is independent of the nature of the thermometric substance. 
It so happens, however, that the difference between these _ 
two scales of temperature is very small. The reason of this 
will be explained afterwards. Je 


It is plain that the work which a given quantity of heat 


H can perform in an engine can never be greater than the 
mechanical equivalent of that heat, though the colder the 
refrigerator the greater proportion of heat is converted into 
work. It is plain, therefore, that if we determine T” the 
temperature of the refrigerator, so as to make w the work 
mechanically equivalent to H, the heat received by the 
engine, we shall obtain an expression for a state of things in 
which the engine would convert the whole heat into work, 
and no body can possibly be at a lower temperature than 
the value thus assigned to 1”. 

Putting w = nH’, we find Tt’ = T — : 

This is the lowest temperature any body canhave. Call- 
ing this temperature zero, we find 

a hess 
Cc 
or the temperature reckoned from absolute zero is the 
reciprocal of Carnot’s function c. 

We have therefore arrived at a complete definition of the 
measure of temperature, in which nothing remains to be 
determined except the size of the degrees. Hitherto the 
size of the degrees has been chosen so as to be equal to the 
mean value of those of the ordinary scales. To convert the 
ordinary expressions into absolute temperatures we must add 
to the ordinary expression a constant number of degrees, 
which may be called the absolute temperature of the zero of 
the scale. There is also a correction varying at different 
parts of the scale, which is never very great when the tem- 
perature is measured by the air thermometer. We may now 
express the efficiency of a reversible heat engine in terms of 
the absolute temperatire s of the source of heat, and the 
absolute temperature rc of the refrigerator. If u is the 
quantity of heat supplied to the engine, and w is the quantity 
of work performed, both estimated in dynamical measure, 
s—T 

on 


WW 
H 


mG: 


uantity of heat which is given out to the refrigerator 


: 
- at temperature T is 2 = H — w = H—, whence 
: ; 


8 = h or 56 = _ 

S ee Sa 9 

_ that is, in a reversible engine the heat received is to the 

_ heat rejected as the absolute temperature of the source is to 
the absolute temperature of the refrigerator. 

This relation furnishes us with a method of determining et 
the ratio of two temperatures on the absolute dynamical oe. 
scale. It is independent of the nature of the substance 

_ employed in the reversible engine, and is therefore a perfect 
_ method considered from a theoretical point of view. The 
_ practical difficulties of fulfilling the required conditions and 
_ making the necessary measurements have not hitherto been 
_ overcome, so that the comparison of the dynamical scale of 
temperature with the ordinary scale must be made in a re 
different way. (See p. 196.) ae 
___ Let us now return to the diagram fig. 23 (p. 156), on which 
_ we have traced two systems of lines, the isothermals and 
the adiabatics. To draw an isothermal line through a given 
“point requires only a series of experiments on the substance 
at a given temperature, as shown by a thermometer of any 
_kind. To draw a series of these lines to represent ‘succes- 
sive degrees of temperature is equivalent to fixing a scale of 
_ temperature. 
_ Such a scale might be defined in many different ways, 
_ each of which depends on the properties of some selected 
substance. For instance, the scale might be founded on the 
_ expansion ofa particular substance at some standard pressure. 
In this case, if a horizontal line is drawn to represent the 
_ Standard pressure, then the isothermal lines of the selected’ 
‘substance will cut this line at equal intervals. If, however, 
the nature of the substance or the standard pressure be 
different, the thermometric scale will be in general different. 
The scale might also be founded on the variation of pressure 
M 


Ft 


=p 


162 Heat Engines. 


ot a substance confined in a given space, as in the case 
of certain applications of the air thermometer. 

It has also been proposed to define temperature so that 
equal increments of heat applied to a standard substance 
will produce equal increments of temperature. This method 
also fails to give results consistent for all substances, because 
the specific heats of different substances are not in the same 
ratio at different temperatures. 

The only method which is certain to give consistent 
results, whatever be the substance employed, is that which is 
founded on Carnot’s Function, and the most convenient 
form in which this method can be applied is that which 
defines the absolute temperature as the reciprocal of Carnot’s 
Function. We shall see afterwards how a comparison can 
be made between the absolute temperature on the thermo- 
dynamic scale and the temperature as indicated by a 
thermometer of a particular kind of gas. 

To draw an adiabatic line through any point requires 
only experiments on the substance. The series of adiabatic — 
lines in our diagram is defined so that when the substance 
expands at a certain temperature T, the same quantity of 
heat H causes it to.pass from one adiabatic line to the next. 
If we make this quantity of heat measured dynamically (that 
is in units of work) equal numerically to T, the absolute — 
temperature of the standard isothermal line, then, as we have 
already shown, the area of every quadrilateral contained 
between two consecutive isothermals and two consecutive — 


HP Me GR z 
adiabatics will be cH =--= 1. To measure any area on — 
“y 


the diagram we have only to count the number of these 
quadrilaterals contained in it. We must then mark the 
adiabatic lines, beginning with the line of no heat, with the - 
indices 0, 1, 2, 3, &c., up to ¢, the index or number of the 
line. This quantity, g, is called by Rankine the Thermo- 
dynamic Function. 


It is probably impossible to deprive a body entirely of : 


Thermodynamics. 163 


_ heat. If, however, we could do so, its temperature would 
be absolute zero, and the relation between its volume and 
its pressure at this temperature would be given by an 
isothermal line called the line of absolute cold. Of course 
we have no experimental data for determining the form 
of this line for any actual substance. We can only re- 

» gard it as a limit beyond which no line in the diagram 
can extend. 

In the seven chapters which follow we shall apply the prin- 
ciples of Thermodynamics to several important cases, avoid- 
ing as much as we can the introduction of the methods of 
the higher mathematics, by which most of the results are 
worked out in the original memoirs. It is hoped that the 
student may obtain some assistance from these chapters in 
his study of Thermodynamics. He may, however, especially 
when first reading the subject, pass on to Chapter XVI. 


| CHAPTER IX, 


ON THE RELATIONS BETWEEN THE PHYSICAL 
PROPERTIES OF A SUBSTANCE. 


LET T, T; and T,.T, represent two isothermal lines corre- 
sponding to two consecutive degrees of temperature. Let 
$, $, and @ $2 represent two consecutive adiabatic lines. 
Let a BCD be the quadrilateral which lies between both 
these pairs of lines. If the lines are drawn close enough to 
each other we may treat this quadrilateral as a parallelo- 
gram. 

The area of this parallelogram is, as we have already 
shown, equal to unity. 

Draw horizontal lines through a and p to meet the line 
BC produced in kK and Q, then, since the parallelograms 
ABCD and AK QD stand on the same base and are between 


the same parallels, they are equal. Now draw the vertical 
M2 


164 Thermodynamics. 


lines a & and K P to meet Q D, produced if necessary. Then. 
the rectangle a K P & is equal to the parallelogram A K Q D, - 
because they stand on the same base a K, and are between 
the same parallels ak and&qQ. Hence the rectangle a Kk P& 


FiG. 24. 


is also equal to the original parallelogram a peop. If, 
therefore, we draw a K from a horizontally to meet the 
isothermal T,, and a & vertically to meet a horizontal line 
through pb, we shall have the following relation : 
AK.AkR= ABCD. 


In the same way, if the horizontal line through a cuts the) 
adiabatic line ¢, in L and the verticals through p and B in 
m and n, and if the vertical line through a cuts the isothermal 
line T, in M, the adiabatic line 9, in N, and the horizontal” 
line through B in /, we shall get the following four values of 
the area of A BC D, including that which we have already 
investigated : . 
ABCD=AK.AA=AL.AJ=AM.AM=AN.AN=1, 

We have next to interpret the physical meaning of the 
four pairs of lines which enter into these products. 

We must remember that the volume of the substance is 
measured horizontally to the right, and its pressure vertically 


3" 


ce 


Four Thermodynamical Relations. 165 


upwards ; that the interval between the isothermal lines 
represents one degree of temperature, the graduation of the 
scale being as much subdivided as we please ; and that the 
interval between the adiabatic lines represents the addition 
of a quantity of heat whose numerical value is T, the 
absolute temperature. 


(1) AK represents the increase of volume for a rise of 
temperature equal to one degree, the pressure being main- 
tained constant. This is called the dt/atability of the 
substance per unit of mass, and if we denote the dilatability 
per unit of volume by a, a K will be denoted by v a. 

A & represents the diminution of pressure corresponding 
to the addition of a quantity of heat represented numerically 
by rr, the temperature being maintained constant. 

If the pressure is increased by unity, the temperature 
remaining constant, the quantity of heat which is emitted by 
the substance is". Sinceak.ak= 1, =T.AK. 

Ak Ak 

Hence the following relation between the dilatation under 
constant pressure and the heat developed by pressure. 

First Thermodynamic Relation.—lf the pressure of a sub- 
stance be increased by unity while the temperature is main- 
tained constant, the quantity of heat emitted by the sub- 
stance is equal to the product of the absolute temperature 
into the dilatation for one degree of temperature under 
constant pressure. 

Hence, if the temperature is maintained constant, those 
substances which increase in volume as the temperature 
rises give out heat when the pressure is increased, and 
those which contract as the temperature rises absorb heat 
when the pressure is increased. 


(2) A L represents the increase of volume under constant 
pressure when a quantity of heat numerically equal to T is 
communicated to the substance. 

A / represents the increase of pressure required to raise 


166 Thermodynamics. 


the substance one degree of temperature when no heat is 
allowed to escape. 


Second Thermodynamic Relation—The quantity ra re- 


presents the heat which must be communicated to the sub- 
stance in order to increase its volume by unity, the pressure 
being constant, This is equal to the product of the ab- 
solute temperature into the increase of pressure required 
to raise the temperature one degree when no heat is allowed 
to escape. 


(3) A M represents the increase of pressure corresponding 
to a rise of one degree of temperature, the volume being 
constant. (We may suppose the substance enclosed in a 
vessel the sides of which are perfectly unyielding.) 

A m represents the increase of volume produced by the 
communication cf a quantity of heat numerically equal to 
T, the temperature being maintained constant. 

The heat given out by the substance when the volume is 
diminished by unity, the temperature being maintained con- 


stant, is therefore —. . This quantity is called the latent 


heat of expansion. 
Since A M.A 7 == 1, we may express the relation between 


: - . 
these lines thus : re" = T.AM, or, in words: 
m 


Third Thermodynamic Relation —The latent heat of ex- 
pansion is equal to the product of the absolute temperature 
and the increment of pressure per degree of temperature at 
constant volume. 


(4) AN represents the increase of the pressure when a 
quantity, T, of heat is communicated to the substance, the 
volume being constant. 

A m represents the diminution of volume when the sub- 
stance, being prevented from losing heat, is compressed till 
the temperature rises one degree. Hence: 


ie 


Specific Heat. 167 


Fourth Thermodynamic Relation. — ‘— represents the 
An 


rise of temperature due to a diminution of the volume 
by unity, no heat being allowed to escape, and this is equal 
to A N, the increase of pressure at constant volume due to 
a quantity of heat, numerically equal to T, communicated to 
the substance. 

We have thus obtained four relations among the physical 
properties of the substance. These four relations are not 
independent of each other, so as to rank as separate truths. 
Any one might be deduced from any other. The equality 
of the products a kK, a &, &c., to the parallelogram a BCD 
and to each other is a merely geometrical truth, and does 
not depend upon thermodynamical principles. What we 
learn from thermodynamics is that the parallelogram and 
the four products are each equal to unity, whatever be the 
nature of the substance or its condition as to pressure and 
temperature. ! 


ON THE TWO MODES OF MEASURING SPECIFIC HEAT. 


The quantity of heat required to raise unit of mass of the 
substance one degree of temperature is called the specific 
heat of the substance. 


1 These four relations may be concisely expressed in the language of 
the Differential Calculus as follows: 


du POR 2, (1) 
d6(pfconst.) — d p (8 const.) 
du at Me) (2) 
do (pconst.) ~ dp (¢ const.) 
=F = 998 (3) 
d 6 (z const.) ag Giconst.) oto 
dp ot ele (4) 
dq (vconst.) = dy (% const.) = ee 
Here v denotes the volume. 
p an pressure. 
0 Pe absolute temperature. 


9 es thermodynamic function. 


aie 


T. hermodynamics. 


If this quantity of heat is expressed in dynamical measure _ 
it is called the dynamical specific heat. It is more usually 
expressed in terms of the thermal unit as defined in the — 
chapter on Calorimetry with reference to water. To reduce 
this to dynamical measure we must multiply by Joule’s 
mechanical equivalent of the thermal unit. 4 

But the specific heat of a substance depends on the mode 
in which the pressure and volume of the substance vary 
during the rise of temperature. 

There are, therefore, an indefinite number of modes of 
defining the specific heat. Two only of these are of any 
practical importance. The first method is to suppose the 
volume to remain constant during the rise of temperature. 
The specific heat under this condition is called the specific 
heat at constant volume. We shall denote it by k,. 

In the diagram the line a M N represents the different 
states of the substance when the volume is constant, A M 
represents the increase of pressure due to a rise of one 
degree of temperature, and a N that due to the application 
of a quantity of heat numerically equal tor. Hence to find 

the quantity of heat, K,, which must be communicated to 
the substance in order to raise its temperature one degree, 
and so increase the pressure by A M, we have — 
ANAM Sey 
or 


The second method of defining specific heat is to suppose 
the pressure constant. The specific heat under constant 
pressure is denoted by k,. 

The line A LX in the diagram represents the different states 
of the substance at constant pressure, A K represents the in- 
crease of volume due to a rise of one degree of temperature, 
and a L represents the increase of volume due to a quantity | 
of heat numerically equal to tr. Now the quantity kK, of — 
heat raises the substance one degree, and therefore increases © 
_ the volume by a kK. i 


aay J 


Relations of Specific Heat and Elasticity. 169 


Hence 
ie well TSK; 
or 
A 
i — - ——. 
AL 


(A third mode of defining specific heat is sometimes 
adopted in the case of saturated steam. In this case the 
steam is supposed to remain at the point of saturation as 
the temperature rises. It appears, from the experiments of 
M. Regnault, as shown in the diagram at p. 135, that heat 
leaves the saturated steam as its temperature rises, so that 
its specific heat is zegative, a result pointed out by Clausius 
and Rankine.) 


ON THE TWO MODES OF MEASURING ELASTICITY. 


The elasticity of a substance was defined at p. 107 to 
be the ratio of the increment of pressure to the com 
pression produced by it, the compression being defined 
to be the ratio of the diminution of volume to the original 
volume. 

But we require to know something about the thermal 
conditions under which the substance is placed before we 
can assign a definite value to the elasticity. The only two 
conditions which are of practical importance are, first, 
when the temperature remains constant, and, second, when 
there is no communication of heat. 

(1) The elasticity under the condition that the temperature . 
remains constant may be denoted by Eg, 

In this case the relation between volume and pressure is 
defined by the isothermal line D a. The increment of 
pressure is & a, and the diminution of volume is m A. 
Calling the volume v, the elasticity at constant tempera- 


ture is 
Eg = yak =" Vv. nthe os 
Am AK 
(2) The elasticity under the condition that heat neither 


enters nor leaves the substance is denoted by £g, 


____ In this case the relation between volume and pressure is 


ad fort, Ai gadie et ae ye Ld 
a" A pid 


170 Thermodynamics. 


defined by the adiabatic line a B. The increment of pressure 
is A /, and the decrement of volume is a. Hence the 
elasticity when no heat escapes is 


There are several important relations among these 
quantities. In the first place, we find for the ratio of the 
specific heats, 


AK AN 
Ceres Y.-e 

SS ae ee 
AM AM 

ee pinion oo ee 
AN AK 


or the ratio of the specific heat at constant pressure to that 
at constant volume is equal to the ratio of the elasticity 
when no heat escapes to the elasticity at constant tempera- 
ture. This relation is quite independent of the principles of 
thermodynamics, being a direct consequence of the defini- 
tions. 

The ratio of K, to K,, or of Eg to E»,is commonly denoted 
by the symbol y: thus K, = yK,, and Ey = yEg, 

Let us next determine the difference between the two 


elasticities 
ALAM—AN.AR 


Eg — Eg = V. - 
AmMmM.AMN? 


The numerator of the fraction is evidently, by the geo- 
metry of the figure, equal to the parallelogram a B C D, 
Multiplying by k,, we find 


AM ABCD AM 
K, (Ey + Es) = TV. —_s ier 
Am AN.AN Am 


since A 72.A N = ABCD, as we have shown. 


Since K, Ey = K, Ee, we also find 
AM 
Ee (Kp — Ky) = lideters 
These relations are independent of the principles of 
thermodynamics. 


Latent Heat. 171 


If we now apply the thermodynamical equation A M.A m 
- = 1, each of these quantities becomes equal to 
TV. (aM). 
Now A M is the increment of pressure at constant volume 
per degree of temperature, a very important quantity. The 
results therefore may be written 


K, (Eg — Eg) = TV AM? = Eg (K, = Ky). 


CHAPTER X. 


ON LATENT HEAT. 


A very important class of cases is that in which the sub- 
stance is in two different states at the same temperature and 
pressure, as when part of it is solid and part liquid, or part 
solid or liquid and part gaseous. 
In such cases the volume occupied by the substance must 
be considered as consisting of two parts, v, being that of the 
substance in the first state, and v7, that of the substance in 
the second state. The quantity of heat necessary to convert 
unit of mass of the substance from the first state to the 
second without altering its temperature is called the Latent 

Heat of the substance, and is denoted by t. 
| During this process the volume changes from 7, to 7 at 
the constant pressure /. 

Let Pp s be an isothermal 
line, which in this case is hori- 
zontal, and let it correspond to 
the pressure Pp and the tempe- 
rature Ss. 

Let @ T be another iso- 
thermal line corresponding to 
the pressure Q and the tempe- 
ature T. 


Fic. 25. 


5% pire Sir na eth ws. > 
eh FT A ae 


172 Latent Heat. 


Let B A and c D be adiabatic lines cutting the isothermals 
1 ABCD. 

Then the substance, in expanding at the temperature s 
from the volume P B to the volume P c, will absorb a 


BC 


quantity of heat equal to L -, where L is the latent 


at gl. 
heat at temperature s. 
When the substance is compressed from Q D to Q A at 


temperature T it will give out a quantity of heat equal to 


where the accented quantities refer to the temperature T. 

The quantity of work done by an engine when the indi- 
cating point describes the figure a B C D on the diagram is 
represented by the area of this figure, and if the temperatures 
s and T are so near each other that we may neglect the 
curvature of the lines a B and CD, this area is 

L(BC + AD) PQ. 

If the difference ¢ pressures P Q is very small, BC=AD 

nearly, so that we may write the area thus : 
BC (P — Q). 

But we may calculate the work in another way. It is © 
equal to the heat absorbed at the higher temperature, 
multiplied by the ratio of the difference of the temperatures — 
to the higher temperature. This is 

BC S—T 
Ve — 24 ee 


L 


Equating the two values of the work, we find the latent 
heat 
oe 


L = (¥, — 7)S8 
(U2 8 


* 


where it is to be remembered that in calculating the frac- 


Hon 72.2 
S 


the difference of the pressures P and Q and the 


. 


difference of the temperatures s and T are to be supposed 


Latent Heat. 173 


very small. In fact, this fraction is that which in the lan- 


guage of the differential calculus would be denoted by ee : 


The student may deduce the equation at once from the 
third thermodynamic relation at p. 160. 

The most important case of a substance in two different 
states is that in which the substance is partly water and 
partly steam at the same temperature. 

The pressure of steam in a vessel containing water at the 
same temperature is called the pressure of saturated steam 
or aqueous vapour at that temperature. 

The value of this pressure has been determined for a great 
number of temperatures as measured on the ordinary scales. 
The most complete determinations of this kind are those of 
Regnault. Regnault has also determined tL, the latent heat 
of unit of mass of steam, for many different temperatures. 

Hence, if we also knew the value of v, — 7, or the 
difference of volume between unit of mass of water and the 
same when converted into steam, we should have all the 
data for determining s, the absolute temperature on the 
thermodynamic scale. 

Unfortunately there is considerable difficulty in ascer- 
taining the volume of steam at the point of saturation. If 
we place a known weight of water in a vessel, the capacity 
of which we can adjust, and determine either the capacity 
corresponding to a given temperature at which the whole is 
just converted into steam, or the temperature corresponding 
to a given capacity, we may obtain data for determining 
the density of saturated steam, but it is exceedingly difficult 
to observe either the completion of the evaporation or the 
beginning of the condensation, and at the same time to 
avoid other causes of error. It is to be hoped that these 
difficulties will be. overcome, and then our knowledge of the 
other properties of saturated steam will enable us to compare 
the ordinary scales of temperature with the thermodynamic 
scale through a range extending from — 30° F. to 432° F. 

In the meantime Clausius and Rankine made use of the 


formula in order to calculate the density of saturated steam, 
assuming that the absolute temperature is equal to the tem- 
perature reckoned from — 460° of Fahrenheit’s scale. 

The same principle enables us to establish relations 
between the physical properties of a substance at the point 
at which it changes from the solid to the liquid state. 

The temperature of melting ice was always supposed to be 
absolutely constant till it was pointed out by Professor James 
Thomson! that it follows from Carnot’s principle that the 
melting point must be lowered when the pressure increases ; 
for if v, is the volume of a pound of ice, and v, that of a 
pound of water, both being at 32° F., we know that the 
volume of the ice is greater than that of the water. Hence 
if s be the melting point at pressure P, and T the melting 
point at pressure Q, we have, as at p. 172, 

S—T 
P—Q 

If we make P = o and s = 32° F., then the melting tem- 

perature at pressure Q is 


$s 
= (% ,— 2) — : 


° s 
T = 32 iam A tagd fs 


Now the volume of a pound of ice at 32° F. is o'0174 
cubic feet = v,, and that of a pound of water at the same 
- temperature is o'o16 cubic feet =v. s, the absolute tempe- 
- rature, corresponding to 32°F., is 492°. L, the latent heat 
required to convert a pound of ice into a pound of water, 
= 142 thermal units = 142 x 772 foot-pounds. Hence 1, 
the temperature of melting, corresponding toa ghee of 
Q pounds’ weight per square foot, is 


T = 32° — 0°'0000063 xX Q. 
If the pressure be that of z atmospheres, each atmosphere 


being 2,116 pounds’ ii per square foot, 
T = 32° — 0°'°0133 2. , 


1 Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. xvi. p. 575, 
_ January 2, 1849. 


Freezing Point aliered by Pressure. 175 


Hence the melting point of ice is lowered by about the 
seventy-fifth part of a degree of Fahrenheit for every 
additional atmosphere of pressure. This result of theory 
was verified by the direct experiments of Professor W. 
Thomson.! 

Professor J. Thomson has also pointed out the importance 
of the unique condition as to temperature and pressure under 
which water or any other substance can permanently exist 
in the solid, liquid, and gaseous forms in the same vessel. 
This can only be at the freezing temperature corresponding 
to the pressure of vapour at this freezing point. He calls 
this the triple point, because three thermal lines meet in it— 
(1) the steam line, which divides the liquid from the gaseous 
state ; (2) the ice line, which divides the liquid from the solid 
state ; (3) the hoar-frost line, which divides the solid from the 
gaseous state. 

Whenever the volume of the substance is, like that of 
water, less in the liquid than in the solid state, the effect of 
pressure on a vessel containing the substance partly in a 
liquid and partly in a solid state is to cause some of the 
solid portion to melt, and to lower the temperature of the 
whole to the melting point corresponding to the pressure. 
If, on the contrary, the volume of the substance is greater iz 
the liquid than in the solid state, the effect of pressure is to 
' solidify some of the liquid part, and to raise the temperature 
to the melting point corresponding to the pressure. To 
determine at once whether the volume of the substance is 
greater in the liquid or the solid state, we have only to 
observe whether solid portions of the substance sink or swim 
in the melted substance. If, like ice in water, they swim, 
the volume is greater in the solid state, and pressure causes 
melting and lowers the melting point. If, like sulphur, wax, 
and most kinds of stone, the solid substance sinks in the 
liquid, then pressure causes solidification and raises the 
melting point. 

1 Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1850. 


a oe 


176 §©Afpplication of Thermodynamics te Gases. 


When two pieces of ice at the melting point are pressed 
together, the pressure causes melting to take place at the 
portions of the surface in contact. The water so formed 
escapes out of the way and the temperature is lowered. 
Hence as soon as the pressure diminishes the two parts are 
frozen together with ice at a temperature below 32°. This 
phenomenon is called Regelation. 

It is well known that the temperature of the earth increases 
as we descend, so that at the bottom of a deep boring it is 
considerably hotter than at the surface. We shall see that, 
unless we suppose the present state of things to be of no 
great antiquity, this increase of temperature must go on to 
much greater depths than any of our borings. It is easy on 
this supposition to calculate at what depth the temperature 
would be equal to that at which most kinds of stone melt in 
our furnaces, and it has been sometimes asserted that at this 
depth we should find everything in a state of fusion. But 
we must recollect that at such depths there is an enormous 
pressure, and therefore rocks which in our furnaces would 
be melted at a certain temperature may remain solid even at 
much greater temperatures in the heart of the earth. 


CHAPTER XI. 


ON THE APPLICATION OF THE PRINCIPLES OF 
THERMODYNAMICS TO GASES. 


THE physical properties of bodies in the gaseous state are 
more simple than when they are in any other state. The 
relations of the volume, pressure, and temperature are 
then more or less accurately represented by the laws of 
Boyle and Charles, which we shall speak of, for brevity, as ° 


1e ‘ gaseous laws.’ We may express them in the following 
form: 
Let v denote the volume of unit of mass, / the pressure, 


¢ the temperature measured by an air thermometer and 


reckoned from the absolute zero of that instrument, then 


the quantity —— 7f remains constant for the same gas. 


We here use rie symbol ¢ to denote the absolute tempera 
ture as measured by the air thermometer, reserving the 
symbol 6 to denote the temperature according to the 
absolute thermodynamic scale, 

We have no right to assume without proof that these two 
quantities are the same, although we shall be able to show 
by experiment that the one is nearly equal to the other. 

It is probable that when the volume and the temperature 


are sufficiently great all gases fulfil with great accuracy the 


gaseous laws ; but when, by compression and cooling, the 
gas is brought near to its point of condensation into the 


liquid form, the quantity of becomes less than it is for 


the perfectly gaseous state, na the substance, though still 
apparently gaseous, no longer fulfils with accuracy the 
gaseous laws. (See pp. 116, 119.) 

The specific heat of a gas can be determined only by a 


- course of experiments involving considerable difficulty and 


requiring great delicacy in the measurements. The gas 
must be enclosed in a vessel, and the density of the 


gas itself is so small that its capacity for heat forms but 


a small part of the total capacity of the apparatus. Any 


error, therefore, in the determination of the capacity either 
of the vessel itself or of the vessel with the gas in it will 


produce a much larger error in the calculated specific heat of 


the gas. 


Hence the determinations of the specific heat of gases 


were generally very inaccurate, till M. Regnault brought 
all the resources of his experimental skill to bear on the 


N 


oN 
« vit 
. ¥ 


178 Application of Thermodynamics to Gases. 
investigation, and, by making the gas pass in a continuous 
current and in large quantities through the tube of his calori- 
meter, deduced results which cannot be far from the truth. 

These results, however, were not published till 1853, but in 
the meantime Rankine, by the application of the principles 
of thermodynamics to facts already known, determined 
theoretically a value of the specific heat of air, which he 
published in 1850. The value which he obtained differed 
from that which was then received as the best result of direct 
experiment, but when Rcgnault’s result was published it 
agreed exactly with Rankine’s calculation. 

We must now explain the principle which Rankine 
applied. When a gas is compressed while the temperature 
remains constant, the product of the volume and pressure 
remains constant. Hence, as we have shown, the elasticity 
of the gas at constant temperature is numerically equal to its 
pressure. 

But if the vessel in which the gas is contained is incapable 
of receiving heat from the gas, or of communicating heat to 
it, then when compression takes place the temperature will 
rise, and the pressure will be greater than it was in the 
former case. The elasticity, therefore, will be greater in the 
case of no thermal communication than in the case of 
constant temperature. 

To determine the elasticity under these circumstances in 
this way would be impossible, because we cannot obtain a 
vessel which will not allow heat to escape from the gas 
within it. If, however, the compression is effected rapidly, 
there will be very little time for the heat to escape, but 
then there will be very little ttme to measure the pressure 
in the ordinary way. It is possible, however, after com- 
pressing air into a large vessel at a known temperature, to 
open an aperture of considerable size for a time which is 
sufficient to allow the air to rush out till the pressure is the 
same within and without the vessel, but not sufficient to 
allow much heat to be absorbed by the air from the sides of 


+ 


ne vessel. When the aperture is closed the air 1s somewhat 

cooler than before, and though it receives heat from the 

_sides of the vessel so fast that its temperature in the cooled 
state cannot be accurately observed with a thermometer, the 
amount of cooling may be calculated by observing the 
‘pressure of the air within the vessel after its temperature has 

become equal to that of the atmosphere. Since at the 

_moment of closing the aperture the air within was cooler than 

the air without, while its pressure was the same, it follows 

that when the temperature within has risen so as to be 
equal to that of the atmosphere its pressure will be greater. 

_ Let f, be the original pressure of the air compressed in a 
vessel whose volume is v; let its temperature be T, equal to 
that of the atmosphere. 

Part of the air is then allowed to escape, till the pressure 
within the vessel is P, equal to that of the atmosphere ; let 
the temperature of the air remaining within the vessel be ¢ 
Now let the aperture be closed, and let the temperature of 
the air within become again T, equal to that of the atmosphere, 
and let its pressure be then Ay. 

_ To determine 4, the absolute temperature of the air when 
‘cooled, we have, since the volume of the enclosed air © 

is constant, the proportion : 


ey eat sae 


or 


This gives the cooling effect of expansion from the 
pressure #, to the pressure p. To determine the corre. 
sponding change of volume we must calculate the volume 
originally occupied by the air which remains in the vessel. 

_ At the end of the experiment it occupies a volume Vv, at a. 
pressure #, and a temperature T. At the beginning of the 
experiment its pressure was /, and its temperature 1: 


hence the volume which it then occupied was v 2 =v, and 


1 
# N 2 


_ hundred, or even several thousand, times in a second, the 


180 Application of T. hermodynamics to Gases. 


a sudden increase of volume in the ratio of f, to f, corre- 
sponds to a diminution of pressure from /, to Pp. Since po 
is greater than’p, the ratio of the pressures is greater than 
the ratio of the volumes. 

The elasticity of the air under the condition of no thermal 
communication is the value of the quantity 


ee Ca ee 7 Vase 

a So ae, 
when the expansion is very small, or when f, is very little 
greater than p. 

But we know that the elasticity at constant temperature 
is numerically equal to the pressure (see p. 1r1). Hence we 
find for the value of y, the ratio of the two elasticities, 


ae Ai Ps 
1 pi — Po 
or, more exactly, 
log ~, — log P 


log py — log po 

Although this method of determining the elasticity in the 
ease of no thermal communication is a practicable one, it is 
by no means the most perfect method. It is difficult, for 
instance, to arrange the experiment so that the pressure 
may be completely equalised at the time the aperture is — 
closed, while at the same time no sensible portion of heat 
has been communicated to the air from the sides of the 
vessel. It is also necessary to ensure that no air has en-. 
tered from without, and that the motion within the vessel has 
subsided before the aperture is closed. . 

But the velocity of sound in air depends, as we shall 
afterwards show, on the relation between its density and its 
pressure during the rapid condensations and rarefactions 
which occur during the propagation of sound. As these 
ehanges of pressure and density succeed one another several 


heat developed by compression in one part of the air has no 


ag 


0 of Elasticities. 


time to travel by conduction to parts cooled by expansion, 
even if air were as good a conductor of heat as copper is. 
_ But we know that air is really a very bad conductor of heat, 
_ so that in the propagation of sound we may be quite certain 
that the changes of volume take place without any appreci 
able communication of heat, and therefore the elasticity, as 
deduced from measurements of the velocity of sound, is 
_ that corresponding to the condition of no thermal communi- 
- cation. 
The ratio of the elasticities of air, as deduced from experi- 
ments on the velocity of sound, is 


y = 1°408. 


This is also, as we have shown, the ratio of the specific 
heat at constant pressure to the specific heat at constant 
volume. 
These relations were pointed out by Laplace, long before 
the recent development of thermodynamics. 
We now proceed, following Rankine, to apply the thermo- 
dynamical equation of p. 171: 
E9 (K, — Ky) = TV (AM)? 
In the case of a fluid fulfilling the gaseous laws, and 
also such that the absolute zero of its thermometric scale 


_ coincides with the absolute zero of the thermodynamic scale, 
- we have 


ze 
AM> + 
0 


U 
fe aR, 


“el constant quantity. a 
_ Now at the freezing temperature, which is 492°°6 — 


Seo 


on Fahrenheit’s scale from absolute zero, f v = 


182 Application of Thermodynamics to Gases. 


is 53°21 foot-pounds per degree of Fahrenheit. 

This is the work done by one pound of air in expanding 
under constant pressure while the temperature is raised one 
degree Fahrenheit. 

Now kK, is the mechanical equivalent of the heat required 
to raise one pound of air one degree Fahrenheit without 
any change of volume, and K, is the mechanical equivalent 
of the heat required to produce the same change of tempera- 
ture when the gas expands under constant pressure, so that 
K, — K, represents the additional heat required for the ex- 
pansion. The equation, therefore, shows that this additional 
heat is mechanically equivalent to the work done by the 
air during its expansion. This, it must be remembered, 
is not a self-evident truth, because the air isin a different 
condition at the end of the operation from that in which 
it was at the beginning. It is a consequence of the fact, 
discovered experimentally by Joule (p. 196), that no change — 
of temperature occurs when air expands without doing 
external work. 

We have now obtained, in dynamical measure, the differ- 
ence between the two specific heats of air. 

We also know the ratio of K, to K, to be 1°408. Hence 


foot-pounds by Regnault’s experiments on air, so- that R | 
. 


kK, = ae = 130°4 foot-pounds per degree Fahrenheit, 


and 

K, = K, + 53°21 = 183°6 foot-pounds per degree Fah. 

Now the specific heat of water at its maximum density is 
Joule’s equivalent of heat: for one pound it is 772 foot- 
pounds per degree Fahrenheit. 

Hence if c, is the specific heat of air at constant pressure 
referred to that of water as unity, 


C, — - = 0°2378. 


This calculation was published by Rankine in 1850. 


Energy. 3 183. 


The value of the specific heat of air, determined directly 
from experiment by M. Regnault and published in 1853, is 


G, =. 02970. 


CHAPTER XII. 


ON THE INTRINSIC ENERGY OF A SYSTEM OF BODIES. 


THE energy of a body is its capacity for doing work, and 

is measured by the amount of work which it can be made 

to do. The Intrinsic energy of a body is the work which it 

can do in virtue of its actual condition, without any supply 

of energy from without. 

Thus a body may do work by expanding and overcoming 

pressure, or it may give out heat, and this heat may be. 
converted into work in whole or in part. If we possessed a 

perfect reversible engine, and a refrigerator at the absolute 

zero of temperature, we might convert the whole of the heat 

which escapes from the body into mechanical work. As we 

cannot obtain a refrigerator absolutely cold, it is impossible, 

even by means of perfect engines, to convert all the heat 

into mechanical work. We know, however, from Joule’s 

experiments, the mechanical value of any quantity of heat, 

so that if we know the work done by expansion, and the 

quantity of heat given out by the body during any alteration © 
of its condition, we can calculate the energy which has been 
expended by the body during the alteration. 

As we cannot in any case deprive a body of all its heat, 
and as we cannot, in the case of bodies which assume the 
gaseous form, increase the volume of the containing vessel 
sufficiently to obtain all the mechanical energy of the ex- 
pansive force, we cannot determine experimentally the whole 
energy of the body. It is sufficient, however, for all 
practical purposes to know how much the energy exceeds 
or falls short of the energy of the body ina certain definite 


ccondition—for instance, at a standard temperature and a | 
standard pressure. } 

In all questions about the mutual action of bodies we are 
concerned with the difference between the energy of each 
body in different states, and not with its absolute value, so” 
that the method of comparing the energy of the body at 
any time with its energy at the standard temperature and | 
pressure is sufficient for our purpose. If the body in its | 
actual state has less energy than when it is in the standard 
state, the expression for the relative energy will be nega- 
tive. This, however, does not imply that the energy of 
a body can ever be really negative, for this is impossible. 
It only shows that in the standard state it has more energy 
than in the actual state. “| 

Let us compare the energy of a substance in two different — 
states. Let the two states be indicated in the diagram by 
the points a and B,, and let the intermediate states through 
which it passes be indicated by the line, straight or curved, 
which is drawn from A to B. 

During the passage from the state a to the state B the body 
does work by its pressure while expanding, and the quantity 
of energy expended in this way is measured by the area 
A B a contained by the curve 4 B, the vertical lines from A 
and B, and the line of no pressure. If from aand B we draw 
adiabatic linesA a and B/, and - 
produce them (in imagina- 
tion) till they meet the line of 
absolute cold, then the heat 
given out by the substance 
during the change of state is 
represented by the area con- 
tained between the curve A B, 
the two adiabatic lines a a and 
BG, and the line of absolute 
cold, which probably coincide 
with the line of no pressure. — 


a 


Fic. 26. 


s Now the energy of the substance in fie state tae 
by A exceeds its energy in the state Tepresented by B by the 
sum of the two portions of energy given out by the body in 
the form of mechanical work and in the form of heat, that 

is by a quantity represented by the sum of the two areas 

ABdaandaBfa. Now this is the quantity by which the 

area bounded by A a, A a, and the line of no pressure exceeds 
_ that bounded by s 4, 8, and the line of no pressure. 
_ This therefore represents the excess of the energy in the 
state a over the energy in the state B. 

Since we may suppose the point B on the line of no pres- 
sure, and as the energy would then be zero, we may define 
theoretically the total energy in the state represented by A 
as the area contained between the vertical line a a, the 
adiabatic line a a, and the line of no pressure a 6 v. 

The excess of the intrinsic energy of the substance as 
thus defined when in a given state above its intrinsic energy 
at the standard temperature and pressure is the relative 
intrinsic energy of the substance, with which alone we have 
here to deal. 


ON THE AVAILABLE ENERGY OF A SYSTEM OF BODIES. 


Let us suppose that a number of different substances are 
_ placed in a confined region, the volume of which is v, and 
_ that no heat is allowed to escape from this region, though it 
may pass from one body to another within it. 

Let us also suppose that we are able to make use of all 
_ the work done by the expansion of the different substances. 
Since they are in a confined space, one substance can 
expand only by compressing others, and work will be done 
only as long as the expanding substance has a greater pres- 
sure than those which it compresses, Hence, when all the 
substances are at the same pressure, no more work can be 
done in this way. . 

Finally, let us suppose that we are able by means of a 
perfect heat engine to transfer heat from one of the substances 


186 Energy, Entropy, and Dissipation. 


to another. Work will be done only when the heat is 
transferred from a hotter to a colder substance. Hence, 
when all the substances are reduced to the same temperature, 
no more work can be obtained in this way. 
If, therefore, a number of substances are contained in a 
vessel which allows neither matter nor heat to pass its walls, 
“the energy which can be converted into mechanical work 
will be entirely exhausted when all the substances are at the 
same pressure and the same temperature. To obtain any 
more work from the system, we must allow it to communicate 
either mechanically or thermally with bodies outside the 
vessel. Hence only a part of the whole intrinsic energy of 
the system is capable of being converted into mechanical 
work by actions going on within the vessel, and without any 
communication with external space by the passage either of 
matter or of heat. This part is sometimes called the Available | 
Energy of the system. Clausius has called the remainder of 
the energy, which cannot be converted into work, the Entropy 
of the system. We shall find it more convenient to adopt the 
suggestion of Professor Tait, and give the name of Entropy 
to the part which can be converted into mechanical work. 
DEFINITION OF ENTROPY.— Zhe Entropy of a system is 
the mechanical work it can perform without communication of 
heal, or alteration of tts total volume, all transference of heat 
being performed by reversible engines. 
When the pressure and temperature of the system have 
become uniform the entropy is exhausted. 
The original energy of the system is equal to the sum of 
the entropy and the energy remaining in the state of uniform 
pressure and temperature. 
The entropy of a system consisting of several component 
systems is the same in whatever order the entropy of the 
parts is exhausted. It is therefore equal to the sum of the 
entropy of each component system, together with the entropy 
of the system consisting of the component systems, each with 
its own entropy exhausted. 


_ When the parts of a system are at different temperatures, 

_ and if there is thermal communication between them, heat — 

_ will pass from the hotter to the colder parts by conduction 
and radiation. The result of conduction and radiation is 
invariably to diminish the difference of temperature between 
the parts of the system, and the final effect is to reduce the 
whole system to a uniform temperature. 

During this process no external mechanical work is done, 
and when the process is completed, and the temperature of 
the system has become uniform, no work can be obtained 
from the thermal energy of the system. 

Hence the result of the conduction and radiation of heat 
from one part of a system to another is to diminish the 
entropy of the system, or the energy, available as work, 
which can be obtained from the system. 

The energy of the system, however, is indestructible, and 
as it has not been removed from the system, it must remain 
in it. Hence the intrinsic energy of the system, when the 
entropy is exhausted by thermal communication, conduction, 
and radiation, is equal to its original energy, and is of course 
greater than in the case in which the entropy is exhausted 
by means of the reversible engine. 

Again, when the parts of the system are at different 

_ pressures, and there is material communication by open 
channels between them, there will be a tendency of the 
_ parts of the system to move, and the result of this motion 
will be to equalise the pressure in the different parts. If 
the energy developed in this way is not gathered up and 
used in working a machine it will be spent in giving velocity | 
to the parts of the system. But as soon as this motion is 
set up it begins to decay on account of the resistance ‘which 
all substances, even in the gaseous state, offer to the 
relative motion of their parts. This resistance in the case 
of solid bodies sliding over each other is called Friction. 
In fluids it is called Internal Friction or Viscosity. In 
every case it tends to destroy the relative motion of 


the parts, and to convert the energy of éhits motion into — 
heat. ; 

If, therefore, the system contains portions of matter in 
which the pressure is different, and if there is a material — 
communication (that is, an open passage of any kind) 
between these portions, the part of the entropy depending 
on difference of pressures will be converted first into visible 

motion of the parts, and, as this decays, into heat. 

It is possible to prevent material communication between 
the parts of a system by enclosing the substances in vessels 
through which they cannot pass. But it is impossible to 
prevent thermal communication between the parts of the 
system, because no substance known to us is a non-conductor 
of heat. Hence the entropy of every system is in a state 
of decay unless it is supplied from without. 

This is Thomson’s doctrine of the Dissipation of Energy.! 
Energy is said to be dissipated when it cannot be rendered 
available as mechanical energy. The energy which is not 
yet dissipated is what we have here, following Tait, called 
Entropy. The theory of entropy, in this sense, was given 
by Thomson in 1853.2 The name, however, was first 
employed by Clausius in 1854, and it was used by him to 
denote the energy already dissipated. 

The law of communication of heat, on which we founded 
our first definition of temperature ; the principle of Carnot, © 

and the second law of thermodynamics ; and the theory of 
Dissipation of Energy, may be considered as expressions of 
the same natural fact with increasing degrees of scientific” 
completeness. We shall return to the subject when we 
come to molecular theories. 


> 


1 «Ona Universal Tendency in Nature to Dissipation of Energy.” 
—Phil. Mag. and Proc. R.S.E. 1852. 
2 «On the Restoration of Mechanical Energy from an unequally 
_ heated Space.’—PAil. Mag. Feb. 1853. 
8 Pog. Ann, Dec. 1854. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


ON FREE EXPANSION. 


sary of a Fluid in which no External Work is done 
during a Change of Pressure. 


‘Ler a fluid be forced through a small hole, or one or more 
narrow tubes, or a porous plug, and let the work done by 
the pressure from behind be entirely employed in over- 
coming the resistance of the fluid, so that when the fluid, 
after passing through the plug, has arrived at a certain point 
its velocity is very small. Let us also suppose that no heat 
enters or leaves the fluid, and that no sound or other 
vibration, the energy of which is comparable with that 
which would sensibly alter the temperature of the fluid, 
escapes from the apparatus. 

We also suppose that the motion is steady—that is, that 
the same cuantity of the fluid enters and issues from the 
apparatus in every second. 

During the passage of unit of mass through the apparatus, 
if p and v are its pressure and volume at the 
section A before reaching the plug, and 4, v 
the same at the section Bafter passing through 
it, the work done in forcing the fluid through 
the section A is P v, and the work done by the 
fluid in issuing through the section B is / 7, so 
that the amount of work communicated to the 
fluid in passing through the plug is P v — 9 z. 
Hence, ifr is the energy of unit of mass of 
the fluid while entering at the section A, and ¢ the energy of 
unit of mass issuing at the section B, 
 €—E=PV— pz, 


Fic. 27. 


B+ Pv=¢+ fv .s.se 


190 Free Expansion. — 


That is to say, the sum of the intrinsic energy and the 
product of the volume and the pressure remains the same 
after passing through the plug, provided no heat is lost or 
gained from external sources. . 

Now the intrinsic energy E is indicated on the diagram 
by the area between A a an 
adiabatic line, a @ a vertical 
line, and a 4 v the line of no 
pressure, and P v is represent- 
ed by the rectangle af oa. 
Hence the area included by 
aA p O27, the lines Aa and o wv 
being produced till they meet, 
represents the quantity which 
remains the same after passing 
through the plug. Hence in 
the figure the area Afg R is 
equal to the area contained 
between BR and the two adiabatic lines k a and B f. 

We shall next examine the relations between the different 


Fic. 28. 


a 


° a es 


properties of the substance, in order to determine the rise of 


temperature corresponding to a passage through the plug 
from a pressure P to a pressure Z, and we shall first suppose 
that pis not much greater than . 

Let a c be an isothermal line through 4, cutting g B in Cc, 
and let us suppose that the passage of the substance from 
the state represented by a to the state represented by B is 
effected by a passage along the isothermal line a c, followed 
by an increase of volume from c to B. The smaller the 
distance A B, the less will the results of this process differ 
from those of the actual passage from A to B, in whatever 
manner this is really effected. 

In passing from A to Cc, at the constant temperature 0, the 
pressure diminishes from P to ~. The heat absorbed during 
this process is, by the first thermodynamic relation (p. 165), 


(P — p)v 6a, 


Free Expansion. OR 


where a is the dilatation of unit of voiume at constant pres- 
sure per degree of temperature. 

In passing from c to B the substance expands at constant 
pressure, and its temperature rises from 0 to 6 + 7. 

The heat required to produce this rise of temperature is 


Ky T, 


where K, denotes the specific heat of the substance at con- 
stant pressure. 

The whole heat absorbed by thg substance during the 
passage from 4 B is therefore 


(Pp —p) vV0a+kK,7, 


and this is the value of the area between a B and the two 
adiabatic lines A a, B P. 

Now this is equal to the area a f g B or (P — J) V. 
Hence we have the equation 


K,r=(Pp—pf)v(r-—Oa) .. .' (2) 

where Kk, denotes the specific heat of unit of mass at con- 
stant pressure, expressed in dynamical measure ; 

r, the rise of temperature after passing through the plug ; 

p — #, the smad/ difference of pressure on the two sides of 
the plug ; 

v, the volume of unit of mass (when P — J is so great as 
to cause considerable alteration of volume, this quantity 
must be treated differently) ; 

6, the temperature on the absolute dynamical scale ; 

a, the dilatation of unit of volume at constant pressure 
er degree of temperature. 

_ There are two cases in which observations of the rise (or 
Il) of temperature may be applied to determine quantities 
of great importance in the science of heat. 

1. Zo Determine the Dynamical Equivalent of Heat.—The 
rst case is that in which the substance is a liquid such as 
water or mercury, the volume of which is but slightly affected 
ither by pressure or by temperature. In this case v will 


192 Free Expansion. 


vary so little that the effect of its variation may be taken 
into account as a correction required only in calculations of 
great accuracy. The dilatation a is also very small, so much 
so that the product 6 a, though not to be absolutely neglected, 
may be found with sufficient accuracy without a very accurate _ 
knowledge of the absolute value of @. 

If we suppose the pressure to be due to a depth of fluid 
equal to H on one side of the plug and 4 on the other, then 


(Pp) =" — A) pg, 


where p is the density, and g is the numerical measure of the 
force of gravity. Now 


Ve=1, 
so that equation (2) becomes 
K, 7 = g (H — 4) (1 — 6), 


an equation from which we can determine kK, when we know 
r the rise of temperature, and H — % the difference of level 
of the liquid, a its coefficient of dilatation by heat, and 
(within a moderate degree of exactness) 6 the absolute tem- 
perature in terms of the degrees of the same thermometer 
which is used to determine 7. 

The quantity K, 1s the specific heat at constant pressure, 
that is the quantity of heat which will raise unit of mass of — 
the substance one degree of the thermometer. It is ex- 
pressed here in absolute dynamical measure. 

If the specific heat is to be expressed in gravitation — 
measure, as in foot-pounds, we must divide by g, the force 
of gravity. If the specific heat is to be expressed in terms 
of the specific heat of a standard substance, as, for instance, 
water at its maximum density, we must divide by J, the 
specific heat of this substance. 

We have already shown how by a direct experiment to— 
compare the specific heat of any substance with that of | 
water. If the specific heat expressed in this way is denoted 
by c,, while kK, is the same quantity expressed in absolute 


193 


measure, then the mechanical equivalent of the thermal 
unit is 


Dynamical E quivalent of Heat. 


—_ Ky 
; a 
The quantity y is called Joule’s Mechanical Equivalent 
of Heat, because Joule was the first to determine its value 
by an accurate method. It may be defined as the specific 
heat, in dynamical measure, of water at its maximum 
density. 
It is equal to 772 foot-pounds at Manchester per pound 
of water. If we alter the standard of mass, we at the same 
time alter the unit of work in the same proportion, so that 
we must still express J by the same number. Hence we 
may express Joule’s result by saying that the work done by 
any quantity of water in falling 772 feet at Manchester is 
capable of raising that water one degree Fahrenheit. If we 
wish to render the definition independent of the value of 
gravity at a particular place, we have only to calculate the 
velocity of a body after falling 772 feet at Manchester. The 
energy corresponding to this velocity in any mass of water 
is capable when converted into heat of raising the water one 
degree Fahrenheit. 
There are considerable difficulties in obtaining the value of 
j by this method, even with mercury, for which a pressure 
of 25 feet gives a rise of one degree Fahrenheit. 
_ 2. To Determine the Absolute Zero of the Thermodynamic 
Scale of Temperature.—The most important application of 
the method is to determine the absolute zero of temperature 
the thermodynamic scale as compared with the absolute 
ro of an air thermometer. 
* For this purpose, air or any other gas which fulfils with 
ifficient accuracy the laws of Boyle and Charles is forced in 
steady current through a porous plug, and the difference of 
mperatures on the two sides of the plug is observed. 


In this case we have tf constant, anda = ” 


1) 


a es 


will i>) a 
ss Rit eee 


ey a ee 


194. Free Expansion, 


so that 
r = Yoho P—P  _ By, 


In this expression ¢ is the absolute temperature indicated — 
by a thermometer consisting of the gas employed inthe experi- — 
ment, and @ is the absolute temperature on the dynamical 
scale. 

The expression is true only when p — # is small com- 
pared with P or g. When, as is the case in actual experiments, 
P is several times Z, we must consider the pressure as sinking 
from P to f by a series of small steps, and trace the change 
of temperature from step to step. To do this requires a pro- 
cess of the same nature as that described in our calculation 
of the height of a mountain (Chapter XIV.) 5s result is 


that, instead of = on , Wwe must write log. a where the - 
logarithm is Napierian, or 

P 

2°30258 log — 

Pp 


where the logarithm is that of the common tables ; 
whence Gi 
uP 2°3026 log 7 


an expression which gives the absolute temperature @ in: 
terms of the temperature ¢ reckoned from the absolute zero 
of a thermometer constructed of the gas used in the experi- 
ment. Here kK, is the specific heat of the gas at constant 
pressure, and r is the increase of temperature after passing 
through the porous plug. 

In the case of most of the gases examined by Joule 
and Thomson there was a slight cooling effect on th 
gas passing through the plug. In other words, 7 was nega 
tive, and the absolute temperature was therefore higher thar 
that indicated by the gaseous thermometer. The ratio 
therefore, in which the gas expanded betweenstwo standart 


emperatures was greater than the true ratio of these. tem- 
peratures on the thermodynamic scale. The cooling effect 
was much greater with carbonic acid than with oxygen, 
nitrogen, or air, as was to be expected, because we know 
from the experiments of Regnault that the’ dilatation .of 
carbonic acid is greater than that of air.or its constituents. 
It was also found, for all these gases, that the cooling effect 
was less at high temperatures, which , shows that as the 
temperature rises the dilatation of the gas is more and 
more accurately proportional to the absolute temperature 
of the thermodynamic scale. 

_ The only gas which exhibited a contrary effect was 
hydrogen, in which there was a slight heating effect: after 
passing the plug. 

The result of the experiments of Joule and Thomson 
was to show that. the temperature of melting - ice «is 
273°°7 on the thermodynamic scale, the degrees » being 
such that there are 100 of them between this temperature 
and that of the vapour of boiling water at the standard 
pressure. 

The absolute zero of the thermodynamic scale is .there- 
fore —273°°7 Centigrade, or —460°°66 Fahrenheit. 

__ It appears, therefore, that, in the more perfect gases, ‘the 
cooling effect due to expansion is almost.exactly balanced 
by the heating effect due to the work done bythe expansion 
when this work is wholly spent in generating heat in the 
gas. ‘ihis resuit had been already .obtained, although by a 
method not admitting of such great accuracy, by Joule,!.who 
Showed that the intrinsic.energy of a gas is the same tat 
the same temperature, whatever be the volume which. it 
Occupies. 

_ To test this, he compressed air into a vessel till it con- 
tained about 22 atmospheres, and exhausted the air from 
another vessel. . These vessels were then connected by 


1 Phil. Mag. May 1845. 
02 


Determination of Absolute Temperature. 195 


vera. a © 
+ 7 he 


196 Free Expansion. 


means of a pipe closed by a stopcock, and the whole placed 
in a vessel of water. 

After a sufficient time the water was thoroughly stirred, 
and its temperature taken by means of a delicate thermo- 
meter. The stopcock was then opened by means of a proper — 
key, and the air allowed to pass from the fullinto the empty — 
vessel till equilibrium was established between the two. © 
Lastly the water was again stirred and its temperature : 
carefully noted. : 

From a number of experiments of this kind, carefully — 
corrected for all sources of error, Joule was led to the © 
conclusion that xo change of temperature occurs when air 
is allowed to expand in such a manner as not to develop : 
mechanical power. : 

| 
: 
: 


This result, as has been shown by the more accurate 
experiments afterwards made by Joule and W. Thomson, is — 
not quite correct, for there is a slight cooling effect. This 
effect, however, is very small in the case of permanent gases, 
and diminishes when the gas, by rise of temperature or 
diminution of pressure, approaches nearer to the condition 
of a perfect gas. 

We may however assert, as the result of these experiments, 
that the amount of heat absorbed by a gas expanding at 
uniform temperature is nearly, though not exactly, the thermal 
equivalent of the mechanical work done by the gas during 
the expansion. In fact, we know that in the case of air the © 
heat absorbed is a little greater and in hydrogen a very little 
less than this quantity. 

This is a very important property of gases. If we reverse — 
the process, we find that the heat developed by compressing 
air at constant temperature is the thermal equivalent of the 
work done in compressing it. 

[his is by no means a self-evident proposition. In fact, 
it is not true in the case of substances which are not in the 
gaseous state, and even in the case of the more imperfect 
gases it deviates from the truth. Hence the calculation of 


‘the dynamical equivalent of heat, which Mayer founded on 
this proposition, at a time when its truth had not been 
experimentally proved, cannot be regarded as legitimate. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
ON THE DETERMINATION OF HEIGHTS BY THE BAROMETER. 


Tue barometer is an instrument by means of which the 
pressure of the air at a particular place may be measured. 
_In the mercurial barometer, which is the most perfect form of 
the instrument, the pressure of the air on the free surface of 
the mercury in the cistern is equal to that of a column of 
“mercury whose height is the difference between the level of 
the mercury in the cistern, which sustains the pressure of the 
air, and that of the mercury in the tube, which has no air 
above it. The pressure of the air is often expressed in terms 
of the height of this column. ‘Thus we speak of a pressure 
_of 3o inches of mercury, or of a pressure of 760 millimetres of 
mercury. 

_ To express a pressure in absolute measure we must 
consider the force exerted against unit of area. For this 
‘purpose we must find the weight of a column of mercury of 

the given height standing on unit of area as base. 

If % is the height of the column, then, since its section is 
unity, its volume is expressed by /. 

To find the mass of mercury contained in this volume we 
must multiply the volume by the density of mercury. If this 
density is denoted by p, the mass of the column isp %. The 
pressure, which we have to find, is the force with which this 
mass is drawn downwards by the earth’s attraction. If ¢ 
denotes the force of the earth’s attraction on unit of mass, 
then the force on the column will be gp 4. The pressure 


Oey ai, fo 


198 Measurement of Heights by the Barometer. 


therefore of a column of mercury of height % is expressed | 
by 
| &ph, 
where 4 is the height of the column, p the density of mercury, — 
and g the intensity of gravity at the place. The density of | 
mercury diminishes as the temperature increases. It is usual 
to reduce all pressures measured in this way to the height of 
a column of mercury at the freezing temperature of water. 
If two barometers at the same place are kept at different 
temperatures, the heights of the barometers are in the pro- 
portion of the volumes of mercury at the two temperatures. 
The intensity of gravitation varies at different places, being” 
less at the equator than at the poles, and less at the top of a. 
mountain than at the level of the sea. 
It is usual to reduce observed barometric heights to the 
height of a column of mercury at the freezing point and at 
the level of the sea in latitude 45°, which would produce the— 
same pressure. 
If there were no tides or winds, and if the sea and the air 
were’ perfectly calm in the whole region between two places, 
then the actual pressure of the air at the level of the sea ~ 
must be the same in these two places; for the surface o 
the sea is everywhere perpendicular to the force of gravity. — 
If, therefore, the pressure on its surface were different in ~ 
two places, water would flow from the place of greater pres- ~ 
sure to the place of less pressure till equilibrium ensued. 
Hence, if in calm weather the barometer is found to stand — 
at a different height in two different places at the level of” 
the sea, the reason must be that gravity is more intense at 
the place where the barometer is low. 
Let us next consider the method of finding the depth 
below the level of the sea by means of a barometer carried 
down in a diving bell. 
If p is the depth of the surface of the water in the diving 
bell below the surface of the sea, and if f is the pressure of 
the atmosphere on the surface of the sea, then the pressure 


\ 


Bah 


Barometer in a Diving Bell. 


of the air in the diving bell must exceed that on the surface 
of the sea by the pressure due to a column of water of depth 
D. If ais the density of sea-water, the pressure due to a 
column of depth pD is ga D. 

Let the height of the barometer at the surface of the sea 
be observed, and let us suppose that in the diving bell it is 
found to be higher by a height %, then the additional pres- 
sure indicated by this rise is g p /, where p is the density of 
-mercury. Hence 


gov =gph, 
e or 
q p="h=sh, 
4 o 
wheres = P density of mercury of becande ont = specific gravity Of 938 


4 o density of water 
‘mercury. : 

, The depth below the surface of the sea is therefore equal 
to the product of the rise of the barometer multiplied by the 
specific gravity of mercury. If the water is salt we must 
divide this result by the specific gravity of the salt water at 
the place of observation. 

___ The calculation of depths under water by this method is 
comparatively easy, because the density of the water is not 
very different at different depths. It is only at great depths 
that the compression of the water would sensibly affect the 
‘result. 

4 If the density of air had been as uniform as that of water, 

_ the measurement of heights in the atmosphere would have 
been as easy. For instance, if the density of air had been 
equal to o at all pressures, then, neglecting the variation of 
gravity with height above the earth, we should find the 
height of the atmosphere thus: Let % be the height of _ 
_ the barometer, and p the density of mercury, then the pressure 
indicated by the barometer is 


b=Eph 


200 Measurement of Heights by the Barometer. 


If § is the height of an atmosphere of density «, it 
produces a pressure 


p=gcS. 


Hence 
H=h f. 
o 


This is the height of the atmosphere above the place on 
the fa/se supposition that its density is the same at all heights 
as it is at that place. This height is generally referred to as 
the height of the atmosphere supposed of uniform density, or 
more briefly and technically as the height of the Aomagencous 
atmosphere. 

Let us for a moment consider what this height (which 
evidently has nothing to do with the real height of the 
atmosphere) really represents. From the equation 

p=57%, 
remembering that o the density of air is the same thing as 
the reciprocal of v the volume of unit of mass, we get 


a) =f” 
& 
or § is simply the product f wv expressed in gravitation 
measure instead of absolute measure. 

Now, by Boyle’s law the product of the pressure and 
the volume at a constant temperature is constant, and by 
: Charles’s law this product is proportional to the absolute 
ee temperature. For dry air at the temperature of melting ice, 
and when g = 32°2, 


5= ye = 26,214 feet, 


ay. or somewhat less than five statute miles. 

It is well known that Mr. Glaisher has ascended in a 
balloon to the height of seven miles. This balloon was 
supported by the air, and though the air at this great height 
was more than three times rarer than at the earth’s surface, it 
was possible to breathe in it. Hence it is certain that the 


soe 


atmosphere must extend above the height 5, which we have 
deduced from our false assumption that the density is 
uniform. 

But though the density of the atmosphere is by no means 


_ uniform through great ranges of height, yet if we confine 


ourselves to a very small range, say the millionth part of — 
that is, about 0’026 feet, or less than the third of an inch—the 
density will only vary one-millionth part of itself from the 
top to the bottom of this range, so that we may suppose the 
pressure at the bottom to exceed that at the top by exactly 
one-millionth. 

Let us now apply this method to determine the height of 
a mountain by the following imaginary process, too laborious 
to be recommended, except for the purpose of explaining 
the practical method : 

We shall suppose that we begin at the top of the mountain, 
and that, besides our barometer, we have one thermometer 
to determine the temperature of the mercury, and another to 
determine the temperature of the air. We are also provided 
with a hygrometer, to determine the quantity of aqueous 
vapour in the air, so that by the thermometer and hygrometer 
we can calculate §,the height of the homogeneous atmo- 
sphere, at every station of our path. 

On the top of the mountain, then, we observe the height of 
the barometer to be 4. We now descend the mountain till 
we observe the mercury in the barometer to rise by one- 
millionth part of its own height. The height of the baro- 
meter at this first station is 


p; = (1'000001) £. 


The distance we have descended is one-millionth of §, 
the height of the homogeneous atmosphere for the observed 
temperature at the first stage of the descent. Since it is 
at present impossible to measure pressures, &c., to one- 
millionth of their value, it does not matter whether § be 


- measured at the top of the mountain or one-third of an inch 
lower down. ; 
Now let us descend another stage, till the pressure again 
increases one-millionth of itself, so that if ~, is the new 
- pressure, 


Po = (1000001) Py, 


and the second descent is through a height equal to the 
millionth of 2, the height of the homogeneous atmosphere 
_in the second stage. 
If we go on in this way x times, till we at last reach the 
bottom of the mountain, and if Z, is the pressure at the 
bottom, 
pn = (1'000001) Jy; 
, = (r1'000001)? f,,5 
= (L'000001)"f, 


and the whole vertical height will be 
jin PI + §, + &c. av Dn 


1,000,000 
If we assume that the temperature and humidity are the 
same at all heights between the top and the bottom, then 
§, = 6 = &c. = §, = §, and the height of the mountain 
will be 
ree 
~~ 1,000,000 


lf we know 2”, the number of stages, we can determine 
the height of the mountain in this way. But it is easy to 
find 2 without going through the laborious process of 
descending by distances of the third of an inch, for since _ 
pn = P is the pressure at the bottom, and / that at be top, 
we have the equation 


= (1'000001)” £ 


Taking the logarithm of both sides of this equation, we 


‘log p = 2 log (roc0001) + log p, 


_ log P — logs 
log (1*000001) 


| Now log t'oo0001 = 0'0000004342942648. i 
Substituting this value in the ee for i, we get 


: ee 

4 ‘434294 °8 5 ra 

‘ where the logarithms are the common logarithms to base Io, © < 
4 or _ 


Saas ea 


: 


= 2°302585 H log . 


For dry air at the temperature of melting ice § = 26,214 : a 
feet : hence : 


* 
is log x { 60360 + (0 — 32°) (122-68) 


gives the height in feet for a temperature 6 on Fahrenheit’s 
scale. | 
For rough purposes, the difference of the logarithms of the 
heights of the barometer multiplied by 10,000 gives ther k q 
_ difference of the heights in fathoms of six feet. Ke 


Le a ee 


CHAPTER XV. 


ON THE PROPAGATION OF WAVES 


Tue following method of investigating the conditions of the 
propagation of waves is due to Prof. Rankine.' It involves 
only elementary principles and operations, but leads to 
results which have been hitherto obtained only by oper 
tions involving the higher branches of mathematics. 


= a Lr 


1 Phil. Trans, 1869: ‘On the Thermodynamic Theory of Waves of 
Finite Longitudinal Disturbance,’ _ 


The kind of waves to which the investigation applies are 
_ those in which the motion of the parts of the substance is 
along straight lines parallel to the direction in which the 
wave is propagated, and the wave is defined to be one 
_ which is propagated with constant velocity, and the type of 
which does not alter during its propagation. 
In other words, if we observe what goes on in the 
substance at a given place when the wave passes that place, 
and if we suddenly transport ourselves a certain distance 
forward in the direction of propagation of the wave, then 
after a certain time we shall observe exactly the same things 
occurring in the same order in the new place, when the wave 
reaches it. If we travel with the velocity of the wave, we 
shall therefore observe no change in the appearance pre- 
sented by the wave as it travels along with us. This is the 
characteristic of a wave of permanent type. 
We shall first consider the quantity of the substance 
which passes in unit of time through unit of area of.a plane 
which we shall suppose fixed, and perpendicular to the 
direction of motion. 
Let w be the velocity of the substance, which we shall 
_ suppose to be uniform, then in unit of time a portion of the 
substance whose length is « passes through any section 
~ of a plane perpendicular to the direction of motion. Hence 
_ the volume which passes through unit of area is represented 
byw. 
Now let Q be the quantity of the substance which passes 
through, and let v be the volume of unit of mass of the 
Pr, substance, then the whole volume is Q z, and this, by what 
we have said, is equal to w, the velocity of the substance. 
If the plane, instead of being fixed, is moving forwards with 
a velocity u, the quantity which passes through it will 
~ depend, not on the absolute velocity, ~, of the substance, 
but on the relative velocity, « — vu, and if Q is the quantity 
which passes through the plane from right to def, 
: OP ee ee... a a Rae eee 


f 


iw. A be an imaginary Soe moving from //¢ to viola 


with velocity v, and let this be the velocity of propagation | 


Fic. 29. in 
A 


»—_>- iii» 


of the wave, then, as the plane a travels along, the values of 
wz and all other quantities belonging to the wave at the - 
plane a remain the same. If zw, is the absolute velocity of 
the substance at A, v, the volume of unit of mass, and /, the 
pressure, all these quantities will be constant, and 


EMRE Se Mg ernie tee eae et RY 

If B be another plane, travelling with the same velo- | 
city vu, and if Q #, UY f2 be the corresponding values 
ane 

tee Cera gees ie ee: 

The distance between the planes a and B remains _ in- 
variable, because they travel with the same velocity. Also 
the quantity of the substance intercepted between them 
remains the same, because the density of the substance at 
corresponding parts of the wave remains the same as the 


wave travels along. Hence the quantity of matter which — 


enters the space between a and B at a must be equal to 
that which leaves it at B, or 


Gp me Ge oe GQ (aay) 2 ww tes, « 1) 
Hence 


“4 =U—QYy Mm@=U—Qym .. (5) 3 
so that when we know vu and q and the volume of unit of © 
mass, we can find w, and u,. 

Let us next consider the forces acting on the matter con- 
tained between a and zB. If J, is the pressure at a, and pp 


a A Se ae Lie i eae Pa 


that at B, the force arising from these pressures tending to _ 

increase the momentum from left to right is py — pj. 

This i is the momentum generated in unit of time by the 

external pressures on the portion of the substance between 

 Aands. 

Now we must recollect that, though corresponding points 
of the substance in this interval are always moving in the 
same way, the matter itself between a and B is continually 
changing, a quantity Q entering-at a, and an equal quantity 

Q leaving at B. 

_ Now the portion Q which enters at a has a velocity 2, 
and therefore a momentum Q w,, and that which issues at 
B has a velocity w, and therefore a momentum Q #. 

Hence the momentum of the entering fluid exceeds that 

_of the issuing fluid by 


Q(z, — ty). 
The only way in which this momentum can be produced 
is by the action of the external pressures £, and ,; for the 
- mutual actions of the parts of the substance cannot alter the 
momentum of the whole. Hence we find 
bs — Py = Um — 4%) «+ +s «(8 
Substituting the values of w, and w, from equation (5), we 
find. 

bo — Pi =U —%) - - - » ss (7) 
Hence 

PER? Oy HS Py HSE 8 aw G® 
Now the only restriction on the position of the plane B is’ 
that it must remain ata constant distance behind a, and 
whatever be the distance between a and B, the above 
equation is always true. 
Hence the quantity s + is v must continue constant 
_ during the whole process involved in the passage of the 
wave. Calling this quantity p, we have 


p=P-Qz ean a ee, 5 sw OR ae 


or the pressure is equal to a constant pressure, P, diminished 


by a quantity proportional to the volume vz. 

_ This relation between pressure and volume is not fulfilled 
in the case of any actual substance. In all substances it is 
true that as the volume diminishes the pressure increases, 
but the increase of pressure is never strictly proportional to 
the diminution of volume.. As soon as the diminution of 
volume becomes considerable, the pressure begins to in- 
crease in a greater ratio than the volume diminishes. 

But if we consider only small changes of volume and 
pressure, we may make use of our former definition of elas- _ 
ticity at p. 107—namely, the ratio of the increase of pres- 
sure to the diminution of volume when the volume is unity, . 
or, calling the elasticity £, 

SG, ieee a ‘ 
Bere ay Q? by equation (7) (10) 
where zv is the volume of unit of mass, and since v, and 2, 
are very nearly equal, we may take either for the value of vz. 
Again, if v is the volume of unit of mass in those parts of the 
substance which are not disturbed by the wave, and for 
which, therefore, « = 0, 


a a SE Se reer 9) 
Hence we find 
hee tlhe! ee er 62) 


which shows that the square of the velocity of propagation 
of a wave of longitudinal displacement in any substance is 
equal to the product of the elasticity and -- volume of unit 
of mass. 

In calculating the elasticity we must take into account the 
conditions under which the compression of the substance 
actually takes place. If, as in the case of sound-waves, it is 
very sudden, so that any heat which is developed cannot be 
conducted away, then we must calculate the elasticity on the 
supposition that no heat is allowed to escape. 4 
In the case of air or any other gas the elasticity at constant — 


Waves, 


temperature is numerically equal to the pressure. If we — 
denote, as usual, the ratio of the specific heat at constant 
pressure to that at constant volume by the symbol y, the 
reread when no heat escapes is 


aes So oe eer 
Hence, if u is the velocity of sound, 
my PU. So. ee Se 


We know that when the temperature is the same the 
product # v remains constant. Hence, the velocity of sound 
is the same for the same temperature, whatever be the 
pressure of the air. 

If His the height of the atmosphere supposed homo- 
‘geneous—that is to say, the height of a column of the 
same density as the actual density, the weight of which 
would produce a pressure equal to the actual pressure—then, 
if the section of the column is unity, its volume is §, and if 
m is its mass, § = m v. 

: Also the weight of this column is / = m g, where g is the 
_ force of gravity. 

Hence 

Jp pv=gh 

Band 

wW=gy h. 


The velocity of sound may be compared with that of a 
body falling a certain distance under the action of gravity. 
_ For if v is the velocity of a body falling through a aie 5, 
oes 2 eS. 
If we make v = v, thens =} y §. 
At the temperature of melting ice § = 26,214 feet if the 
force of gravity is 32°2. 
_ At the same temperature the velocity of sound in air is 
1,090 feet per second by experiment. 
The square of this is 1,188,100, whereas the square’: ot 
the velocity due to half the height of the homogeneous — r 


De 8, 


eee eae), eS 
ge ree i ae Poe gy 
gies 


Velocity of Sound. 209 


2 


atmosphere is 843,821. Hence by means of the known 
velocity of sound we can determine y, the ratio of 1,188,100 
to 843,821, to be 1408. 

The height of the homogeneous atmosphere is proportional 
to the temperature reckoned from absolute zero. Hence the 
velocity of sound is proportional to the square root of the 
absolute temperature. In several of the more perfect gases 
the value of y seems to be nearly the same asin air. Hence 
in those gases the velocity of sound is inversely as the square 
root of their specific gravity compared with air. 

This investigation would be perfectly accurate, however 
great the changes of pressure and density due to the passage 
of the sound-wave, provided the substance is such that in the 
actual changes of pressure and volume the quantity 


pP+Qu 


remains constant, Q being the velocity of propagation. In 
all substances, as we have seen, we may, when the values of 
p and v are always very near their mean values, assume a 
value of Q which shall approximately satisfy this condition ; 
but in the case of very violent sounds and other disturbances 
of the air the changes of # and wv may be so great that this 
approximation ceases to be near the truth. To understand 
what takes place in these cases we must remember that the 
changes of # and v are not proportional to each other, for in 
almost all substances increases faster for a given diminution 
of v as Z increases and v diminishes. 

Hence Q, which represents the mass of the substance 
traversed by the wave, will be greater in those parts of the 
wave where the pressure is great than in those parts where 
the pressure is small; that is, the condensed portions of the 
wave will travel faster than the rarefied portions. The result 
of this will be that if the wave originally consists of a gradual 
condensation followed by a gradual rarefaction, the conden- 
sation will become more sudden and the rarefaction more 
gradual as the wave advances through the air, in the same 

e 


ie 
gl i 
i Saag 
" ae 
= % Pekar 
Bi : : ci 
ey ay 
z~ » ee 


210 Radiation. 


way and for nearly the same reason as the waves of the sea 
on coming into shallow water become steeper in front and 
more gently sloping behind, till at last they curl over on the 
shore. 

FIG. 30. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


ON RADIATION, 


WE have already noticed some of the phenomena of radia- 
tion, and have shown that they do not properly belong to the 
science of Heat, and that they should rather be treated, 
along with sound and light, as a branch of the great science 
of Radiation. 

The phenomenon of radiation consists in the transmis- 
sion of energy from one body to another by propagation 
through the intervening medium, in such a way that the 
progress of the radiation may be traced, after it has left the 
first body and before it reaches the second, travelling through 
the medium with a certain velocity, and leaving the medium 
behind it in the condition in which it found it. 

We have already considered one instance of radiation in 
the case of waves of sound. In this case the energy com- 
municated to the air by a vibrating body is propagated 
through the air, and may finally set some other body, as the 
drum of the ear, in motion. During the propagation of the 
sound this energy exists in the portion of air through which 
it is travelling, partly in the form of motion of the air to and 


- fro, and partly in the form of condensation and rarefaction. 
The energy due to sound in the air is distinct from heat, be- 
cause it is propagated in a definite direction, so that in a 
certain time it will have entirely left the portion of air under 
consideration, and will be found in another portion of air to — 
which it has travelled. Now heat never passes out of a hot 
body except to enter a colder body, so that the energy of 
sound-waves, or any other form of energy which is propa- 
gated so as to pass wholly out of one portion of the medium 
and into another, cannot be called heat. 

There are, however, important thermal effects produced 
by radiation, so that we cannot understand the science of heat 
without studying some of the phenomena of radiation. 

When a body is raised to a very high temperature it 
becomes visible in the dark, and is said to shine, or to emit 
light. The velocity of propagation of the light emitted by 
the sun and by very-hot bodies has been approximately mea- 
sured, and is estimated to be between 180,000 and 192,000 
miles per second, or about goo,000 times faster than sound 
in air. 

The time taken by the light in passing from one place to 
another within the limited range which we have at our com- 
mand in a laboratory is exceedingly short, and it is only by 
means of the most refined experimental methods that it has 

_ been measured. It is certain, however, that there is an 
interval of time between the emission of light by one body ~ 
and its reception by another, and that during this time the 
energy transmitted from the one body to the other-has 
existed in some form in the intervening medium. } 

_ The opinions with regard to the relation between light — 

- and heat have suffered several alternations, according as — 

these agents were regarded as substances or as accidents. — 

_ At one time light was regarded as a substance projected 

_ from the luminous body, which, if the luminous ‘body — 

-were hot, might itself become hot like any other substance. — 

Heat was thus regarded as an accident of the substance light, “ 


212 Radiation. 


When the progress of science had rendered the measure- 
ment of quantities of heat as accurate as the measurement 
of quantities of gases, heat, under the name of ealoric, was 
placed in the list of substances. Afterwards, the independent 
progress of optics led to the rejection of the corpuscular 
theory of light, and the establishment of the undulatory 
theory, according to which light is a wave-like motion of a 
medium already existing. The calorie theory of heat, how- 
ever, still prevailed even after the corpuscular theory of 
light was rejected, so that heat and light seemed almost to 
have exchanged places. 

When the caloric theory of heat was at length. demon- 
strated to be false, the grounds of the argument were quite 
imdependent of those which had been used m the case of 
light. 

We shall therefore consider the nature of radiation, 
whether of light or heat, in an independent manner, and 
show why we believe that what is called radiant heat is the 
same thing as what is called light, only perceived by us 
through a different channel. The same radiation which 
when we become aware of it by the eye we call light, when 
we detect it by a thermometer or by the sensation of heat 
we ¢all radiant heat. 

In the first place, radiant heat agrees with light in always 
moving in straight lines through any uniform medium. Itis 
not, therefore, propagated by diffusion, as in the case of the 
conduction of heat, where the heat always travels from hotter 
to colder parts of the medium in whatever direction this 
condition may lead it. 

The medium through which radiant heat passes is not 
heated if perfectly diathermanous, any more than a_per- 
fectly transparent medium through which light passes is 
rendered luminous. But if any impurity or defect of trans- 
parency causes the medium to become visible when light 
passes through it, it will also cause it to become hot and to 
stop part of the heat when traversed by radiant heat. 


‘piece of wood, they will set it on fire. If the luminous rays 


In the next place, radiant heat is reflected from the 
polished surfaces of bodies according to the same laws as 
light. A concave mirror collects the rays of the sun into a_ 
brilliantly luminous focus. If these collected rays fall on a 


are collected by means of a convex lens, similar heating __ 
effects are produced, showing that radiant heat is refracted 
when it passes from one transparent medium to another. 
When light is refracted through a prism, so as to change 
its direction through a considerable angle of deviation, it is 
separated into a series of kinds of light which are easily 
distinguished from each other by their various colours. 
The radiant heat which is refracted through the prism is also 
spread out through a considerable angular range, which shows 
that it also consists of radiations of ‘various kinds. The — 
luminosity of the different radiations is evidently not in the 
same proportion as their heating effects. For the blue and 
green rays have very little heating power compared with the 
extreme red, which are much less luminous, and the heating _ 
rays are found far beyond the end of the red,.where no light 
at all is visible. 
There are other methods of separating the different kinds 
of light, which are sometimes more convenient than the use 
of a prism. Many substances are more transparent to _ 
one kind of light than another, and are therefore called 
coloured media. Such media absorb certain rays and | 
transmit others. If the light transmitted by a stratum ofa _ 
coloured medium afterwards passes through another stratum 
of the same medium, it will be much less diminished in — 
intensity than at first. For the kind of light which is most 
absorbed by the medium has been already removed, and 
what is transmitted by the first stratum is that which can pass — 
most readily through the second. Thus a very thin stratum 
of a solution of bichromate of potash cuts off the whole o 
the spectrum from the middle of the green to the violet, but 
the remainder of the light, consisting of the red, orange, 


x 


" paca * = vA 
eee eee ret 2 


2 => 
cn ee 
po 


214 Radiation. 


yellow, and part of the green, is very slightly diminished in 
intensity by passing through another stratum of the same 
medinn. 

If, however, the second stratum be ef a different medium, 
which absorbs most of the rays which the first transmits, it 
will cut off nearly the whole light, though it may be itself 
very transparent for other rays absorbed by the first medium. 
Thus a stratum of sulphate of copper absorbs nearly all the 
rays transmitted by the bichromate of potash, except a few 
of the green rays. 

Melloni found that different substances absorb different 
kinds of radiant heat, and that the heat sifted by a screen 
of any substance will pass in greater proportion through 
a screen of the same substance than unsifted heat, while it 
may be stopped in greater proportion than unsifted heat by 
a screen of a different substance. 

These remarks may illustrate the general similarity between 
light and radiant heat. We must next consider the reasons 
which induce us to regard light as depending on a particular 
kind of motion in the medium through which it is pro- 
pagated. These reasons are principally derived from the 
phenomena of the interference of ight. They are explained 
more at large in treatises on light, because it is much easier 
to observe these phenomena by the eye than by any kind 
of thermometer. We shall therefore be as brief as possible. 

There are various methods by which a beam of light from 
a small luminous object may be divided into two portions, 
which, after travelling by slightly different paths, finally fall 
on a white screen. Where the two portions of light overlap 
each other on the screen, a series of long narrow stripes may 
be seen, alternately lighter and darker than the average 
brightness of the screen near them, and when white light is 
used, these stripes are bordered with colours. By using light 
of one kind only, such as that obtained from the salted wick 
of a spirit-lamp, a greater number of bands or fringes may 
be seen, and a greater difference of brightness between the 


light and the dak bands. If we stop either of the portions “ 


, 


of light into which the original beam was divided, the whole 
system of bands disappears, showing that they are due, 
not to either of the portions alone, but to both united. 

If we now fix our attention on one of the dark bands, and 
then cut off one of the partial beams of light, we shall — 
observe that instead of appearing darker it becomes actually 
brighter, and if gve again allow the light to fall on the screen 
it becomes dark again. Hence it is possible to produce 
darkness by the addition of two portions of light. If light 
is a substance, there cannot be another substance which 
when added to it shall produce darkness. We are therefore 
compelled to admit that light is not a substance. 

Now is there any other instance in which the addition of 
two apparently similar things diminishes the result? We 
know by experiments with musical instruments that.a com- 


bination of two sounds may produce less audible effect than 


either separately, and it can be shown that this takes place 
when the one is half a wave-length in advance of the other. 
Here the mutual annihilation of the sounds arises from the 
fact that a motion of the air towards the ear is the exact 
opposite of a motion away from the ear, and if the two in- 
struments are so arranged that the motions which they tend 
to produce in the air near the ear are in opposite direc- 
tions and of equal magnitude, the result will be no motion 
at all: Now there is nothing absurd in one motion being 
the exact opposite of another, though the supposition that 
one substance is the exact opposite of another substance, as 
in some forms of the Two-Fluid theory of Electricity, is an | 
absurdity. 

We may show the interference of waves in a visible 
manner by dipping a two-pronged fork into water or mercury. 
The waves which diverge from the two centres where the 
prongs enter or leave the fluid are seen to produce a 
greater disturbance when they exactly coincide than when 


one gets ahead of the other. 


ee Se 


* 


de raat er tae Cad 


216 Radiation. 


Now it is found, by measuring the positions of the bright 
and dark bands on the screen, that the difference of the 
distances travelled by the two portions of light is for the 
bright bands always an exact multiple of a certain very 
small distance which we shall call a wave-length, whereas 
for the dark bands it is intermediate between two multi- 
ples of the wave-length, being 4, 14, 24, &c., times that 
length. : 

We therefore conclude that whatever exists or takes 
place at a certain point in a ray of light, then, at the same 
instant, at a point at 4 or 14 of the wave-length in advance, 
something exactly the opposite exists or takes place, so that 
in going along a ray we find an alternation of conditions 
which we may call positive and negative. 

In the ordinary statement of the theory of undulations 
these conditions are described as motion of the medium in 
opposite directions. The essential character of the theory 
would remain the same if we were to substitute for ordinary 
motion to and fro any other succession of oppositely 
directed conditions. Professor Rankine has suggested op- 
posite rotations of molecules about their axes, and I have 
suggested oppositely directed magnetizations and electro- 
motive forces ; but the adoption of either of these hypotheses 
would in no way alter the essential character of the undula- 
tory theory. 

Now it is found that if a very narrow thermo-electric pile 
be placed in the position of the screen, and moved so that 
sometimes a bright band and sometimes a dark one falls on 
the pile, the galvanometer indicates that the pile receives 
more heat when in the bright than when in the dark band, 
and that when one portion of the beam is cut off the heat in 
tne dark band is increased. Hence in the interference of 
radiations the heating effect obeys the same laws as the 
tuminous effect. 

Indeed, it has been found that even when the source 
of radiation is a hot body which emits no luminous rays, 


the phenomena of interference can be traced, showing 
that two rays of dark heat can interfere no less than two 

rays of light. Hence all that we have said about the waves 

_ of light is applicable to the heat-radiation, which is therefore 

a series of waves. 

It is also known in the case of light that after passing 
through a plate cut from a crystal of tourmaline parallel to 
its axis the transmitted beam cannot pass through a second 
similarly cut plate of tourmaline whose axis is perpendicular 
to that of the first, though it can pass through it when the axis 
is in any other position. Such a beam of light, which has 
different properties according as the second plate is turned 

into different positions round the beam as an axis, is called 

_apolarized beam. There are many other ways of polarizing 

a beam of light, but the result is always of the same kind. 
Now this property of polarized light shows that the motion 
which constitutes light cannot be in the direction of the 

_ ray, for then there could be no difference between different 

sides of the ray. . The motion must be transverse to the 
direction of the ray, so that we may now describe a ray of 

_ polarized light as a condition of disturbance in a direction 

at right angles to the ray propagated through a medium, so 

that the disturbance is in opposite directions at every half 

wave-length measured along the ray. Since Principal J. D. 

_ Forbes showed that a ray of dark heat can be polarized, we 

_ can make the same assertion about the heat radiation. 

Let us now consider the consequences of .admitting that 
what we call radiation, whether of heat, light, or invisible 
_tays which act on chemical preparations, is of the nature of 
a transverse undulation in a medium. 

A transverse undulation is completely defined when we 
know— 

1. Its wave-length, or the distance between two places in 
which the disturbance is in the same phase. 

2. Its amplitude, or the greatest extent of the disturb- 

ance. 


3. The plant in which the direction of the disturbanc e 4 
lies. | . 
4. The phase of the wave at a particular point. 

5. The velocity of propagation through the medium. 

When we know these particulars about an undulation, it — 
is completely defined, and cannot be altered in any way@ 
without changing some of these specifications. 

Now by passing a beam consisting of any assemblage of ’ 
undulations through a prism, we can separate it into portions — 
according to their wave-Jengths, and we can select rays of a | 
. particular wave-length for examination. Of these we may, by — 
means of a plate of tourmaline, select those whose plane of — 
__ polarization is the principal plane of the tourmaline, but this — 
is unnecessary for our purpose. We have now got rays of a 4 
definite wave-length. Their velocity of propagation depends — 
only on the nature of the ray and of the medium, so that we 1 
cannot alter it at pleasure, and the phase changes so rapidly 
(billions of times in a second) that it cannot be directly 
observed. Hence the only variable quantity remaining is — 
the amplitude of the disturbance, or, in other words, the 
intensity of the ray. 

Now the ray may be observed in various ways. We may, — 
if it excites the sensation of sight, receive it intooureye. If 
it affects chemical compounds, we may observe its effect on 
them, or we may receive the ray on a thermo-electric pile — 
and determine its heating effect. 

But all these effects, being effects of one and the same 
thing, must rise and fall together. A ray of specified wave- — 
length and specified plane of polarization cannot be a 
combination of several different things, such as a light-ray, a — 
neat-ray, and an actinicray. It must be one and the same 
thing, which has luminous, thermal, and actinic effects, and } 
everything which increases one of these effects must increase _ 
the others also. 
The chief reason why so much that has been written on 
this subject is tainted with the notion that heat is one thing | 


bo 


F Light and Heat. 219 


and light is another seems to be that the arrangements 
for operating on radiations of a selected wave-length are 
troublesome, and when mixed radiations are employed, in 
which the luminous and the thermal effects are in different 
proportions, anything which alters the proportion of the 
different radiations in the mixture alters also the proportion 
of the resulting thermal and luminous effect, as indeed it 
generally alters the colour of the mixed light. 

We have seen that the existence of these radiations may 
be detected in various ways—by photographic preparations, 
by the eye, and by the thermometer. There can be no 
doubt, however, as to which of these methods gives the true 
measure of the energy transmitted by the radiation. This 

_ is exactly measured by the heating effect of the ray when 
completely absorbed by any substance, 

When the wave-length is greater than 812 millionths. of a 
millimetre no luminous effect is produced on the eye, though 
the effect on the thermometer may be very great. When 
the wave-length is 650 millionths of a millimetre the ray is 
visible as a red light, and a considerable heating effect is 
observed, But when the wave-length is 500 millionths of a 
millimetre, the ray, which is seen as a brilliant green, has 
much less heating effect than the dark or the red rays, and 
it is difficult to obtain strong thermal effects with rays of 
smaller wave-lengths, even when concentrated. 

But, on the other hand, the photographic effect of the 
radiation on salts of silver, which is very feeble in the red 
rays, and even in the green rays, becomes more powerful 
the smaller the wave-length, till for rays whose wave-length 
is 400, which have a feeble violet luminosity and a still 
feebler thermal effect, the photographic effect is very 
powerful; and even far beyond the visible spectrum, for wave- 
lengths of less than 200 millionths of a millimetre, which 
are quite invisible to our eyes and quite undiscoverable by 
our thermometers, the photographic effect is still observed. 
_ This shows that neither the luminous nor the photographic 


Rae ss ee a te ee 


a aT wee 


220 Radiation. 


effect is in any way proportional to the energy of the radia~ 
tion when different kinds of radiation are concerned. It 
is probable that when the radiation produces the photo- 
graphic effect it is not by its energy doing work on the 
chemical compound, but rather by a well-timed vibration of 
the molecules dislodging them from the position of almost 
indifferent equilibrium into which they had been thrown by 
previous chemical manipulations, and enabling them to rush 
together according to their more permanent affinities, so as 
to form stabler compounds. In cases of this kind the effect 
is no more a dynamical measure of the cause than the effect 
of the fall of a tree is a measure of the energy of the wind 
which uprooted it. 

It is true that in many cases the amount of the radiation 
may be very accurately estimated by means of its chemical — 
effects, even when these chemical effects tend to diminish — 
the intrinsic energy of the system. But by estimating the 
heating effect of a radiation which is entirely absorbed by 
the heated body we obtain a true measure of the energy of 
the radiation. It is found that a surface thickly coated 
with lampblack absorbs nearly the whole of every kind of 
radiation which falls on it. Hence surfaces of this kind are 
of great value in the thermal study of radiation. 

We have now to consider the conditions which determine 
the amount and quality of the radiation from a heated body. — 
We must bear in mind that temperature is a property of 
hot bodies and not of radiations, and that qualities such as_ 
wave-lengths, &c., belong to radiations, but not to the heat — 
which produces them or is produced by them. 


ON PREVOST’S THEORY OF EXCHANGES. 


When a system of bodies at different temperatures is left 
to itself, the transfer of heat which takes place always has 
the effect of rendering the temperatures of the different 
bodies more nearly equal, and this character of the transfer 


heat, that it passes from hotter to colder bodies, is the 
same whether it is by radiation or by conduction that the 
transfer takes place. 
Let us consider a number of bodies, all at the same 
"temperature, placed in a chamber the walls of which are 
maintained at that temperature, and through which no heat 
‘can pass by radiation (suppose the walls of metal, for 
instance). No change of temperature will occur in any of 
Bithese bodies. They will be in thermal equilibrium with 
each other and with the walls of the chamber. This is a 
consequence of the definition of equal temperature at p. 32. 
_ Nowif any one of these bodies had been taken out of 
the chamber and placed among colder bodies there would 
be a transfer of heat by radiation from the hot body to the 
_ colder ones; or if colder body had been introduced intc. 
the chamber it would immediately begin to receive heat by 
radiation from the hotter bodies round it. But the cold 
_ body has no power of acting directly on the het bodies at a 
distance, so as to cause them to begin to emit radiations, 
nor has the hot chamber any power to stop the radiation of 
any one of the hot bodies placed within it. We therefore 
conclude with Prevost that a hot body is always emitting 
radiations, even when no colder body is there to receive 
them, and that the reason why there is no change of tem- 
perature when a body is placed in a chamber of the same 
_ temperature is that it receives from the radiation of the walls 
_of the chamber exactly as much heat as it loses by radiation 
; towards these walls. 

If this is the true explanation of the thermal equilibrium 
of radiation, it follows that if two bodies have the same. 
temperature the radiation emitted by the first and absorbed 
_by the second is equal in amount to the radiation emitted 
by the second and absorbed OF the first during the same 

time. 
‘The higher the temperature of a body, the greater its 
radiation is found to be, sothat when the temperatures of the 


es val es 


222 ; '. Radiation 


bodies are unequal the hotter bodies will emit more radia- 
tion than they receive from the colder bodies, and therefore, 
on the whole, heat will be lost by the hotter and gained by 
the colder bodies till thermal equilibrium is attained. We 
shall return to the comparison of the radiation at different 
temperatures after we have examined the relations between 
the radiation of different bodies at the same temperature. 

The application of the theory of exchanges has at various 
times been extended to the phenomena of heat as they 
were successively investigated Fourier has considered the 
law of radiation as depending on the angle which the ray 
makes with the surface, and Leslie has investigated its 
relation to the state of polish of the surface ; but it is in 
recent times, and chiefly by the researches of B. Stewart, — 
Kirchhoff, and De la Provostaye, that the theory of ex- 
changes has been shown to be applicable, not only to the — 
total amount of the radiation, but to every distinction in 
quality of which the radiation is capable. 

For, by placing between two bodies of the same tempera- 
ture a contrivance such as that already noticed at p. 218, so 
that only radiations of a determinate wave-length and in a 
determinate plane can pass from the one body to the other, 
we reduce the general proposition about thermal equilibrium 
to a proposition about this particular kind of radiation. We 
may therefore transform it into the following more definite 
proposition. 

If two bodies are at the same temperature, the radiation — 
emitted by the first and absorbed by the second agrees with 
the radiation emitted by the second and absorbed by the | 
first, not only in its total heating effect, but in the intensity, — 
wave-length, and plane of polarization of every component 
part of either radiation. And the law that the amount of 
radiation increases with the temperature must be true, not 
only for the whole radiation, but for all the component parts | 
of it when analysed according to their  wave- “lengths. and 


planes of polarization. 


‘The consequences of these two propositions, applying as 
they do to every kind of radiation, whether detected by its 


_ thermal or by its luminous effects, are so numerous and 
_ varied that we cannot attempt any full enumeration of them 
in this treatise. We must confine ourselves to a few ex- 
amples. 


When a radiation falls on a body, part of it is reflected, 


_ and part enters the body. The latter part again may either 
be wholly absorbed by the body or partly absorbed and 


_ partly transmitted. 


Now lampblack reflects hardly any of the radiation which 
falls on it, and it transmits none. Nearly the whole is 
absorbed. _ 

Polished silver reflects nearly the whole of the radiation 


_ which falls upon it, absorbing only about a fortieth part, and 
transmitting none. 


$ 
; 


Rock salt reflects less than a twelfth part of the radiation 


which falls on it; it absorbs hardly any, and transmits ninety- 


two per cent. 

These three substances, therefore, may be taken as types of 
absorption, reflexion, and transmission respectively. 

Let us suppose that these properties have been observed 
in these substances at the temperature, say, of 212° F., and 
let them be placed at this temperature within a chamber 


_ whose walls are at the same temperature. Then the amount 


of the radiation from the lampblack which is absorbed by 


the other two substances is, as we have seen, very small. 


will emit a much smaller amount of radiation than one 


Now the lampblack absorbs the whole of the radiation from 
the silver or the salt. Hence the radiation from these 
substances must also be small, or, more precisely— 

The radiation of a substance at a given temperature is to 


the radiation of lampblack at that temperature as the amount 


of radiation absorbed by the substance at that temperature is to 


_ the whole radiation which falls upon tt. 


Hence a body whose surface is made of polished siiver 


224 Radiation ° 


whose surface is of lampblack. The brighter the surface of 
a silver teapot, the longer will it retain the heat of the tea ; 
and if on the surface of a metal plate some parts are polished, 
others rough, and others blackened, when the plate is made 
red hot the blackened parts will appear brightest, the rough 
parts not so bright, and the polished parts darkest. This is 
well seen when melted lead is made red hot. When part 
of the dross is removed, the polished surface of the melted 
metal, though really hotter than the dross, appears of a less 
brilliant red. 

A piece of glass when taken red hot out of the fire appears 
of a very faint red compared with a piece of iron taken from 
the same part of the fire, though the glass is really hotter 
than the iron, because it does not throw off its heat so fast. 

Air or any other transparent gas, even when raised to a 
heat at which opaque bodies appear white hot, emits so little 
light that its luminosity can hardly be observed in the 
dark, at least when the thickness of the heated air is not 
very great. 

Again, when a substance at a given temperature absorbs 
certain kinds of radiation and transmits others, it emits at 
that temperature only those kinds of radiation which it 
absorbs. A very remarkable instance of this is observed in 
the vapour of sodium. This substance when heated emits 
rays of two definite kinds, whose wave-lengths are 0°00059053 
and 0'00058989 millimetre respectively. These rays are 
visible, and may be seen in the form of two bright lines by 
directing a spectroscope upon a flame in which any com- 
pound of sodium is present. 

Now if the light emitted from an intensely heated solid 
body, such as a piece of lime in the oxyhydrogen light, be 
transmitted through sodium-vapour at a temperature lower 
than that of the lime, and then analysed by the spectro- 
scope, two dark lines are seen, corresponding to the two 
bright ones formerly observed, showing that sodium-vapour 
absorbs the same definite kinds of light which it radiates. 


: 


If the temperature of the sodium-vapour is raised, say by 
ising a Bunsen’s burner instead of a spirit-lamp to produce 
it, or if the temperature of the lime is lowered till it is 
_ the same as that of the vapour, the dark lines disappear, # 
_ because the sodium-vapour now radiates exactly as much 
light as it absorbs from the light of the lime-ball at the 
same temperature. If the sodium-flame is hotter than the = 
lime-ball the lines appear bright. 
_ This is an illustration of Kirchhoff’s principle, that the 
_ radiation of every kind increases as the temperature rises. 
In performing this experiment we suppose the light from 
the lime-ball to pass through the sodium-flame before it 
reaches the slit of the spectroscope. If, however, the flame 
is interposed between the slit and the eye, or the screen on 
which the spectrum is projected, the dark lines may be seen 
distinctly, even when the temperature of the sodium-flame is 
higher than that of the lime-ball. For in the parts of the 
spectrum near the lines the light is now compounded of the 
analysed light of the lime-ball and the direct light of the 
sodium-flame, while at the lines themselves the light of the 
spectrum of the lime-ball is cut off, and only the direct light 
of the sodium-flame remains, so that the lines appear darker @ 
_ than the rest of the field. a 
It does not belong to the scope of this treatise to attempt = 
to go over the immense field of research which has been 
opened up by the application of the spectroscope to dis- 
tinguish different incandescent vapours, and which has led 
to a great increase of our knowledge of the heavenly 
bodies. 
_ If the thickness of a medium, such as sodium-vapour, 
_ which radiates and absorbs definite kinds of light, be very 
great, the whole being at a high temperature, the light 
_ emitted will be of exactly the same composition as that 
emitted from lampblack at the same temperature. For, 
_ though some kinds of radiation are much more feebly 
- emitted by the substance than others, these are also so_ 
Q 


226° Radiation. 


feebly absorbed that they can reach the surface from im-_ 


mense depths, whereas the rays which are so copiously 
radiated are also so rapidly absorbed that it is only from 
places very near the surface that they can escape out of the 
medium. Hence both the depth and the density of an 
incandescent gas cause its radiation to assume more and 
more of the character of a continuous spectrum. 

When the temperature of a substance is gradually raised, 
not only does the intensity of every particular kind of radia- 
tion increase, but new kinds of radiation are produced. 
Bodies of low temperature emit only rays of great wave- 
length.. As the temperature rises these rays are more 
copiously emitted, but at the same time other rays of 
smaller wave-length make their appearance. When the tem- 
perature has risen to a certain point, part of the radiation is 
luminous and of a red colour, the luminous rays of greatest 
wave-length being red. As the temperature rises, the other 
luminous rays appear in the order of the spectrum, but every 
rise of temperature increases the intensity of all the rays 
which have already made their appearance. A white-hot 
body emits more red rays than a red-hot body, and more 
non-luminous rays than any non-luminous body. 

The total thermal value of the radiation at any tempera- 
ture, depending as it does upon the amount of all the different 
kinds of rays of which it is composed, is not likely to be a 
simple function of the temperature. Nevertheless, Dulong 
and Petit succeeded in obtaining a formula which expresses 
the facts observed by them with tolerable exactness. It is 
of the form 

R = ma’, 
where R is the total loss of heat in unit of time by radia- 
tion from unit of area of the surface.of the substance at the 
temperature 0, m is a constant quantity. depending only on 
the substance and the nature of its «surface, and @ is a 


numerical quantity which, when @ expresses ‘the temperature _ 


on the Centigrade scale, is 1°0077. 


g I the hadyi is pied in a chamber devoid of air, whose 
- walls are at the temperature 4, then the heat radiated from 
the walls to the body and absorbed by it will be 


7 = i a', 
so that the ete loss of heat will be 


R—7r=mao — mda. 


The constancy of the amount of radiation between the same 
surfaces at the same temperatures affords a very convenient 
_ method of comparing quantities of heat. This method was 
referred to in our chapter on Calorimetry (p. 74), under the 
name of the Method of Cooling. om 
The substance to be examined is heated and put into a 

j thin copper vessel, the outer surface of which is blackened, 
or at least is preserved in the same state of roughness or of 
polish throughout the experiments. This vessel is placed “% 
_ in a larger copper vessel so as not to touch it, and the outer : 
_ vessel is placed in a bath of water kept at a constant tem- 
perature. The temperature of the substance in the smaller 
_ vessel is observed from time to time, or, still better, the times 
- are observed at which the reading of a thermometer im- % 
_ mersed in the substance is an exact number of degrees.’ In 
this way the time of cooling, say from 100° to go°, from go° 
_ to 80°, is registered, the temperature of the outer vessel being 
_ kept always the same. ¥ 
_ Suppose that this observation of the time of cooling is 
_ made first when the vessel is filled with water, and then 
_ when some other substance is put into it.:. The rate at which 
_ heat escapes by radiation is the same for the same tempera- 
ture in both experiments. The quantity. of heat which 
; escapes during the cooling, say from 100° to go°, in the two 
experiments, is proportional to the time of cooling. Hence 
the capacity of the vessel and its contents in the first experi- 
‘ment is to its capacity. in the second experiment as the time 
gy from 100° to go° in the first experiment is to the 
ti time of cooling from 100° to go° in the second experiment. 
+ Q2 


:: 


The method of cooling is very convenient in certain cases, 
_ but it is necessary to keep the temperature of the whole of 
the substance in the inner vessel as nearly uniform as possible, _ 
so that the method must be restricted to liquids which we 
can stir, and to solids whose conductivity is great, and 
which may be cut in pieces and immersed in a liquid. 
The method of cooling has been found very applicable to 
the measurement of the quantity of heat conducted through 
a substance. (See the chapter on Conduction.) 


= a a a is £ “, 
Sw ee ee ne ee ee ae ee 


EFFECT OF RADIATION ON THERMOMETERS, § 


On account of the radiation passing in all directions through — 
the atmosphere, it is a very difficult thing to determine the ; 
true temperature of the air in any place out of doors by — 
means of a thermometer. 4 

If the sun shines on the thermometer, the reading is of 
course too high ; but if we put it in the shade, it may be too — 
low, because the thermometer may be emitting more radia- — 
tion than it receives from the clear sky. The ground, walls — 
~ of houses, clouds, and the various devices for shielding the 
thermometer from radiation, may all become sources of | 
error, by causing an unknown amount of radiation on the — 
bulb. For rough purposes the effects of radiation may be — 
greatly removed by giving the bulb a surface of polished — 
silver, of which, as we have seen, the absorption is only a — 
fortieth of that of lampblack. 

A method described by Dr. Joule in a communication to — 
the Philosophical Society of Manchester, November 26, 1867, — 
seems the only one free from all objections. The thermo- | 
meter is placed in a long vertical copper tube open at both — 
ends, but with a cap to close the lower end, which may be ~ 
removed or put on without warming it by the hand. What- — 
ever radiation affects the thermometer must be between it. 
and the inside of the tube, and if these are of the same 


+ ech 


as affecting Thermometers. 229 


temperature, the radiation will have no effect on the observed 
reading of the thermometer. Hence, if we can be sure that 
the copper tube and the air within it are at the temperature 
of the atmosphere, and that the thermometer is in thermal 
equilibrium, the thermometer reading will be the true tem- 
perature. 

Now, if the air within the tube is of the same temperature 
as the air outside, it will be of the same density, and it will 
therefore be in statical equilibrium with it. If it is warmer 
it will be lighter, and an upward current will be formed in 
the tube when the cap is removed. If it is colder, a down- 
ward current will be formed. 

To detect these currents a spiral wire is suspended in the 
tube by a fine fibre, so that an upward or downward current 
causes the spiral to twist the fibre, and any motion of the 
spiral is made apparent by means of a small mirror attached 
to it. 

To vary the temperature of the copper tube, it is enclosed 
in a wider tube, so that water may be placed in the space 
between the tubes, and by pouring in warmer or cooler water 
the temperature may be adjusted till there is no current. 

We then know that the air is of the same temperature 
within the tube as it is without. But we know that the 
tube is also of the same temperature as the air, for if it 
_were not it would heat or cool the air and produce a cur- 
rent. Finally, we know that the thermometer, if stationary, 
is at the temperature of the atmosphere ; for the air in contact 
with it, and the sides of the tube, which alone can exchange 
radiations with it, have the same temperature as the atmo- 
sphere. 


230 Convection. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


ON CONVECTION CURRENTS. 


WHEN the application of heat to a fluid causes it to expand 
or to contract, it is thereby rendered rarer or denser than the 
neighbouring parts of the fluid ; and if the fluid is at the 


same time acted on by gravity, it tends to form an upward _ 


or downward current of the heated fluid, which is of course 
accompanied with a current of the more remote parts of the 
fluid in the opposite direction. The fluid is thus made to 
circulate, fresh portions of fluid are brought into the neigh- 
bourhood of the source of heat, and these when heated 
travel, carrying their heat with them into other regions. 
Such currents, caused by the application of heat, and carry- 
ing this heat with them, are called convection currents. 
They play a most important part in natural phenomena, by 
causing a much more rapid diffusion of heat than would 
take place by conduction alone in the same medium if re- 
strained from moving. The actual diffusion of heat from 
one part of the fluid to another takes place, of course, by 
conduction ; but, on account of the motion of the fluid, the 
isothermal surfaces are so extended, and in some cases con- 
sorted, that their areas are greatly increased while the dis- 
‘ances between them are diminished, so that true conduction 
goes on much more rapidly than if the medium were at 
rest. : 
Convection currents depend on changes of density in a 
fluid acted on by gravity. If the action of heat does not 
produce a change of density, as in the case of water at a 
temperature of about 39° F., no convection current will be 
produced. If the fluid is not acted on by gravity, as would 


OR a ae 


ee ee Te eee 


a: , 


oduction of Currents. 


be the case if the fluid were removed to a sufficient distance | 


from the earth and other great bodies, no convection cur- 


rents would be formed. As this condition is not easily 


realised, we may take the case of a vessel containing fluid, 
and descending according to the law of motion of a body 
falling freely. The pressure in this fluid will be the same 
in every part, and a change of density in any part of the 
fluid will not occasion convection currents. 


When we wish to avoid the formation of convection 


currents we must arrange matters so that during the whole 
course of the experiment the density of each horizontal — 


stratum is the same throughout, and that the density increases 
with the depth. If, for instance, we are studying the con- 


duction of heat in. a fluid which expands when heated, we | 
must make the heat flow downwards through the fluid. If — 
we wish to determine the law of diffusion of fluids we must 


place the denser fluid underneath the rarer one. 

Convection currents are produced by changes of density 
arising from other causes. Thus if a crystal of a soluble 
salt be suspended in a vessel of water, the water in contact 
with the crystal will dissolve a portion of it, and, becoming 
denser, will begin to sink, and its place will be supplied by 
fresh water. Thus a convection current will be formed, a 
solution of the salt will descend from the crystal, and this 
will cause an upward current of purer water, and a circula- 
tion will be kept up till either the crystal is entirely dissolved, 
or the liquid has become saturated with the salt up to the 


level of the top of the crystal. In this case it is the salt — 


which is carried through the liquid by convection. 

A convection current may be produced in which electricity 
is the thing carried. If a conductor terminating in a fine 
point is strongly electrified, the particles of air near the point 
will be charged with electricity, and then urged from the 
point towards any surface oppositely electrified. A current 


of electrified air is thus formed, which diffuses itself about 
_ the room, and generally reaches the walls, where the electrified = __ 


not discharged for a long time. 

The method of determining by convection currents the 
temperature at which water has its maximum density seems 
- to have been first employed by Hope. He cooled the 
middle part of a tall vessel of water by surrounding this part 

of the vessel with a freezing mixture. As long as the tempe- 
_ rature is aboye 40° F. the cooled water descends, and causes 
a fall of temperature in a thermometer placed in the lower 

part of the vessel. Another thermometer, placed in the 
upper part of the vessel, remains stationary. But when the 
temperature is below 39° F. the water cooled by the freezing 
mixture becomes lighter and ascends, causing the upper 
thermometer to fall, while the lower one remains sta- 
tionary. ‘ 

The investigation of the maximum density of water has 


Fic. 31. made use of convection currents.. He em- 
ployed a vessel consisting of two vertical 
cylinders, each 43 feet high and 6 inches 


with a cock, and above by an open trough 
or channel. The whole was filled with water 
up to such a level that the water could flow 
freely through the channel. A glass specific 
gravity bead which would just float in water 
was placed in the channel, and served to 


density between the portions of water in the 


channel. 
The cock in the connecting tube being 
closed, the temperature of the water in the two tubes was 


air clings to the oppositely electrified wall, and is sometimes 


bao 


been greatly improved by Joule, who also— 


ee ee eg ee ee ee Se 


diameter, connected below by a wide tube 


two columns was sufficient to produce a_ 
current, and to move the bead in the > 


adjusted, the water well mixed in each tube by stirring, 


; 
a 


indicate any motion of the water in the — 
channel. The very smallest difference of — 


Behe it iad come to rest the temperature of each 
¥ ~ column was observed, and the cock was opened. If a cur- 
rent was then Meera in the channel, it indicated that 
the water in the tube towards which the current flowed was 
the denser. By finding a pair of different temperatures 
at which the density is exactly the same, we may be sure 
that one of them is below and the other above the tempe- 
rature of maximum density; and by obtaining a series of 
such pairs of temperatures of which the difference is smaller 
and smaller, Dr. Joule determined the temperature of maxi- 
mum density to be 39°'1 F. within a very small seeabpe: of a 
2 degree. 


4 CHAPTER XVIII. 
ON THE DIFFUSION OF HEAT BY CONDUCTION. pac 


WHENEVER different parts of a body are at different tem- ? 
peratures, heat flows from the hotter parts to the neigh- 
bouring colder parts. To obtain an Tie 4a a: 
exact notion of conduction, let us 

consider a large boiler with a flat 

bottom, whose thickness is ¢c The 

fire maintains the lower surface 

at the temperature T, and heate 
_ flows upwards through the boiler : 
plate to the upper surface, which is Va 
in contact with the water at the lower temperature, s 

Let us now restrict ourselves to the consideration of a 
rectangular portion of the boiler plate, whose length is a, 
its breadth 4, and its thickness «. 

The things to be considered are the dimensions of this 
portion of the body, and the nature of the material of which 
it is made, the temperatures of its upper and ‘ower surfaces, _ 
q and the flow of heat through it as determined by these _ 


a ; : 
OE a Oe ay nt he Re Oe or a ae 


iadwose In the ‘hast lee it is fouad ‘that ie th ; 
difference of the temperatures s and T is not so great as to 
make a sensible difference between the properties of the — 
substance at these two temperatures, the flow of heat is — 


:. exactly proportional to the difference of temperatures, other 


_ things being the same. 4 

Let us suppose that when a, J, and ¢ are each equal to © 
the unit of length, and when T is one degree above s, the 
steady flow of heat is such that the quantity which enters 
the lower surface or leaves the upper surface in the unit of — 
time is 2, then & is defined as the specific thermal con- | 
ductivity of the substance. To find n, the quantity of heat — 
which flows in a time through the portion of boiler plate 
whose area is a 4, and whose thickness is c, when the lower 
surface is kept at a temperature T, and the upper at a — 
temperature s, till the flow has become steady, divide the 
plate into ¢ horizontal layers, the thickness of each layer 
being unity, and divide each layer into a d cubes, the sides 
of each cube being unity. 

Since the flow of heat is steady, the difference of tem- 
perature of the upper and lower faces of each cube will 


be 3 (t —s). The flow of heat through each cube will 


be : (tT—s) in unit of time. Now, in each layer there 


are a 6 such cubes, and the flow goes on for ¢ units of time, 
so that we obtain for the whole heat conducted in time ¢ 
are abtk (r~s), 
€ rT 
_ where @ 4 is the area and ¢ the thickness of the plate, ¢ the 
time, T — s the difference of temperature which causes the — 
flow, and & the specific thermal conductivity of the sub- 


_ stance of the plate. 


‘It appears, therefore, that the heat conducted is idieaye 
proportional to the area of the plate, to the time, to the differ- 


f temperature, on to the bnifactivity, and ee: 
oportional to the thickness-of the plate. 


3 


ON THE DIMENSIONS OF &, THE SPECIFIC THERMAL 
CONDUCTIVITY. 


From the equation we find 


eH 


~ a@bi(t—s) 
Hence if [i] be the unit of length, [T] the unit of time, © 


[H] the unit of heat, and [@] the unit of temperature, the 


danensions of & will be - [4 


[L710] - | 
The further discussion of the dimensions of & will depend © 
on the mode of measuring heat and temperature. 


(1) If heat is measured as energy, its dimensions are _ 


: 2 
[= , and those of & become E re . This may be 


called the dynamical measure of the conductivity. . 
(2) If heat is measured in thermal units, such that each 

thermal unit is capable of raising unit of mass of a standard 

substance through one degree of temperature, the dimen- 


sions of H are [mM ©], and those of & will be [=] . This 


may be called the calorimetric measure of the conductivity. 
(3) If we take as the unit of heat that which will raise unit 


of volume of the substance itself one degree, the dimensions 


of H are [190 ], and those of & are [ —| . This may be 


called the ¢hermometric measure of the conductivity. 


In order to obtain a distinct conception of the flow of 


heat through a solid body, let us suppose that at a given 
_ instant we know the temperature of every point of the body. 
__ If we now suppose a surface to be described within the 
_ body such that at every point of this surface the tempera- 
_ ture has a given value T°, we may call this surface the 


isothermal surface of 1°. (Of course, when we suppose 
this surface to exist in the body, we do not conceive the 
body to be altered in any way by this supposition, as if the 
body were really cut in two by it.) This isothermal surface 
separates those parts of the body which are hotter than 
the temperature T° from those which are colder than this 
temperature. 

Let us now suppose the isothermal surfaces drawn for 
every exact degree of temperature, from that of the hottest 
part of the body to that of the coldest part. ‘These surfaces 
may be curved in any way, but no two different surfaces 

can meet each other, because no part of the body can at 
the same time have two different temperatures. The body 
will therefore be divided into layers or coats by these sur- 
faces, and the space between two isothermal surfaces differing 
by one degree of temperature will be in the form of a thin 
shell, whose thickness may vary from one part to another. 

At every point of this shell there is a flow of heat from 
the hotter surface to the colder surface through the substance 
of the shell. 

The direction of this flow is perpendicular to the surface 
of the shell, and the rate of flow is greater the thinner the 
shell is at the place, and the greater its conductivity. 

If we draw a line perpendicular to the surface of the shell, 
and of Jength unity, then if cis the thickness of the shell, 
and if the neighbouring shells are of nearly the same thick- 


ness, this line will cut a number of shells equal to * . This, 


then, is the difference of temperature between two points in 
the body at unit of distance, measured in the direction of 
the flow of heat, and therefore the flow of heat along this 


line is measured by e where & is the conductivity. 


We can now imagine, with the help of the isothermal sur- — 
faces, the state of the body at a given instant. Wherever — 
there is inequality of temperature between neighbouring ~ 


Te RR Ae TE Re ee ee TI 


— a 


Se ey Oe 


SP ar ee 


Te 


of the portion considered.. 


parts of the bady a flow of heat is going on. This flow is 
everywhere perpendicular to the isothermal surfaces, and the 


flow through unit of area of one of these surfaces in unit of 
time is equal to the conductivity divided by the distance 
between two consecutive isothermal surfaces. 

The knowledge of the actual thermal state of the body, 
and of the law of conduction of heat, thus enables us to 
determine the flow of heat at every part of the body. Ifthe 
flow of heat is such that the amount of heat which flows into 
any portion of the body is exactly equal to that which flows 
out of it, then the thermal state of this portion of the body 
will remain the same as long as the flow of heat fulfils this 
condition. 

If this condition is fulfilled for every part of the body, the 
temperature at any point will not alter with the time, the 
system of isothermal surfaces will continue the same, and the 
flow of heat will go on without alteration, being always the 
same at the same part of the body. 

This state of things is referred to as the state of steady flow 
of heat. It cannot exist unless heat is steadily supplied to 
the hotter parts of the surface of the body, from some source 
external to the body, and an equal quantity removed from 
the colder parts of the surface by some cooling medium, or 
by radiation. 

The state of steady flow of heat requires the fulfilment at 
every part of the body of a certain condition, similar to that 
which is fulfilled in the flow of an incompressible fluid. 

When this condition is not fulfilled, the quantity of heat 
which enters any portion of the body may be greater or less 
than that which escapes from it. In the one case heat will 
accumulate, and the portion of the body will rise in tempe- 
rature. In the other case the heat of the portion will 
diminish, and it will fall in temperature. The amount of 
this rise or fall of temperature will be measured numerically 
by the gain or loss of heat, divided by the capacity for heat 


If the portion considered is unit of volume, and if w 
measure heat as in the third method given at p. 235 by the 
quantity required to raise unit of volume of the substance, 
- in its actual state, one degree, then the rise of temperature 
of this portion will be numerically equal to the total flow 
_ of heat into it. 

We are now able, by means of a thorough knowledge of 
the thermal state of the body at a given instant, to determine 
the rate at which the temperature of every part must be 
changing, and therefore we are able to predict its state in 
the succeeding instant. Knowing this, we can predict its 
state in the next instant following, and so on. 

The only parts of the body to which this method does not 
apply are those parts of its surface to which heat is supplied, 
or from which heat is abstracted, by agencies external to the 
body. Ifwe know either the rate at which heat is supplied 
or abstracted at every part of the surface, or the actual tem- 
perature of every part of the surface during the whole time, 
either of these conditions, together with the original thermal 

state of the body, will afford sufficient data for calculating 
the temperature of every point during all time to come. 

The discussion of this problem is the subject of the great 
work of Joseph Fourier, Zhéorie de la Chaleur. It is not 
possible in a treatise of the size and scope of this book to 
reproduce, or even to explain, the powerful analytical methods 

- employed by Fourier to express the varied conditions, as to 
the form of its surface and its original thermal state, to which 

the body may be subjected. ‘These methods belong, rather, 
to the general theory of the application of mathematics to 

physics; for in every branch of physics, when the investiga- 
tion turns upon the expression of arbitrary conditions, we 
have to follow the method which Fourier first pointed out 
in his ‘Theory of Heat.’ 

I shall only mention one or two of the results given by 
Fourier, in which the intricacies arising from the arbitrary 

conditions of the problem are avoided. 


3 The first of these is thee case in which the solid is sippdsed? 33 
_ of infinite extent, and of the same conductivity in every part. 
_ The temperature of every point of this body at a given 
time is supposed to be known, and it is required to deter- 
mine the temperature of any given point P after a time ¢ has 
. elapsed.: 

Fourier has given a complete solution of this problem, of 
which we may obtain some idea by means of the following 
considerations. Let & be the conductivity, measured by the 
third method, in which the unit of heat adopted is that 
_ which will raise unit of volume of the substance one degree ; 
_ then if we make 
3 Ris at; 

a will be a line the length of which will be proportional 
.to the square root of the time. 

a Let Q be any point in the body, and let its distance from 
P bev. Let the original temperature of g be 6. Now take 


Bc 
a quantity of matter proportional to ¢ 4 and of the 
_ temperature 6, and mix it with portions of matter taken 
from every other part of the body, the temperature of each 
portion being the original temperature of that point, ang 


the quantity of each portion being proportional to e Fi 
The mean temperature of all such portions will be the 
temperature of the point p after a time ¢. a 
In other words, the temperature of P after a time ¢ may 
be regarded as in some sense the mean of the original 
temperatures of all parts of the body. In taking this mean, 
however, different parts are allowed different weights, de- f 
_ pending on their distance from Pp, the parts near phaving 
_ more influence on the result than those at a greater dis- 
_ tance. 
_ The mathematical formula which indicates the weight to 
be given to the temperature of each part in taking the 
mean is a very important one. It occurs in several 


mm 


PP ayin es 


Wop ay vy ee bad co as LG Mas Seat pi 
é “3 fa 


240 Diffusion of Heat by Condiaclion ada es Be 


branches of physics, particularly in the theory of errors 
and in that of the motions of systems of molecules. 

It follows from ‘this result that, in calculating the tem- 
perature of the point P, we must take into account the 
temperature of every other point Q, however distant, and 
however short the time may be during which the propaga- 
tion of heat has been going on. Hence, in a strict sense, 
the influence of a heated part of the body extends to the 

distant parts of the body in an incalculably short time, 
so that it is impossible to assign to the propagation of heat 
a definite velocity. The velocity of propagation of thermal 
effects depends entirely on the magnitude of the effect 
which we are able to recognise ; and if there were no limit 
to the sensibility of our instruments, there would be no 
limit to the rapidity with which we could detect the in- 
fluence of heat applied to distant parts of the body. - But 
while this influence on distant points can be expressed 
mathematically from the first instant, its numerical value is 
excessively small until, by the lapse of time, the line a has 
grown so as to be comparable with 7, the distance of p from 
Q. If we take this into consideration, and remember that it 
is only when the changes of temperature are comparable with 
the original differences of temperature that we can detect 
them with our instruments, we shall see that the sensible — 
propagation of heat, so far from being instantaneous, isan — 
excessively slow process, and that the time required to 
produce a similar change of temperature in two similar 
systems of different dimensions is proportional to the — 
square of the linear dimensions. For instance, if a red-hot — 
ball of four inches’ diameter fired into a sandbank has in an © 
hour raised the temperature of the sand six inches from its — 
centre 10° F., then a red-hot ball of eight inches’ diameter — 
would take four hours to raise the temperature of the sand - 
twelve inches from its centre by the same number of degrees. — 

This result, which is very important in practical questions 
about the time of cooling or heating of bodies of any form, — 


| 
; 
; 


in an Infinite Solid. * ae 


may be deduced directly from the consideration of the 
dimensions of the quantity —namely, the square of a length 
divided by a time. It follows from this that if in two un- 
equally heated systems of similar form but different dimen- 
sions the conductivity and the temperature are the same at 
corresponding points at first, then the process of diffusion of 
heat will go on at different rates in the two systems, so that 
if for each system the time be taken proportional to the 
square of the linear dimensions, the temperatures of corre- 
sponding points will still be the same in both systems. 

The method just described affords a complete determina- 
tion of the temperature of any point of a homogeneous 
infinite solid at any future time, the temperature of every 
point of the solid being given at the instant from which we 
begin to count the time. But when we attempt to deduce 
from a knowledge of the present thermal state of the body 
what must have been its state at some past time, we find 
that the method ceases to be applicable. 

To make this attempt, we have only to make 4, the 
symbol of the time, a negative quantity in the expressions 
given by Fourier. If we adopt the method of taking the 
mean of the temperatures of all the particles of the solid, each 
particle having a certain weight assigned to it in taking the 


greater for the distant particles than for the neighbouring ones, 
a result sufficiently startling in itself. But when we find 
that, in order to obtain the mean, after taking the sum of 
the temperatures multiplied by their proper factors, we have 
to divide by a quantity involving the square root of 4 
the time, we are assured that when ¢ is taken negative the 
operation is simply impossible, and devoid of any physical 
meaning, for the square root of a negative quantity, though 
it may be interpreted with reference to some geometrical 
operations, is absolutely without meaning with reference to 
time. 

It appears, therefore, that Fourier’s solution of this 

R 


mean, we find that this weight, according to the formula, is 


. 
q 
iZ 
i 


es Se Ur 


<= =" 


e ae Wee ghee is Pre; ee i : | “4 ; oe . ; 
problem, though complete considered with refere nce | ite | 
time, fails when we attempt to discover the state of the — 
body in past time. a 
In the diagram fig. 33 the curves show the distribution of | 4 


FiG. 33. a 


4 
-; 


SCALE oF TEMPERATURE 
: emperature in an infinite mass at different times, after the 
sudden introduction of a hot horizontal stratum in the 
midst of the infinite solid. The temperature is indicated by 

_ the horizontal distance to the right of the vertical line, 


numbers. 


middle of the figure. 


The curves indicate the temperatures of the various strata 


one hour, four hours, and sixteen hours after the intro- 
duction of the hot stratum. The gradual diffusion of the 


the hot stratum is supposed to have been introduced at the 


heat is evident, and also the diminishing rate of diffusion as — 


its extent increases. 


_ The problem of the diffusion of heat in an infinite solid 


does not present those difficulties which occur in problems 
relating to a solid of definite shape. These difficulties 
arise from the conditions to which the surface of the solid 
may be subjected, as, for instance, the temperature may be 


given over part of the surface, the quantity of heat supplied — 


to another part may be given, or we may only know that 
the surface is exposed to air of a certain temperature. 

The method by which Fourier was enabled to solve many 
questions of this kind depends on the discovery of har- 
monic distributions of heat. 


Suppose the temperatures of the different parts of the body 


to be so adjusted that when the body is left to itself under 
the given conditions relating to the surface, the tempera- 


tures of all the parts converge to the final temperature, 


their differences from the final temperature always preserv- 
ing the same proportion during the process; then this 
distribution. of temperature is called an harmonic dis- 


tribution. If we suppose the final temperature to be taken © 


as zero, then the temperatures in the harmonic distribution 
diminish in a geometrical progression as the times increase 


in arithmetical progression, the ratio of cooling being ihe 
same for all parts of the body. 

In each of the cases investigated by ee there may 
be an infinite series of harmonic distributions. One of 
these, which has the slowest rate of diminution, may be 


called the fundamental harmonic; the rates of diminution — 
of the others are proportional to the squares of the natural 


con 


ae ce ee a ee Fite (PS ort Ct ae Ne AD Sag Ps ea oe a ee ee 

wes pe Rie oe. Ay . a oe , (pnsiey ie a! a cs ei = a ae 

ba wi ' va voy ea ou te ORS Say ah ees 
ay o } i ‘ ' “ ; 

3 


- 
é 


% 244 Diffusion of Heat by Conduction. 


If the body is originally heated in any arbitrary manner, 
Fourier shows how to express the original temperature as the - 
sum of a series of harmonic distributions. When the body 
is left to itself the part depending on the higher harmonics 
rapidly dies away, so that after a certain time the distribu- 
tion of heat continually approximates to that due to the . 
ma fundamental harmonic, which therefore represents the law | 
of cooling of a body after the process of diffusion of heat 
has gone on for a long time. | 

Sir William Thomson has shown, in a paper published in 
the ‘Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal’ in 1844, 
how to deduce, in certain cases, the thermal state of a body 
in past time from its observed condition at present. 

For this purpose, the present distribution of temperature 
must be expressed (as it always may be) as the sum of a 
ee series of harmonic distributions. Each of these harmonic 
ie distributions is such that the difference of the temperature of 

any point from the final temperature diminishes in a geo- 
metrical progression as the time increases in arithmetical 
progression, the ratio of the geometrical progression being 
the greater the higher the degree of the harmonic. 
If we now make ¢ negative, and trace the history of the 
distribution of temperature up the stream of time, we shall 
7 find each harmonic increasing as we go backwards, and the 
higher harmonics increasing faster than the lower ones. 
Ifthe present distribution of temperature is such that it 
may be expressed in a finite series of harmonics, the distri- 
‘r bution of temperature at any previous time may be calculated ; 
but if (as is generally the case) the series of harmonics is 
infinite, then the temperature can be calculated only when 
this series is convergent. For present and future time it is 
always convergent, but for past time it becomes ultimately 
divergent when the time is taken at a sufficiently remote 
epoch. The negative value of ¢, for which the series becomes 
ultimately divergent, indicates a certain date in past time 
such that the present state of things cannot be deduced from 


Pan! 
=." 


Le a eee URE. 
rm : 


weed ie al Se 
ps 


4 sy i ~ 


Steady and Periodic Flow of Heat. 245 ee 


_ any distribution of temperature occurring previously to that 


date, and becoming diffused by ordinary conduction. Some 
other event besides ordinary conduction must have occurred 
since that date in order to produce the present state of things. 

This is only one of the cases in which a consideration of 
the dissipation of energy leads to the determination of a 
superior limit to the antiquity of the observed order of 
things. 


A very important class of problems is that in which there- 


is a steady flow of heat into the body at one point of 
its surface, and out of it at another part. There is a 
certain distribution of temperature in all such cases, which 
if once established will not afterwards change: this is 
called the permanent distribution. If the original distri- 
bution differs from this, the effect of the diffusion of heat will 
be to cause the distribution of temperature to approximate 
without limit to this permanent distribution. Questions 
relating to the permanent distribution of temperature and 
the steady flow of heat are in general less difficult than 
those in which this state is not established. 

Another important class of problems is that in which heat 
is supplied to a portion of the surface in a periodic manner, 
as in the case of the surface of the earth, which receives and 
emits heat according to the periods of day and night, and 
the longer periods of summer and winter. 

The effect of such periodic changes of temperature at the 
surface is to produce waves of heat, which descend into the 
earth and gradually dieaway. The length of these waves is 
proportional to the square root of the periodic time. If we 
examine the wave at a depth such that the greatest heat 
occurs, when it is coldest at the surface, then the extent of 
the variation of temperature at this depth is only =, of its 
value at the surface. In the rocks of this country this depth 
is about 25 feet for the annual variations. ; 

In the diagram fig. 34 the distribution of temperature in 
the different strata is represented at two different times. If 


i = Ooh Bs. sas a 


246 Diffusion of Heat by Conduction. 


we suppose the figure to represent the diurnal variation of 
temperature, then the curves indicate the temperatures at 


7EMPERATURES 


2AM. and 8A.m. If we suppose it to represent the annual 
variation, then the curves correspond to January and Apri. 


* 


Ce ge eT SE ee ee ie SY ee ee Ree oe, Se eee 


Underground Temperature. 247 


Since the depth of the wave varies as the square root of the 
periodic time, the wave-length of the annual variation of 
temperature will be about nineteen times the depth of those 
of the diurnal variation. Ata depth of about 50 feet the 
variation of annual temperature is about a year in arrear. 

The actual variation of temperature at the surface does 
not follow the law which gives a simple harmonic wave, but, . 
however complicated the actual variation may be, Fourier 
shows how to decompose it into a number of harmonic 
waves of which it is the sum. As we descend into the earth 
these waves die away, the shortest most rapidly, so that we 
lose the irregularities of the diurnal variation in a few inches, 
and the diurnal variation itself in a few feet. The annual 
variation can be traced to a much greater depth ; but at 
depths of 50 feet and upwards the temperature is sensibly 
constant throughout the year, the variation being less than 
the five-hundredth part of that at the surface. 

But if we compare the mean temperatures at different 
depths, we find that as we descend the mean temperature 
rises, and that after we have passed through the upper strata, 
in which. the periodic variations of temperature are observed, 
this increase of temperature goes on as we descend to the 
greatest depths known to man. In this country the rate of 
increase of temperature appears to be about 1° F. for 50 os: 
feet of descent. E 

The fact that the strata of the earth are hotter below than 
above shows that heat must be flowing through them from : 
below upwards. The amount of heat which thus flows ; 
upwards in a year through a square foot of the surface can 
easily be found if we know the conductivity of the substance 
through which it passes. For several kinds of rock the 
conductivity has been ascertained by means of experiments 
made upon detached portions of the rock in the laboratory. 
But a still more satisfactory method, whereit can be employed, 
is to make a register of the temperature at different depths 
throughout the year, and from this to determine the length 


248 Diffusion of Heat by Conduction. 4 
of the annual wave of temperature, or its rate of decay. : 
From either of these data the conductivity of the substance 
of the earth may be found without removing the rocks from 
their bed. 
| By observations of this kind made at different points of 
® the earth’s surface we might determine the quantity of heat 
: which flows out of the earth in a year. This can be done 
only roughly at present, on account of the small number of 
places at which such observations have been made, but we 
know enough to be certain that a great quantity of heat 
escapes from the earth every year. It is not probable that 
any great proportion of this heat is generated by chemical 
action within the earth. We must therefore conclude that 
there is less heat in the earth now than in former periods of 
its existence, and that its internal parts were formerly very 
much hotter than they are now. 

In this way Sir W. Thomson has calculated that, if no 
change has occurred in the order of things, it cannot have 
been more than 200,000,000 years since the earth was in 
the condition of a mass of molten matter, on which a solid 
crust was just beginning to form. 


ON THE DETERMINATION OF THE THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY 
OF BODIES. 


The most obvious method of determining the conduc- 
tivity of a substance is to form it into a plate of uniform 
thickness, to bring one of its surfaces to a known tempera- 
ture and the other to a known lower temperature, and to 
determine the quantity of heat which passes through the 
plate in a given time. 

For instance, if we could bring one surface to the tem- 
perature of boiling water by a current of steam, and keep 
the other at the freezing temperature by means of ice, we 
might measure the heat transmitted either by the quantity 
of steam condensed, or by the quantity of ice melted. 


at - |) ee Va 8 eee ee. Ye ee 
ss We SA a TNs, Le 
i ears 


Measurement of Conductivity. 249 


_ The chief difficulty in this method is that the surface of 
the plate does not acquire the temperature of the steam or 
_ the ice with which it is in contact, and that it is difficult to 
ascertain its real temperature with the accuracy necessary 
for a determination of this kind. 
Most of the actual determinations of conductivity have 
been made in a more indirect way—by observing the per- 
manent distribution of temperature in a bar, one end of 
which is maintained at a high temperature, while the rest 
of its surface is exposed to the cooling effects of the atmo- 
sphere. 
The temperatures of a series of points in the bar are 
ascertained by means of thermometers inserted into holes - 
drilled in it, and brought into thermal connexion with its 
substance by means of fluid metal surrounding the bulbs. 
In this way the rate of diminution of temperature with 
the distance can be ascertained at various points on the bar. 
To determine the conductivity, we must compare the 
rate of variation of temperature with the flow of heat which 
is due to it. Itisin the determination of this flow of heat 
that the indirectness of the method consists. The most 
trustworthy method of determining the flow of heat is that 
employed by Principal Forbes in his experiments on the 
conduction of heat in an iron bar.! He took a bar of exactly 
the same section and material as the experimental bar, and, 
after heating it uniformly, allowed it to cool in air of the 

same temperature as that surrounding the experimental bar. 
_ By observing the temperature of the cooling bar at frequent 

intervals of time, he ascertained the quantity of heat which 
escaped from the sides of the bar, this heat being measured 
in terms of the quantity of heat required to raise unit of 

volume of the bar one degree. ‘This loss of heat depended 
of course on the temperature of the bar at the time, and a 
table was formed showing the loss from a linear foot of the 
bar in a minute at any temperature. 


1 Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 1861-2. 


Ae 


“* 


250 Diffusion of Heat by Conduction. 


Now, in the experimental bar the temperature of every 
part was known, and therefore the loss of heat from any 
given portion of the bar could be found by making use of 
the table. To determine the flow of heat across any par- 
ticular section, it was necessary to sum up the loss of heat 
from all parts of the bar beyond this section, and when this — 
was done, by comparing the flow of heat across the section 
with the rate of diminution of temperature per linear foot 
in the curve of temperature, the conductivity of the bar — 
for the temperature of the section was ascertained. Prin- 
cipal Forbes found that the thermal conductivity of iron 
decreases as the temperature increases. 

The conductivity thus determined is expressed in terms 
of the quantity of heat required to raise unit of volume of 
the substance one degree. If we wish to express it in the 
ordinary way in terms of the thermal unit as defined with — 
reference to water at its maximum density, we must 
multiply our result by the specific heat of the substance, 
and by its density ; for the quantity of heat required to 
raise unit of mass of the substance one degree is its specific 
heat, and the number of units of mass in unit of volume is” 
the density of the substance. 1 

As long as we are occupied with questions relating to the 
diffusion of heat and the waves of temperature in a single 
substance, the quantity on which the phenomena depend 
is the thermometric conductivity expressed in terms of the 
substance itself; but whenever we have to do with the 
effects of the flow of heat upon other bodies, as in the case 
of boiler plates, steam-condensers, &c., we must use a 
definite thermal unit, and express the calorimetric con- 
ductivity in terms of it. It has been shown by Professor 
Tyndall that the wave of temperature travels faster in bis- 
muth than in iron, though the conductivity of bismuth is 
much less than that of iron. The reason is that the 
thermal capacity of the iron is much greater than that of a 
equal volume of bismuth. 


Conductivity of various Substances. 251 


_. Forbes was the first to remark that the order in which 
the metals follow one another in respect of thermal con- 
ductivity is nearly the same as their order as regards electric 
conductivity. This remark is an important one as regards 
certain metals, but it must not be pushed too far; for 
there are substances which are almost perfect insulators of 
electricity, whereas it is impossible to find a substance 
which will not transmit heat. 

The electric conductivity of metals diminishes as the 
temperature rises. The thermal conductivity of iron also 
diminishes, but in a smaller ratio, as the temperature rises. 

Professor Tait has given reasons for believing that the 
thermal conductivity of metals may be inversely proportional 
to their absolute temperature. 

The electric conductivity of most non-metallic substances, 
and of all electrolytes and dielectrics, zwcreases as the tem- 
perature rises. We have not sufficient data to determine 
whether this is the case as regards their thermal conduc- 
tivity. According to the molecular theory of Chapter XXII. 
the thermal conductivity of gases increases as the tempera: 
ture rises. 


Ee ee ee eee ee 


ON THE CONDUCTIVITY OF FLUIDS. 


It is very difficult to determine the thermal conductivity 
of fluids, because the variation of temperature which is part 
of the phenomenon produces a variation of density, and 
unless the surfaces of equal temperature are horizontal, and 
the upper strata are the warmest, currents will be produced 
in the fluid which will entirely mask the phenomena of true 
— conduction. 

_ Another difficulty arises from the fact that most fluids 
have a very small conductivity compared with solid bodies. 
_ Hence the sides of the vessel containing the fluid are often 
__ the principal channel for the conduction of heat. 

In the case of gaseous fluids the difficulty is increased by 
the greater mobility of their parts, and by the great variation 


2h ker 


Sar 


x 
1 
® 
Aer A ¢ 
” 


; 


es 


ete ry 


= 


# 


am 
is 
+ 
J 


‘Thus we have first an outer highly conducting shell of coppe 


-~ 


252 Diffusion of Heat by Conduction. 


of density with change of temperature. Their conductivity — 
is extremely small, and the mass of the gas is generally small 
compared with that of the vessel in which it is contained. : 
Besides this, the effect of direct radiation from the source : 
of heat through the gas on the thermometer produces a 
heating effect which may, in some cases, completely mask 
the effect of true conduction. For all these reasons, the 
determination of the thermal conductivity of a gas is an 

investigation of extreme difficulty. : 


APPLICATIONS OF THE THEORY. 


The great thermal conductivity of the metals, especially 
of copper, furnishes the means of producing many thermal 
effects in a convenient manner. For instance, in order 
to maintain a body at a high temperature by means of a 
source of heat at some distance from it, a thick rod of copper 
may be used to conduct the heat from the source to the 
body we wish to heat ; and when it is desired to warm the 
air of a room by means of a hot pipe of small dimensions, 
the effect may be greatly increased by attaching copper 
plates to the pipe, which become hot by conduction, and 
expose a great heating surface to the air. 

To ensure an exact equality of temperature in all the 
parts of a body, it may be placed in a closed chamber formed 
of thick sheet copper. If the temperature is not quite 
uniform outside this chamber, any difference of temperature 
between one part of the outer surface and another will 
produce such a flow of heat in the substance of the copper 
that the temperature of the inner surface will be very nearly 
uniform. To maintain the chamber at a uniform high tem- 
perature by means of a flame, as is sometimes necessary, it 
may be placed in a larger copper chamber, and so suspended 
by strings or supported on legs that very little heat can 
pass by direct conduction from the outer to the inner wall. 


next a slowly conducting shell of air, which, fancee: tends 

to equalize the temperature by convection ; then another 

highly conducting shell of copper; and lastly the inner 
chamber. The whole arrangement facilitates the flow of 
2 heat parallel to the walls of the chambers, and checks its 
flow perpendicular to the walls. Now differences of tempe- 
_ Tature within the chamber must arise from the passage of 
_ heat from without to within, or in the reverse direction, and 
the flow of heat along the successive envelopes tends only 
_ to equalize the temperature. Hence, by the arrangement of 
- successive shells, alternately of highly conducting and slowly 
- conducting matter, and still more if the slowly conducting 
matter is fluid, an almost complete uniformity of temperature 
_ may be maintained within the inner chamber, even when the 
_ outer chamber has all the heat applied to it at one point. 

This arrangement was employed by M. Fizeau in his 
researches on the dilatation of bodies by heat. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


ON THE DIFFUSION OF FLUIDS. 


THERE are many liquids which, when they are intermingled 
_ by being stirred together, remain mixed, and, though their 
densities are different, they do not separate from each other 
as oil and water do. When liquids which are capable of 
being permanently mixed are placed in contact with each 
other, the process of mixture goes on in a slow and gradual 
“manner, and continues till the composition of the mixture is 
the same in every part. 

Thus if we put a strong solution of any salt in the lower 
part of a tall glass jar, we may, by pouring water in a gentle 
‘stream on a small wooden float, fill up the jar with water 
without disturbing the solution. The process of diffusion 
will then go on between the water and the solution, and will 


continue for weeks or mbinthe according to the pehuse of. q 
the salt and the height of the j jar. 
If the solution of the salt is strongly coloured, as in the 
case of sulphate of copper, bichromate of potash, &c., we 
| may trace the process of diffusion by the gradual rise of the 
ee. colour into the upper part of the jar, and the weakening of — 
the colour in the lower part. A more exact method is that 
employed by Sir William Thomson, of placing a number of 
glass bubbles or beads in the jar, whose specific gravities — 

i are intermediate between that of the strong solution and 
, that of water. At first the beads all float in the surface of © 
separation between the two liquids, but as diffusion goes on — 
they separate from each other, and indicate by their positions — 
the specific gravity of the mixture at various depths. It is 
ae necessary to expel the air very thoroughly from both liquids — 
ag by boiling before commencing this experiment. If this is | 
not done, air separates from the liquids, and attaches itself 
in the form of small bubbles to the specific gravity beads, so 
that they no longer indicate the true specific gravity of the 
. fluid in which they float. In order to determine the strength 
3 of the solution at any point, as indicated by one of the — 
beads, we have only to measure the amount of the salt 
: which must be added to a known quantity of pure water, in 
") _order to make the bead swim in the mixture. 
Another method which has been suggested of observing 
the process of diffusion is to substitute for the jar a hollow 
glass prism having its refracting edge vertical, and to deter- 
mine the refraction ofa horizontal ray of light passing through 
the prism at different heights. To determine the strength 
; of the solution indicated by an observed deviation of the’ 
» ray of light, we have only to make a series of experiments 
with the same prism on solutions of known strength. 
There are many pairs of liquids which do not diffuse into” 
each other, and there are others in which the diffusion, after 
‘ going on for some time, stops as soon as a certain small 
¥ proportion of the heavier liquid has become mixed with the 


ro Law of Diffusion. - 255 


mixed with the heavier. 

In the case of gases, however, there is no such limitation. 
Every gas diffuses into every other gas, so that, however 
different the specific gravities of two gases may be, it is 
impossible to keep them from mixing if they are placed in 
_ the same vessel, even when the denser gas is placed below 
the rarer. 

The fact of the diffusion of gases was first remarked by 
Priestley. The laws of the phenomena were first investigated 
by Graham. The rate at which the diffusion of any substance 
goes on is in every case proportional to the rate of variation 
of the strength of that substance in the fluid as we pass 
along the line in which the diffusion takes place. Each 


greater quantity to places where it is less abundant. 

The law of diffusion of matter is therefore of exactly the 
same form as that of the diffusion of heat by conduction, 
-and we can at once apply all that we know about the con- 
duction of heat to assist us in understanding the phenomena 
of the diffusion of matter. 

To fix our ideas, let us consider two very thin horizontal 
strata of the mixture, at a distance from each other equal toc, 
and we shall suppose that diffusion is going on at a constant 
rate through the part of the fluid between these strata. 

Let the quantity of one of the substances, say the denser, 
- in unit of volume of the mixture be Q in the lower stratum 
and g in the upper stratum, Q being greater than g; then 
~ diffusion of this substance will take place from the lower 
' stratum to the upper through the intervening fluid, whose 
thickness is ¢c. Let m be the quantity of the substance 
which passes upward in a time ¢ through a horizontal area 
whose length is a and whose breadth is 4 ; then we find, as 
_ in the case of heat, 

. habit 


; (Q—9). 


ert en re Eee TERE eS en ee ae 
give Mee eee nah bes 


_ lighter, and a small proportion of the lighter has become 


substance in the mixture flows from places where it exists in_ 


256 Diffusion of Matter. 

” Here instead of H, a quantity of heat, we have M, a — 
quantity of matter diffused ; and instead of T—s, the differ- 
ence of two temperatures, we have Q—g, the difference of 
the density of that kind of matter in two different strata. 
Finally, 2, instead of meaning the thermal conductivity, 
means the coefficient of diffusion of the given substance 
in the given mixture. 

If we determine & from this equation, we find 


nT Ohi 
abt (Q-9) 
Here @ 4c are lines, Q and g are densities or quantities of 
matter in unit of volume, and M is a quantity of matter. 


Hence the fraction 


is of the nature of a volume 


which is of three dimensions as regards length. We thus 
find that the dimensions of &, the coefficient of diffusion, 
are equal to the square of a length divided by a time. 
Hence, in the experiment with the jar, the vertical 
distance between strata of corresponding densities, as in- 
dicated by the beads which float in them, varies as the 
square root of the time from the beginning of the diffusion. 
When the mixture of two liquids or gases is effected in a 
more rapid manner by agitation or stirring, the only effect 
of the mechanical disturbance is to increase the area of the 
surfaces through which diffusion takes place. Instead of 
the surface of separation being a single horizontal plane, it 
becomes a surface of many convolutions, and of great 
extent, and in order to effect a complete mixture the diffu- 
sion has to extend only over the distance between the — 
successive convolutions of this surface instead of over half — 
the depth of the vessel. 4 
Since the time required for diffusion varies as the square — 
of the distance through which the diffusion takes place, it — 
is easy to see that by stirring the solution in a jar along 
with the water above it, a complete mixture may be effected - 


Molecular Motion. oy 
in a few seconds, which would have required months if the 
jar had been left undisturbed. That the mixture effected 
by stirring is not instantaneous may be easily seen by 
observing that during the operation the fluid appears to 
be full of streaks, which cause it to lose its transparency. 
This arises from the different indices of refraction of different 
portions of the mixture, which have been brought near each 
other by stirring. The surfaces of separation are so drawn 
out and convoluted that the whole mass has a woolly 
appearance, for no ray of light can pass without being 
turned many times out of its path. 

The same appearance may also be observed when we 
mix hot water with cold, and even when very hot air is 
mixed with cold air. This shows that what is called the 
equalization of temperature by convection currents really 
takes place by conduction between portions of the sub- 
stance brought near each other by the currents. 

If we observe the process of diffusion with our most 
powerful microscopes, we cannot follow the motion of any 
individual portions of the fluids. We cannot point out one 
place in which the lower fluid is ascending, and another in 
which the upper fluid is descending. ‘There are no currents 
visible to us, and the motion of the material substances goes 
on as imperceptibly as the conduction of heat or of elec- 
tricity. Hence the motion which constitutes diffusion must 
be distinguished from those motions of fluids which we can 
trace by means of floating motes. It may be described as 
a motion of the fluids, not in mass, but by molecules. 

We have not hitherto taken any notice of molecular 
theories, because we wish to draw a distinction between 
that part of our subject which depends only on the 
universal axioms of dynamics, combined with observa- 
tions of the properties of bodies, and the part which en- 
deavours to arrive at an explanation of these properties by 
attributing certain motions to minute portions of matter 
which are as yet invisible to us, 

S 


“Diffusion if Matter, : | 


The description of diffusion as a molecular motion is 
one which we shall justify when we come to treat of mo- 
lecular science. At present, however, we shall use the 
phrase ‘ molecular motion’ as a convenient mode of describ- 
ing the transference of a fluid when the motion of sensible 
portions of the fluid cannot be directly observed. 

Graham observed that the diffusion both of liquids and 
gases takes place through porous solid bodies, such as 
plaster of Paris and pressed plumbago, at a rate not very much 
less than when no such body is interposed, and this even 
when the solid division is amply sufficient to check all 
ordinary currents, and even to support considerable differ- 
ences of pressure on its opposite sides. 

By taking advantage of the different velocities with which 
different liquids and gases pass through such substances, he 


-was enabled to effect many important analyses and to arrive 


at new views of the constitution of various bodies. 
But there is another class of cases in which a liquid or 
gas can pass through a diaphragm which is not in the 


_ordinary sense porous. For instance, when carbonic acid 


gas is confined in a soap-bubble it gradually escapes. The 
liquid absorbs the gas at its inner surface, where it has the 
greatest density ; and on the outside, where the density of | 
the carbonic acid is less, the gas diffuses out into the atmo- 
sphere. During the passage of the gas through the film itis 
in the state of solution in water. It is also found that hydro- 
gen and other gases can pass through a layer of caoutchouc. 
The ratios in which different gases pass through this substance — 
are different from the ratios in which they percolate through — 
porous plugs. Graham shows that the chemical relations 
between the gases and the caoutchouc determine these — 
ratios, and that it is not through pores in the ordinary sense — 
that the motion takes place. 

According to Graham’s theory, the caoutchouc is a colloid : 
substance—that is, one which is capable of being united, in a 
temporary and very loose manner, with various proportions — 


other substances, just as glue will form a jelly with | 
_ various proportions of water. Another class of substances, 
; which Graham calls crystalloid, are distinguished from these 
_ by being always of definite composition, and not admitting 
_ of these temporary associations. When a colloid substance 
has in differents parts of its mass different proportions of 
_ water, alcohol, or solutions of crystalloid bodies, diffusion 
_ takes place through the colloid substance, although no part 
_ of it can be shown to be in the liquid state. . 3 
On the other hand, a solution of a colloid substance is 
- almost incapable of diffusion through a porous solid, or 
_ through another colloid substance. Thus, if a solution of 
q gum in water containing salt be placed in contact with a 
solid jelly of gelatine containing alcohol, salt and water 
_ will be diffused into the gelatine, and alcohol willbe diffused 
into the gum, but there will be no mixture of the gum and 
_ the gelatine. 

_. There are certain metals whose relation to certain gases 
_ Graham explained by this theory. For instance, hydrogen 
can be made to pass through iron and palladium at a high 
_ temperature, and carbonic oxide can be made to pass 
_ through iron. The gases form colloidal unions with the on 
metals, and are diffused through them just as water is diffused 
_ through a jelly. 

_ Graham made many determinations of the relative diffu- 

_ sibility of different salts. Accurate determinations of the 

coefficient of diffusion of liquids and gases are very much > 
_ wanted, as they furnish important data for the molecular 

_ theory of these bodies. The most valuable determinations 

of this kind are those of the coefficient of diffusion between 

pairs of simple gases made by Professor J. Loschmidt of 
 Vienna.! 

He has determined the coefficient of diffusion in square 


_ } Experimental-Untersuchungen iiber die Diffusion von Gasen ohne 
_ pordése Scheidewande. Sitzb. d. k. Akad. d. Wissensch. Bd. xi 


(March and July 1870.) 
® s2 


metres per hour for ten pairs of the most ‘kaponaat gases. 
We shall consider these results when we come to the mole-— 
cular theory of gases. 7 


CHAPTER XxX. 
CAPILLARITY. 


We have hitherto considered the energy of a body as 
_ depending only on its temperature and its volume. The 
whole of the energy of gases, and the most important part of 
the energy of liquids, may be expressed in this way, but a 
very important part of the energy of a solid body may 
depend on the form which it is compelled to assume as 
well as on its volume. We shall return to this subject 
when treating of Elasticity and Viscosity, but we shall con- 
sider at present that part of the energy of a liquid which» 

depends on the nature and extent of its surface. 

To investigate the properties of a liquid surface, it is” 
advisable to make use of the liquid in a form in which the - 
surface is large in proportion to the volume. For 4 
purpose, let us take common soapsuds, or Plateau’s mixture 
of soap and glycerine, and blow a small bubble at the end 
of a tube with a bell mouth. A tobacco-pipe will answer, 
if the bore of the tube is large enough. After blowing the 
bubble at one end of the tube, place the other end near 
the flame of a candle. The bubble will contract and drive 
a current of air through the tube, as may be seen by its effe ct. 
on the flame. q 

This shows that the bubble presses on the air wittiti it, 
and is like an elastic bag. To enlarge the bubble by 
blowing into the tube, work must be done to force the air ing 
because the pressure inside the bubble is greater than that 
of the air outside. This work is stored up in the film ¢ of 
soapsuds, for it is able to blow the air out t again bore 
equal force. 


Hence a soap-bubble has a certain intrinsic energy 
Di sendiig i in some way on its size. ~ 
_ The bubble consists of a thin stratum of liquid bounded 

_ by air on both sides. The intrinsic energy of the liquid, 
_ considered with reference to its volume and temperature — 
only, will be the same for a bubble containing the same 
- quantity of liquid, to whatever size it may be blown. But 

_ we know that work is done in making the bubble larger, 
_ and the only difference when the bubble is blown larger 
_ is that the surface of the liquid exposed to air is increased. 

_ It appears from this, that in taking account of the energy 

_ of a system one of whose constituents is a liquid, we must 
- take account, not only of the temperature and volume of the ~ 
4 liquid, but of the extent and nature of its bounding surface. 

_ In the case of the bubble the energy is greater the greater 
the extent of surface exposed to air. The amount of this 
_ energy for a soap-bubble at ordinary temperatures is, ac- 
cording to Plateau, about 5°6 gramme-metres per square 
metre in gravitation units. This is the amount of work 
required to blow a soap-bubble whose superficial extent is 
' one square metre. As the soap-bubble has two surfaces 
3 exposed to air, the energy of a single surface is only 2°8 
_ gramme-metres per square metre. 

_ We shall call this the superficial energy of the soap- 
_ bubble. It is measured by the energy in unit of surface, 
and its dimensions when expressed in dynamical measure 
are therefore : 

Se a VM 

area eae Fg 


or it is of one dimension as regards mass, and of two dimet. 
3 sions inversely as regards time, and it is independent of the 
unit of length. Superficial energy depends on the nature 
_ of both the media ef which the surface is a boundary. 
The media must be such as do not mix with each other, 
_ otherwise diffusion occurs, and the surface of separation 
becomes indefinite ; but there is a coefficient of superficial 


3 
¥ 


262 Capillarity. 


energy for every surface which separates two liquids which 
do. not mix—a liquid and a gas, or its own vapour ; and for 
the surface which separates a liquid and a solid, whether it 
dissolves the solid or not. There is also a coefficient of 
superficial energy for the surface separating a gas and a 
solid, or two solids ; but as any two gases diffuse into each 
other, they can have no surface of separation. 


Superficial Tension. 

When the area of the surface is increased in any way, work 
must be done ; and when the surface is allowed to contract, 
it does work on other bodies. Hence it acts like a stretched 
sheet of india-rubber, and exerts a tension of the same kind. 
The only difference .is, that the tension in the sheet of 
india-rubber depends on the amount of stretching, and may ~ 
be greater in one direction than in a direction at right 
angles to it, whereas the tension in the soap-bubble remains 
the same however much the film is extended, and the tension 
at any point is the same in all directions. 
If we draw a straight line, P Q, across the surface A B DC, 
and if the whole tension exerted by 
the surface across the line P Q is 
F, then the superficial tension is 
measwed by the tension across unit 
* of length of the line P Q; or, since F 
is the tension across the whole line, 
if T is the superficial tension across 
unit of length, 
ae gone as | 
Now let us suppose that the lines a B and c D were 
originally in contact, and that the surface A B D C was 
produced by drawing c D away from a B by the action of 
the force F. 
If we suppose A B and B C to be rods wet with soapsuds, 
placed between two parallel rods a c and B D and then 
drawn asunder, the soap film ABDC will be formed. Ifs 


Superficial Tension. 


is the superficial energy of the film per unit of area, then 


the work done in drawing it out will bes. aB.ac. But if 


F is the force required to draw a B from c D, the same work 
may be written F. AC, or, putting for F its value in terms of 
T, and equating the two expressions for the work, 


S.AB.AC=$T. PQ. AC 


Of. a7. AB. AC. 
Hence 
oss, 

or the numerical value of the superficial energy per unit 
of area is equal to that of the superficial tension per unit of 
length. This quantity is usually called the Coefficient of 
Capillarity, because it was first considered with reference to 
the ascent of liquids in capillary tubes. These tubes de- 
rived their name from the smallness of their bore, which 
would only admit a hair (cafz//a). I have used the phrases 
‘ superficial energy ’ and ‘ superficial tension’ because I think 
they help us to direct our attention to the facts, and to 
understand the various phenomena of liquid surfaces better 
than a name which is purely technical, and which has 
already done a great deal of harm when used without being 
understood. If by the help of this treatise, or otherwise, any- 
one has obtained a clear conception of the real phenomena 
called Capillary Attraction and Capillarity, he may use 
these words quite freely. The theory as we shall state it 
does not differ essentially from that originally given by 
Laplace, though by the free use of the idea of superficial 
tension we avoid some of the mathematical operations 
which are required to deduce the phenomena from the 
hypothesis of molecular attractions. 

We shall now suppose that the superficial tension is 
known for the surfaces which bound every pair of the 
media with which we have to do. For instance, we may 
denote by T,, the superficial tension of the surface which 
separates the medium a from the medium... 


med 


< ie 2, 


£ 


5 


- 
ZA 


~~ 


=> 


a ee ee ee 


<r 


ci arti 


ree 


Let there be three fluid media, a, 4, ¢, and let the surface of _ 

_ separation between @ and é meet the surface of separation — 

_ between 4 and ¢ along a line of any form having continuous ~ 

curvature. Let o be a point in this line, and let the plane 
of the paper represent a section perpendicular to the line. 

The three tensions T,, T;,, and T,, must be in equili- 
brium along this line, and, since we know these tensions, 
we can easily detérmine the angles which they make with — 
‘each other. In fact, if we construct a triangle a Bc having — 
lines proportional to these tensions for its sides, the exterior _ 
angles of this triangle will be equal to the angles formed by 
the three surfaces of separation which meet in a line. : 
By trigonometry, if A B Cc are the angles of the edges — 

formed by the media a 4 ¢, then 


Tea 
sin B q 
It appears from this that whenever three fluid media are _ 


Fic. 36. 
Tap 


in contact and in equilibrium, the angles between their — 
surfaces of separation depend only on the values of the — 
- superficial tensions of these three surfaces, and are there- — 
_ fore always the same for the same three fluids. - 
But it is not always possible to construct a triangle with — 


-. ae dine Ns , i 
aye eS 


three given lines as its sides. If any one of the lines is 
greater than the sum of the other two, the triangle cannot be 
formed. For the same reason, if any one of the three super- 
ficial tensions is greater than the sum of the other two, the 
three fluids cannot be in equilibrium in contact. 

For instance, if the tension of the surface separating air 
and water is greater than the sum of the tensions of the 
surfaces separating air and oil, and oil and water, then a 
drop of oil cannot be in equilibrium on the surface of water. 
The edge of the drop, where the oil meets the air and the 
water, becomes thinner and thinner; but even when the 
angle is reduced to the thinnest edge, the tension of the free 
surface of the water exceeds the tensions of the two surfaces 
of the oil, so that the oil is drawn out thinner and thinner, 
till it covers a vast expanse of water. In fact, the process 
may go on till the oil becomes so thin, and contains so 
small a number of molecules in its thickness, that it no 
longer has the properties of the liquid in mass. 

When a solid body is in contact with two fluids, then if 
the tension of the surface separating the solid from the first 
fluid exceeds the sum of the tensions of the other two sur- 
faces, the first fluid will gather itself up into a drop, and 
the second will spread over the surface. If one of the 
fluids is air, and the other a liquid, then the liquid, if it 
_ corresponds to the first fluid mentioned above, will stand 
in drops without wetting the surface ; but if it corresponds 
to the second, it will spread itself over the whole surface, 
and wet the solid. 

When the tension of the surface separating the two fluids 
is greater than the difference of the tensions of the surfaces 
separating them from the solid, then the surface of separation | 
_ of the two fluids will be inclined at a finite angle to the 
_ surface ofthe solid. Thus, if @ and @ are the two fluids, and ¢ 
_ the solid, then to find the angle of contact Pp o Q we must 
make Po =T,, and0 Q=1,,—T,. This angle is called 
_ the angle of capillarity. 


ON THE RISE OF A LIQUID IN A TUBE. a 

Let @ be a liquid in a tube of a substance ¢, whose radius 
ia ae is ry. Let the fluid 4 be air or any — 

. other fluid. Let a be the angle of ca-— 

pillarity. The circumference of the 

tube is 2 7. All round this circum. 

ference there is a tension T,, acting at 

an angle inclined a to the vertical, and 

therefore the whole vertical force is 


2% * Ty COS @. 


If this force raises the liquid to a 
height Z, then, neglecting the weight of 
the sides of the hollow portion x.¥ a 4 
the weight of fluid supported is ; 

rpgrh. q 

Equating this force to the weg 


which it supports, we find | 
hag a OSS 4 
pgr 4 
Hence the height to which the fluid is drawn up is 
inversely as the radius of the tube. 4 
A liquid is drawn up in the same way in the space be- 
tween two parallel plates separated by a distance @ If we 
now suppose fig. 38 to represent a section of the film of liquid, © 
the horizontal breadth of which is Z, then the surface-tension | 
of the liquid on the line which bounds the wet and dry 
parts of each plate is.t 4, and this force acts at an angle a 
with the vertical. The whole force, therefore, arising from 
the surface-tension, and tending to raise the liquid, is 
2T/cosa. 
The weight of the liquid raised is 
pghkild. 3 
Equating the force to the weight which it supports, we 


Be 
aq 


_ the liquid and its vapour, both at a and at 


tion would occur, and the permanent 


This expression differs from that for the height im a 
cylindrical tube only by the substitution of d; the distance 
between the parallel plates, for 7, the radius of the tube. 
Hence the height to which a liquid will ascend between 


two plates is equal to the height to which it rises in a tube 


whose radius is equal to the distance between the plates, 
or whose diameter is twice that distance. 

A remarkable application of the principles of thermo- 
dynamics to capillary phenomena has recently been made 
by Sir W. Thomson.! Let a fine tube be ee 
placed in a liquid, and let the whole be 
placed in a vessel from which air is ex- 
hausted, so that the whole space above 
the liquid becomes filled with its vapour 
and nothing else. 

Let the permanent level of the liquid 
be at a in the small tube, and at B in the 
vessel, and let us suppose the tempera- 
ture the same throughout the apparatus. 

There is a state of equilibrium between 


B; otherwise evaporation or condensa- 


state would not exist. 

Now the pressure of the vapour at B exceeds that at a by 
the pressure due to a column of the vapour of the height 
AB. 


It follows that the vapour is in equilibrium with the — 


liquid at a lower pressure where the surface of the liquid is 
concave, as at A, than where it is plane, as at B. 


Now let the lower end of the tube be closed, and let _ 
some of the liquid be taken out of it, so that the liquid in i! 


tube does not reach up to the point a. 


* Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Feb. 7, 1870. 


py 


wie es od ee 


Pe te em, ee 2D ee eel ee 
Wek } # 


268 | C apillarity. 


Then vapour will condense inside the tube, owing to the 
concavity of its surface, and this will go on till it is filled 
with liquid up to the level a, the same as if it had been 


open at the bottom. 


Hence, if at any point of a concave liquid surface 7 and 
r' are the principal radii of curvature of the surface, and if 
the pressure of vapour in equilibrium with a plane surface 
of its liquid at the given temperature is a, and if / is the 
pressure of equilibrium of the vapour in contact with the 
curved surface, 


ae To I tee 
seu rar se 
where o is the density of the vapour, and p that of the 
liquid. 
If 4 is the height to which the liquid would rise in virtue 
of the curvature of its surface in a capillary tube, and if 
is the height of a homogeneous atmosphere of the vapour, 


Pp = ww ( 1 be. ) 
8): 

Sir W. Thomson has calculated that in a tube whose 
radius is about a thousandth of a millimetre, and in which 
water would rise about thirteen metres above the plane 
level, the equilibrium pressure of aqueous vapour would be 
less than that on a plane surface of water by about a thou- 
sandth of its own amount. 

He thinks it probable that the moisture which vegetable 
substances, such as cotton, cloth, &c., acquire from air at 
temperatures far above the dew point may be explained by 
the condensation of water in the narrow tubes and cells of 
the vegetable structure. 

In the case of a spherical bubble of steam in water, the 
increase or diminution of the diameter depends on the 
temperature and pressure of the vapour within; and the 
condition that ebullition may take place is that the pres- 
sure of saturated vapour at the temperature of the liquid 


RUNES ee) ea aS Oe. 
e Yi > pt ae 
nent ng ah * Fie et é 


must exceed the actual pressure of the liquid by a pressure 
equal to that of a column of the liquid of the height to 
which it would ascend in a tube whose section is equal to 
that of the bubbles. 

If the liquid contains any gas in solution, or any liquid 
more volatile than itself, or if air or steam is made to 
bubble up through the liquid, then bubbles will be formed 
of a visible diameter, and the ebullition will be kept up by 
evaporation at the surface of these bubbles. But if, by long 
boiling or otherwise, the liquid is deprived of any substance 
more volatile than itself, and if the sides of the vessel in which 
it is contained are such that the liquid adheres closely to 
them, so that bubbles, if formed at the surface of the vessel, 
will rather collect into a spherical form than spread along 
the surface, then the temperature of the liquid may be 
raised far above the boiling point, and when boiling at 
last occurs, it goes on in an almost explosive manner, 
and the liquid ‘bumps’ violently on the bottom of the 
vessel. 

The highest temperature to which water may be raised 
under the atmospheric pressure without ebullition cannot be 
said to be accurately known, for every improvement in the 
arrangements for getting rid of condensed air, &c., has made 
it possible to raise liquid water to a higher temperature. 
In an experiment due to Dufour, the water, instead of being 


allowed to touch the sides of the vessel, is dropped into a’ 


mixture of linseed oil and oil of cloves, which has nearly 
the same density as itself. By this means, drops of liquid 
water may sometimes be observed swimming in the mixture 
at a temperature of 356° F. The pressure of aqueous 
vapour is at this temperature nearly ten atmospheres, or 
about 147 pounds’ weight on the square inch. Hence the 
cohesion of the water must be able to support at least 132 
pounds weight on the square inch. 

We may also apply Sir W. Thomson’s principle to the 
case of evaporation from a small drop. In this case the 


Conditions of Boiling. | : 269 


p z pak xfz f é 
= ; ‘ 
pte 3 ‘’ 7 é . , 7 
: Rha ne 
2 is) ed I nts. QPLttad es 
~d ur es . - ae | Pak 

a ‘he: 4 


_ surface of the liquid is convex, so that if r is the radi 
_ the drop, 
7 2 


p—o £ 


pr=or+tt 


Here @ is the pressure of saturated vapour corresponding 
to the temperature when the surface of the liquid is plane, 
and p is the pressure of vapour required to prevent the 
drop from evaporating. A small drop will therefore evapo- 
rate in air containing so much moisture that condensation 
would take place on a flat surface. 4 

Hence, if a vapour free from suspended particles, and 
not in contact with any solid body except such as are 
warmer than itself, is cooled by expansion, it is probable 

cH that the suggestion of Prof. J. Thomson at p. 126 might 
be verified, and that the vapour might be cooled below its 
ordinary point of condensation without liquefaction, for the 
first effect of condensation would be to produce excessively 
small drops, and these, as we have seen, would not tend to 
increase unless the vapour surrounding them were more 

_ than saturated. 

The formation of cloud in vapour often appears very _ 
sudden, as if it had been at first retarded by some cause of 
this kind, so that when at last the cloud is formed conden- 
sation occurs with great rapidity, reminding us of the con- 
verse phenomenon of the rapid boiling of an overheated 
liquid. 

The drops in a cloud, for the same reason, cannot remain 
of the same size, even if they are not jostled against each 
other, for the smaller drops will evaporate, while the larger 
ones are increased by condensation, so that visible drops — 
will be formed by pure condensation without any necessity — 
for the coalescence of smaller drops. 

Up to this point we have not considered the effect of — 
heat on the superficial tension of liquids. In all liquids on 
which experiments have been made the superficial tension — 
diminishes as the temperature rises, being greatest at the — 


*. 4 r . 
PN ee ee, 


Cooling of a Liquid Film by Extension. Eye | 


freezing point of the substance, and vanishing altogether at 
the critical point where the liquid and gaseous states become 
continuous. 


It appears, therefore, that the phenomenon is intimately 


related to the apparent discontinuity of the liquid and 
gaseous states, and that it must be studied in connexion 
with the conditions of evaporation and the phenomenon 
called latent heat. Much light will probably be thrown on 
all these subjects by investigations which as yet can hardly 
be said to be begun. 

Sir W. Thomson has applied the principles of thermo- 
dynamics to the case of a film of water extended by a force 
applied to it, and has shown that in order to maintain the 
temperature of the film constant an amount of heat must 
be supplied to it nearly equal in dynamical measure to half 
the work done in stretching the film. 

In fact, the third thermodynamical relation (p. 167) may 
be applied at once to the case by making the following 
substitutions : for ‘ pressure’ put ‘ superficial tension,’ and 
for ‘volume’ put ‘area.’ 

We thus find that the latent heat of extension of unit of 
area is equal to the product of the absolute temperature 
and the decrement of superficial tension per degree of .tem- 
perature. At ordinary temperatures it appears from experi- 
ment that this product is about half the superficial tension. 
Hence the latent heat of extension in dynamical measure 
is about half the work spent in producing the extension. 

The student may also adapt the investigation of latent 
heat as given at p. 172 to the case of the extension of a 
liquid film. 

The following table, taken from the memoir of M. Quincke, 
gives the superficial tension of different liquids in contact 
with air, water, and mercury. The tension is measured in 
grammes weight per linear metre, and the temperature is 
20° C. 


« 


Tension of surface separating : 
e liquid from 


Liquid Sp. gravity 


Water : 1‘O 


ee ee 


Mercury ; 1375432 
Bisulphide of Carbon . 1°2687 
Chloroform 14878 
Alcohol 0°7906 
Olive Oil . 0°9136 
Turpentine . . | 0°8867 
Petroleum . é .| O'YO77 
Hydrochloric Acid. igs: 
Solution of head foi pote of 

Soda 1°1248 


It appears from this table that water has the greatest 
superficial tension of all ordinary liquids. For this reason it 
is very difficult to preserve a surface of pure water. It is 
sufficient to touch any part of the surface of pure water | 
with a greased rod to reduce its tension considerably. The — 
smallest quantity of any kind of oil immediately spreads — 

_ itself over the surface, and completely alters the superficial — 
tension. Hence the importance in all experiments on super- _ 
ficial tension of having the vessel thoroughly clean. This — 
has been well pointed out by Mr. Tomlinson in his researches — 
on the ‘cohesion figures of liquids.’ ; 

When one of the liquids is soluble in the other, the effects — 
of superficial tension are very remarkable. For instance, if © 
a drop of alcohol be placed on the surface of a thin layer of © 
water, the tension is immediately reduced to 2°6, where the — 
alcohol is pure, and varies from this value to 8°25, where the - 
water is pure. The result is that the equilibrium of the sur-— 
face is destroyed, and the superficial film of the liquid is set q 
in motion from the alcohol towards the water, and if the 
water is shallow this motion of the surface will drag the 
whole of the water with it, so as to lay bare part of the 
bottom of the vessel. A dimple may be formed on 


of 8 iAe Wine. 


surface of water by bringing a drop of ether close to the sur- 
saace, ~The vapour of the ether condensed on the surface 
of the water is sufficient to cause the outward current 
mentioned above. 

Wine contains alcohol and water, and when it is exposed to 
the air the alcohol evaporates faster than the water, so that = = 
the superficial layer becomes weaker. Whenthe wineisina 

- deep vessel, the strength is rapidly equalized by diffusion; = 
but in the case of the thin layer of wine which adheres to — 
the sides of a wineglass, the liquid rapidly becomes more 
watery. This increases the superficial tension at the sides. 
of the glass, and causes the surface to be dragged from the 
strong wine to the weak. The watery portion is always — 
uppermost, and creeps up the sides of the glass, dragging the 

stronger wine after it till the quantity of the fluid becomes so 
great that the different portions mix, and the drop runs down 
the side. 

This phenomenon, known as the tears of strong wine, was 
first explained on these principles by Professor James Thom- 
son. It is probable that it is referred to in Proverbs xxiii. 
31, as an indication of the strength of the wine. The motion ee 
ceases in a stoppered bottle as soon as enough of vapour of as 
alcohol has been formed in the bottle to be in equilibrium . 
with the liquid alcohol in the wine. ee 

The fatty oils have a greater superficial tension than tur- 

pentine, benzol, or ether. Henceif there is a greasy spot on oo 
a piece of cloth, and if one side of it is wetted with one of 
__ these substances, the tension is greatest on the side of the 
grease, and the portions consisting of mixtures of benzol and 
grease move from the benzol towards the grease. 

____ If in order to cleanse the grease-spot we begin by wetting 
_ the middle of the spot with benzol, we drive away the:grease 
- into the clean. part of the cloth. The benzol should there- 
_ fore be applied first in a ring all round the’spot, and gradu- 
_ally brought nearer to the centre of. the spot, and a fibrous 
substance, such as blotting-paper, should.be placed in contact 
T 


oS th oe oe | 


with the cloth, so that when the grease is chased by the 


274. - Stresses and Strains, 


benzol to the middle of the spot it may make its escape into 
the blotting-paper, instead of remaining in globules on the 
surface, ready to return into the cloth when the benzol 
evaporates. 

Another very effectual method of getting rid of grease- 
spots is founded on the fact that the superficial tension of a 
substance always diminishes as the temperature rises. If, 
therefore, the temperature is different at different parts of a 
greasy cloth, the grease tends to move from the hot parts to 
the cold. We therefore apply a hot iron to one side of the 
cloth, and blotting-paper to the other, and the grease is: 
driven into the blotting-paper. If there is blotting-paper on 
both sides it will be found that the grease is driven mainly — 
into that on the opposite side from the hot iron. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


ON ELASTICITY AND VISCOSITY. 


On Stresses and Strains. 


WHEN the form of a connected system is altered in any 
way, the alteration of form is called a Strain. The force — 
or system of forces by which this strain is produced or 
maintained is called the Stress corresponding to the strain. 
There are different kinds of strains, and different kinds of — 
stresses corresponding to them. 

The only case which we have hitherto considered is that 
in which the three longitudinal stresses are equal. This 
kind of stress is called Hydrostatic Pressure, and is the 
only kind which can exist in a fluid at-rest. The pressure 
is the same in whatever direction it is estimated. | 


Avery Vicaiian kind of stress is called Shearing Stress: _ 

it is compounded of two equal longi- Fic. 39. 

tudinal stresses, one being a tension 
and the other a pressure acting at 

right angles to each other. When a 

pair of scissors is employed to cut 
anything, the two blades produce a 
_ shearing stress in the material be- 
tween them, tending to make one 

portion slide over the other. 
We have now to consider the properties of bodies when 
acted on by this kind of stress. 

A body which when subjected to a stress experiences no_ 
strain would, if it existed, be called a Perfectly Rigid Body. 
There are no such bodies, and this definition is given only to 
indicate what is meant by perfect rigidity. 

A body which when subjected to a given stress at a given 
temperature experiences a strain of definite amount, which 
does not increase when the stress is prolonged, and which 
_ disappears completely when the stress is removed, is called 
_ a Perfectly Elastic Body. 

Gases and liquids, and perhaps most solids, are perfectly 
elastic as regards stress uniform in all directions, but no sub- 
stance which has yet been tried is perfectly elastic as regards 
shearing stress, except perhaps for exceedingly small values 
of the stress. 
3 Now suppose that stresses of the same kind, but of con- 
_ tinually increasing magnitude, are applied to a: body: in 
_ guecession. As long as the body returns to -its original 
_ form when the stress is removed it is said to.be perfectly 
elastic. : 
If the form of the body is found to be ‘permanently altered 
_ when the stress exceeds a certain value, the body is said 
_ to be soft, or plastic, and the’ state of the body when the 
alteration is just going to take place is called the Limit of 
Perfect Elasticity. 


T2 


“If the stress be increased till the tod prea; or gives 
Vadeahe. the value of the stress is called the Strength on 
the body for that kind of stress. a 

If breaking takes place before there is any permanent © 
alteration of form, the body is said to be Brittle. 

If the stress, when it is maintained constant, causes 1 
a. strain or displacement in the body which increases — | 
continually with the time, the substance is said to be _ 
Viscous. 4 

When this continuous alteration of form is only produced _ 
by’stresses exceeding a certain value, the substance is called — 
a solid, however soft it may be. When the very smallest 
stress, ‘if continued long enough, will cause a constantly — 
increasing: change of form, the body must be regarded as 
a viscous: ftuid, froweie hard it may be. 

Thus, a tallow candle is much softer than a stick of © 
sealing-wax; but if the candle and the stick of sealing-wax — 
are laid horizontally between two supports, the sealing-— 

’wax will in a few»weeks in summer bend with its own | 
weight, while the candle-remains straight. The candle is 
therefore a soft solid, and the sealing-wax a very viscous — 
fluid. 

What is required to alter-the form of a soft solid is a. 
sufficient force, and this, when applied, produces its effect 
at once. In the case of a viscous fluid it is ¢#me which is — 
required, and if enough time is given, the very smallesia 
force will produce a sensible effect, such as would require a 
very large force if suddenly applied. 

Thus a block of pitch may be so hard that you cannot. 
make a dint in it by striking it with your knuckles; and 

yet it will, in the course of time, flatten itself out by its’ 

“own weight, and glide down hill like a stream of water. 

A glass fibre was found by M. F. Kohlrausch! to be- 
come more and more twisted when constantly acted on by 


1 Poge. 1863. 


he small twisting force arising from the action of the 
earth on a little magnet suspended by the fibre. I have 
_ found slow changes in the torsion of a steel wire going on > 
_. for many days after it had received a slight permanent twist, 
and Sir W. Thomson ! has investigated the viscosity of other — 
metals. 

There are instances of viscosity among very hard bodies. 
_ Returning to our former example, pitch : we may mix it in- 
various proportions with tar so as to form a continuous — 
series of compounds passing from the apparently solid 
__ condition of pitch to the apparently fluid condition of tar, 
which may be taken as a type of a viscous fluid. By 
mixing the tar with turpentine the viscosity may be still 
further reduced, and so we may form a series of fluids of 
diminishing viscosity till we arrive at the most mobile fluids, 
such as ether. 


DEFINITION OF THE COEFFICIENT OF VISCOSITY. 


Consider a stratum of the substance of thickness ¢, con- 
tained between the horizontal fixed plane Fide 
_ A Band the plane c D, which is moving -________=» 
horizontally from c towards p, with the 
velocity v. Let us suppose that the substance * . 
_ between the two planes is also in motion, the stratum in _ 
contact with c D moving with velocity v, while the velocity 
of any intermediate stratum is proportional to its height 
_ above A B. 
a The substance between the planes is undergoing shearing _ 
Strain, and the rate at which this strain is increasing is measured _ 
__ by the velocity v of the upper plane, divided by the distance 


ey 


[ 
oy 


_ € between the planes, or ~ 


The stress F is a shearing stress, and is measured by the 
_ horizontal force exerted by the substance on unit of area 


1 Proc. Roy. Soc. May 18, 1865. 


_ of either of the planes, and acting from a to B on t 
_ plane, and from p to c on the upper. ; 
- The ratio of this force to the rate of increase of the wan Res 
_ ing stress is called the coefficient of viscosity, and i is denoted © 4 
_ by the symbol ». We may therefore write 


Vv 
=p 7 
_IfR is the amount of this force on a recsanee area of 
53 length a and breadth 4, ; 


and ay 
sana: 3"? 

If v, a, d, and ¢ are each unity, then p = R, cA 

Definition—The viscosity of a substance is measured by 


the tangential force on the unit of area of either of two hori- 


zontal planes at the unit of distance apart, one of whichis 
_ fixed, while the other moves with the unit of velocity, the 
space between being filled with the viscous substance. 
The dimensions of » may be easily determined. If Ris — : 
the moving force which would generate a certain velocity v in 
Mv 


the mass m in the time 4, then R = —_, and 


me 2) 
Ce bee 
Here a, 3, c are lines, and v and v are velocities, so that — 
the dimensions of » are [mM L~! 1], where M, L, and T are the 
units of mass, length, and time. 
When we wish to express the absolute forces called into 
play by the viscosity of a substance, we must use the ordiv'l : 
- nary unit of mass (a pound, a grain, or a gramme) ; but if we © 
_ wish only to investigate the motion of the viscous substance, 
it is convenient to take as our unit of mass that of unit of 
volume of the substance itself. If p is the density of the 


substance, or the mass of unit of volume, the viscosity 
measured in this kinematic way is related to p, its value by 
the former, or dynamical method, by the equation 
p=vop. 

The dimensions of v, the kinematic viscosity, are [L? tT]. _ 
’ Investigations of the value of viscosity have been made, 
for solids by Sir W. Thomson ; for liquids by Poiseuille, © 
Graham, O. E. Meyer, and Helmholtz; and for gases by 
Graham, Stokes, O. E. Meyer, and myself. 

I find the value of » for air at 0° Centigrade to be 


pe = 0001878 (1+ 003668), 
the centimetre, gramme, and second being units. 


In British measure, using the foot, the grain, and the 
second, and Fahrenheit’s thermometer, this becomes 


pe = 000179 (461 + 8). 


The viscosity » is proportional to the absolute tempera- 
ture, and independent of the pressure, being the same for a 
pressure of half an inch as for a pressure of thirty inches of © 
mercury. ‘The significance of this remarkable result will be _ 

“seen when we come to the molecular theory of gases. 

The kinematic measure, v, of the viscosity is found by 

dividing » by the density. It is therefore directly propor- 


tional to the square of the absolute temperature, and in- 


versely proportional to the pressure. “ 

The value of mw for hydrogen is less than half that for 
air. Oxygen, on the other hand, has a viscosity greater than 
that of air. That of carbonic acid is less than that of air. 

It appears, from the calculations of Professor Stokes, 
combined with the value of the viscosity of air given above, 
that a drop of water falling through air one thousand times 
rarer than itself (which we may suppose to be the case 
at the ordinary height of a cloud) would fall about 58, 
of an inch in a second if its diameter were the thousandth 
part ofan inch, Ifthe diameter of the drop were only one 


a Yd 


_ ten-thousandth of an inch the rate at which it would make — 
"its way through the air would be a hundred times smaller, 
or half an inch ina minute. If a cloud is formed of little 
drops of water of this size, their motion through the air 
would be so slow that it would escape observation, and the 
- motion of the cloud, so far as it can be observed, would be 
the same as that of the air in that place. In fact,the | 
settiing down through the air of any very small particles, 
_ such as the fine spray of waves or waterfalls, and allkinds 
of dust and smoke, is a very slow process, and the time of 
settling down through a given distance varies inversely as 
the square of the dimensions of the particles, their density 
and figure being the same. If, however, a cloud of fine 
_ dust contains so many particles that the mass of a cubic | 
foot of dusty air is sensibly greater than that of a cubic 
foot of pure air, the dusty air will descend in mass below _ 
the level of the pure air like a fluid of greater density, so 
that a room may have its lower half filled with dusty air 
separated by a level surface from the pure air above. a 
‘There are some kinds of fogs the mean density of which 
is greater than that of the purer air in the neighbourhood, 
“and these lie like lakes in hollows, and pour down valleys 
like streams. On the other hand, the mean density of a 
cloud may be less than that of the surrounding air, and it 
will then ascend. . 
In the case of smoke, both the air and the sooty particles 
are heated by the fire before they escape into the atmo- 
_ sphere, but, independently of this kind of heating, if the sun 
_ shines on a cloud of dust or smoke, the particles absorb — 
heat, which they communicate to the air round them, and 
thus, though the particles themselves remain much denser 
than the air in the neighbourhood, they may cause the cloud 
which they form to appropriate so much of the sun’s heat — 
- that it becomes lighter as a whole than the surrounding pure 
air, and so rises. 4 
In the case of a cloud of watery particles, besides this — 


kind of action, fee is another, desantiats on he ‘evapora: 
7 tion from the surface of the little drops. The vapour of 
water is much rarer than air, and damp air is lighter than 
dry air at the same temperature and pressure. Hence the 
little drops make the air of the cloud damp, and if the 
‘mean density of the cloud is by this means made less than 
that of the surrounding air, the cloud will ascend. 


Lng 8 


CHAPTER XXII. 


ON THE MOLECULAR THEORY OF THE CONSTITUTION OF 
BODIES. 


WE have already shown that heat is a form of energy—that 
when a body is hot it possesses a store of energy, part at 
least of which can afterwards be exhibited in the form of 
visible work. . 
Now energy is known to us in two forms. One of these 
is Kinetic Energy, the energy of motion. A body in motion 
has kinetic energy, which it must communicate to some 
other body during the process of bringing it to rest. This | 
is the fundamental form of energy. When we have acquired 
_ the notion of matter in motion, and know what is meant by 
the energy of that motion, we are unable to conceive that 
any possible addition to our knowledge could explain the 
¥ energy of motion, or give us a more perfect knowledge of it 
than we have already. 
There is another form of energy which a body may have, 
which depends, not on its own state, but on its position 
with respect to other bodies. This is called Putential 
_ Energy. The leaden weight of a clock, when it is wound 
up, has potential energy, which it loses as it descends. It ead 
_ is spent in driving the clock. This energy depends, not on — 
the piece of lead considered in itself, but on the position of 


+ 


rE SS eee Ne ee a ee eee ee er ee ae eee To 


Meta een et eR Bel 09) Menten Seed a re ae Ea 
: hv. Us oe ae ne 
het eS uae aN 


282 Molecular Theory. 


the lead with respect to another body—the earth—which 


attracts it. 

In a watch, the mainspring, when wound up, has poten- 
tial energy, which it spends in driving the wheels of the 
watch. This energy arises from the coiling up of the 
spring, which alters the relative position of its parts. In 
both cases, until the clock or watch is set agoing, the 
existence of potential energy, whether in the clock-weight 
or in the watch-spring, is not accompanied with any visible 
motion. We must therefore admit that potential energy can 
exist in a body or system all whose parts are at rest. 

It is to be observed, however, that the progress of science 
is continually opening up new views of the forms and 
relations of different kinds of potential energy, and that 
men of science, so far from feeling that their knowledge of 
potential energy is perfect in kind, and incapable of essential 
change, are always endeavouring to explain the different 
forms of potential energy ; and if these explanations are in 
any case condemned, it is because they fail to give a suffi- 
cient reason for the fact, and not because the fact requires 
no explanation. 

We have now to determine to which of these forms of 
energy heat, as it exists in hot bodies, is to be referred. Is 
a hot body, like a coiled-up watch-spring, devoid of motion 
at present, but capable of exciting motion under proper 
conditions? or is it like a fly-wheel, which derives all its 
tremendous power from the visible motion with which it is 
animated ? 

It is manifest that a body may be hot without any motion 
being visible, either of the body as a whole, or of its parts 
relatively to each other. If, therefore, the body is hot 
in virtue of motion, the motion must be carried on by parts 
of the body too minute to be seen separately, and within 
limits so narrow that we cannot detect the absence of any 
part from its original place. 

The evidence for a state of motion, the velocity of which 


Heat is Motion. = =——*— 283 


must far surpass that of a railway train, existing in bodies 
which we can place under the strongest microscope, and in 
which we can detect nothing but the most perfect repose, 
must be of a very cogent nature before we can admit that 
heat is essentially motion. 

_ Let us therefore consider the alternative hypothesis—that 
the energy of a hot body is potential energy, or, in other 
words, that the hot body is in a state of rest, but that this” 
state of rest depends on the antagonism of forces which 
are in equilibrium as long as all surrounding bodies are 
of the same temperature, but which as soon as this equi- 
librium is destroyed are capable of setting bodies in 
motion. With respect to a theory of this kind, it is to be 
observed that potential energy depends essentially on the 
relative position of the parts of the system in which it exists, 
and that potential energy cannot be transformed in any 
way without some change of the relative position of these 
parts. In every transformation of potential energy, therefore, 
motion of some kind is involved. 

Now we know that whenever one body of a system is 
hotter than another, heat is transferred from the hotter to 
the colder body, either by conduction or by radiation. Let 
us suppose that the transfer takes place by radiation. 
Whatever theory we adopt about the kind of motion which 
constitutes radiation, it is manifest that radiation consists of 
motion of some kind, either the projection of the particles 
of a substance called caloric across the intervening space, or 
a wave-like motion propagated through a medium filling that 
space. In either case, during the interval between the time 
when the heat leaves the hot body and the time when it 
reaches the cold body, its energy exists in the intervening 
space in the form of the motion of matter. 

Hence, whether we consider the radiation of heat as 
effected by the projection of material caloric, or by the 
undulations of an intervening medium, the outer surface of 
a hot body must be in a state of motion, provided any cold 


Me 
, y 


/ 


“Molecular Theory, — 


body is in its neighbourhood to receive the radiations which — 
it emits. But we have no reason to believe that the pre- 
sence of a cold body is essential to the radiation of heat by 
a hot one. Whatever be the mode in which the hot body 
shoots forth its heat, it must depend on the state of the hot . 
body alone, and not on the existence of a cold body ata 
distance, so that even if all the bodies in a closed region 

. 


were equally hot, every one of them would be radiating 
heat; and the reason why each body remains of the same 
temperature is, that it receives from the other bodies exactly 
as much heat as it emits, This, in fact, is the foundation of 
Prevost’s Theory of Exchanges. We must therefore admit 
that at every part of the surface of a hot body there is a 
radiation of heat, and therefore a state of motion of the | 
superficial parts of the body. Now this motion is certainly 
invisible to us by any direct mode of observation, and 
therefore the mere fact of a body appearing to be at rest 
cannot be taken as a demonstration that its parts may 
not be in a state of motion. 

Hence part, at least, of the energy of a hot body must be 
energy arising from the motion of its parts, or kinetic energy. 

The conclusion at which we shall arrive, that a very 
considerable part of the energy of a hot body is in the form 
of motion, will become more evident when we consider the 
thermal energy of gases. 

Every hot body, therefore, is in motion. We have next 
to enquire into the nature of this motion. It is evidently 
not a motion of the whole body in one direction, for how- 
ever small we make the body by mechanical processes, each 
visible particle remains apparently in the same place, how- 
ever hot it is. ‘The motion which we call heat must there- 
fore be a motion of parts too small to be observed separately ; 
the motions of different parts at the same instant must be 
in different directions ; and the motion of any one part must, 
at least in solid bodies, be such that, however fast it moves, 
it never reaches a sensible distance from the point from 
which it started. 


TEN ee ee Ea ae ay ee er ae 


We have now arrived at the conception of a body as 
consisting of a great many small parts, each of which is in 
motion. We shall call any one of these parts a molecule of 
the substance. A molecule may therefore be defined as a 
small mass of matter the parts of which do not part .com- 
- pany during the excursions which the molecule makes wien 
the body to which it belongs is hot. 

The doctrine that visible bodies consist of a determinate 
number of molecules is called the molecular theory of maiter. 
The opposite doctrine is that, however small the parts may 
be into which we divide a body, each part retains all the 
properties of the substance. This is the theory of the 
infinite divisibility of bodies. We do not assert that there 
is an absolute limit to the divisibility of matter: what we 
assert is, that after we have divided a body into a certain 
finite number of constituent parts called molecules, then | 
any further division of these molecules will deprive them 
of the properties which give rise to the phenomena ob- 
served in the substance. 

The opinion that the observed properties of visible bodies _ 
apparently at rest are due to the action of invisible mole- 
cules in rapid motion is to be found in Lucretius. 

Daniel Bernoulli was the first to suggest that the pressure 
of air is due to the impact of its particles on the sides of 
the vessel containing it ; but he made very little progress 1 in 
the theory which he suggested, 

Lesage and Prevost of Geneva, and afterwards Herapath 
in his ‘ Mathematical Physics,’ made several important Aen 
cations of the theory. 

Dr. Joule in 1848 explained the pressure of gases by the 
impact of their molecules, and calculated the velocity which 
they must have to produce the observed pressure. 

Krénig also directed attention to this explanation of the 

‘phenomena of gases. 
It is to Professor Clausius, however, that we owe the recent 
“development of the dynamical theory of gases, Since he 


4 


eed Molecular T, heory. 


took up the subject a great advance has been made by i 


many enquirers. I shall now endeavour to give a sketch of 
the present state of the theory. 

All bodies consist of a finite number of small parts called 
molecules. Every molecule consists of a definite quantity 
of matter, which is exactly the same for all the molecules of 
the same substance. The mode in which the molecule is 
bound together is also the same for all molecules of the 
same substance. A molecule may consist of several distinct 
portions of matter held together by chemical bonds, and 
may be set in vibration, rotation, or any other kind of 
relative motion, but so long as the different portions do 
not part company, but travel together in the excursions 
made by the molecule, our theory calls the whole connected 
mass a single molecule. 

The molecules of all bodies are in a state of continual 
agitation. The hotter a body is, the more violently are its 
molecules agitated. In solid bodies, a molecule, though in 
continual motion, never gets beyond a certain very small 
distance from its original position in the body. The path 
which it describes is confined within a very small region 
of space. 

In fluids, on the other hand, there is no such restriction 
to the excursions of a molecule. It is true that the mole- 
cule generally can travel but a very small distance before 
its path is disturbed by an encounter with some other mole- 
cule ; but after this encounter there is nothing which deter- 
mines the molecule rather to return towards the place from 
whence it came than to push its way into new regions. 
Hence in fluids the path of a molecule is not confined 
within a limited region, as in the case of solids, but may 
penetrate to any part of the space occupied by the fluid. 

The actual phenomena of diffusion both in liquids and 
in gases furnish the strongest evidence that these bodies 
consist of molecules in a state of continual agitation. 

But when we apply the methods of dynamics to the 


Pee 


rae ae | ae ee 
: a 


lll ee eee ee 
+ P S 


investigation of the properties of a system consisting of a 


great number of small bodies in motion the resemblance 
of such a system to a gaseous body becomes still more 
apparent. 

I shall endeavour to give some account of what is known 
of such a system, avoiding all unnecessary mathematical 
calculations. 


ON THE KINETIC THEORY OF GASES. 


A gaseous body is supposed to consist of a great number 
of molecules moving with great velocity. During the greater 
part of their course these molecules are not acted on by any 
sensible force, and therefore move in straight lines with 
uniform velocity. When two molecules come within a 
certain distance of each other, a mutual action takes place 
between them, which may be compared to the collision of 
two billiard balls. Each molecule has its course changed, 
and starts on a new path. I have concluded from some 
experiments of my own that the collision between two hard 
spherical balls is not an accurate representation of what 
takes place during the encounter of two molecules. A 
better representation of such an encounter will be obtained 
by supposing the molecules to act on one another in a more 
gradual manner, so that the action between them goes on for 
a finite time, during which the centres of the molecules first 
approach each other and then separate. 

We shall refer to this mutual action as an Encounter 
between two molecules, and we shall call the course of a 
molecule between one encounter and another the Free Path 
of the molecule. In ordinary gases the free motion of a 
molecule takes up much more time than that occupied by an 
encounter. As the density of the gas increases, the free path 
diminishes, and in liquids no part of the course of a molecule 
can be spoken of as its free path. 

In an encounter between two molecules we know that, 


since the force of the impact acts between the two bodies, 
- 


; Encounters between Molecules. — 287 


288 M vldviila F bases 


the motion of the centre of gravity of the two molecules 
remains the same after the encounter as it was before. We 
also know by the principle of the conservation of energy that 
the velocity of each molecule relatively to the centre of 
gravity remains the same in magnitude, and is only changed 
in direction. 

Let us next suppose a number of molecules in motion 
contained in a vessel whose sides are such that if any 
energy is communicated to the vessel by the encounters of 
molecules against its sides, the vessel communicates as 
much energy to other molecules during their encounters 
with it, so as to preserve the total energy of the enclosed 
system. The first thing we must notice about this moving 
system is that even if all the molecules have the same velo- 
city originally, their encounters will produce an inequality 
of velocity, and that this distribution of velocity will go on 
continually. Every molecule will then change both its 
direction and its velocity at every encounter; and, as we 
are not supposed to keep a record of the exact particulars 
of every encounter, these changes of motion must appear to 
us very irregular if we follow the course of a single molecule. 
Tf, however, we adopt a statistical view of the system, and 
distribute the molecules into groups, according to the 
velocity with which at a given instant they happen to be 
moving, we shall observe a regularity of a new kind in the 
proportions of the whole number of molecules which fall into 
each of these groups. 

And here I wish to point out that, in adopting chil 
statistical method of. considering the average number of 
groups of molecules selected according to their velocities, we 
have abandoned the strict kinetic method of tracing ‘the 
exact circumstances of each individual molecule in all its © 
encounters. It is therefore possible that we may arrive at 
results which, though they fairly represent the facts as long 
as we are supposed to deal with a gas in’mass, would’ cease 
to be applicable if our faculties and’ instruments were ‘so 


Distribution of Energy. 28g 


sharpened that we could detect and lay hold of each mole 
cule and trace it through all its course. 

For the same reason, a theory of the effects of acu 
deduced from a study of the returns of registrars, in which ne 
names of individuals are given, might be found not to F-. : 
applicable to the experience of a schoolmaster who is able 
to trace the progress of each individual pupil. 

The distribution of the molecules according to their veloci- 
ties is found to be of exactly the same mathematical form aS 
the distribution of observations according to the magnitude of 
their errors, as described in the theory of errors of observation. 
The distribution of bullet-holes in a target according to their 


_ distances from the point aimed at is found to be of the same 


form, provided a great many shots are fired by persons of 
the same degree of skill. 

We have already met with the same form in the case of 
heat diffused :from a hot stratum by conduction. Whenever 
in physical phenomena some cause exists over which we 
have no control, and which produces a scattering of the 
particles of matter, a deviation of observations from the truth, 
or a diffusion of velocity or of heat, mathematical expressions 
of this exponential form are sure to make their appearance. 

It appears then that of the molecules composing the 
system some are moving very slowly, a very few are-moving 
with enormous velocities, and the greater number with inter- 
mediate velocities. To compare one such system with 
another, the best method is to take the mean of the squares 
of all the velocities. This quantity is called the Mean Square 
of the velocity. The square root of this quantity is called 
the Velocity of Mean Square. 


DISTRIBUTION OF KINETIC ENERGY BETWEEN TWO 
DIFFERENT SETS OF MOLECULES. 


If two sets of molecules whose mass is different are in 
motion in the same vessel, they will hy their encounters 
U 


290 Molecular Theory. 


exchange energy with each other till the average kinetic 
energy of a single molecule of either set is the same. This 
follows from the same investigation which determines the 
law of distribution of velocities in a single set of molecules. 

Hence if the mass of a molecule of one kind is M,, and 
that of a molecule of the other kind is Mg, and if their average 
velocities of agitation are v, and Vs, then 


0 Vy a EM Vg VS Ge 


The quantity 4 Mm v? is called the average kinetic energy 
of agitation of a single molecule. We shall return to this 
result when we come to Gay-Lussac’s Law of the Volumes 
of Gases. 


INTERNAL KINETIC ENERGY OF A MOLECULE. 


If a molecule were a mathematical point endowed with 
inertia and with attractive and repulsive forces, the only 
kinetic energy it could possess is that of translation as a 
whole. But if it be a body having parts and magnitude, 
these parts may have motions of rotation or of vibration 
relative to each other, independent of the motion of the 
centre of gravity of the molecule. We must therefore admit 
that part of the kinetic energy of a molecule may depend on 
the relative motions of its parts. We call this the Internal 
energy, to distinguish it from the energy due to the trans- 
lation of the molecule as a whole. The ratio of the internal 
energy to the energy of agitation may be different in 
different gases. 


DEFINITION OF THE VELOCITY OF A GAS, 


It is evident that if a gas consists of a great number of 
molecules moving about in all directions we cannot identify 
the velocity of any one of these molecules with what we are 
accustomed to consider as the velocity of the gas itself. 
Let us consider the case of a gas which has :emained in a 
fixed vessel for a sufficient time to arrive at the normal 


. 
(ate 


ay 
‘ 


f 
; 


3 Agitation of Molecules. 


distribution of velocities. This gas, according to the ordi- 
Nary notions, is at rest, though the molecules of which it is 
composed may be flying about in all directions. 

' Now consider any plane area of an imaginary surface 
described within the vessel. This surface does not interfere 
with the motion of the molecules. Some molecules pass 
through the surface in one direction, and others in the 
opposite direction ; but it is evident, since the gas does not 
tend to accumulate on one side rather than on the other, 
that exactly the same number of molecules pass in the one 
direction as in the other. If, therefore, a gas is at rest, as 
many molecules pass through a fixed surface in the one 
direction as in the other in the same time. 

It is evident that if the vessel, instead of being at rest, had 
been in a state of uniform motion, an equal number of mole- 
cules would pass in both directions through any surface 
fixed with respect to the vessel. Hence we find that if a 
gas is in motion, and if the velocity of a surface coincides in 
direction and magnitude with that of the gas, the same 
number of molecules will pass through that surface in the 
positive direction as in the negative. 

This leads to the following definition of the velocity of a 
gas: 

If we determine the motion of the centre of gravity of all 
the molecules within a very small region surrounding a point 
in a gas, then the velocity of the gas within that region is 
defined as the velocity of the centre of gravity of all the mole- 
cules within that region. 

This is what is meant by the motion of a gas in common 
language. Besides this motion, there are two other kinds of 
motion considered in the kinetic theory of gases. The firstis 
the motion of agitation of the molecules. This is the hitherto 
invisible motion of the molecule considered as a whole. 
Its course consists of broken portions, called free paths, 
interrupted by the encounters between different molecules. 

The second is the internal motion of each molecule, 

v2 


292 Molecular T. here 


consisting partly of rotation and partly of vibrations among 
the component parts of the molecule. 

The velocity of the centre of gravity of a molecule is the 
resultant of the velocity of the gas and the velocity of agita- 
tion of the individual molecule at the given instant. The 
velocity of a constituent part of a molecule is the resultant 
of the velocity of its centre of gravity and the velocity of 
the constituent part relatively to the centre of gravity of the 
molecule. 


THEORY OF THE PRESSURE OF A GAS. 


Let us consider two portions of a gas separated bya plane 

surface which moves with the same velocity as 

the gas. We have seen that in this case the 

number of molecules which pass through the 
a | p | plane in opposite directions is the same. 

Each molecule in crossing the plane from 

— the region a to the region B enters the second 


Fic. 41. 


region in precisely the same state as it leaves the first. It - 


therefore carries over into the region B, not only its mass, 
but its momentum and its kinetic energy. Hence, if we 
consider the quantity of momentum in a given direction 
existing at any instant in the particles in the region B, this 
quantity will be altered whenever a molecule crosses the 
boundary, carrying its momentum along with it. 

Now let us consider all the molecules whose velocity 
differs by less than a certain quantity, ¢, from a given velocity 
the components of which are # in the direction perpen- 
dicular to. the plane from a towards B, and v and zw in two 
other directions parallel to the plane. Let there be n 
molecules whose velocity is within these limits in every unit 
of volume, and let the mass of each of these be M. 

Then the number of these molecules which will cross unit 
of area of the plane from a to B in unit of time is 


¥ u. 


a ee he 


Pressure of a Gas. gag 


The momentum of each of these molecules resolved in 
the direction A Bis M uw. 

Hence the momentum in this direction communicated to 
the region B in unit of time is 


MN 22, 


Since this bombardment of the region B does not pro- 
duce motion of the gas, a pressure must be exerted on 
the gas by the sides of the vessel, and the amount of this 
pressure for every unit of area must be M N 2. 

The region A loses positive momentum at the same rate, 
and in order to preserve equilibrium there must be a pressure 
equal to M N w? on every unit of area of the surface of the 
region A. 

Hitherto we have considered only one group of molecules, 
whose velocities lie between given limits. In every such 
group that which determines the pressure in the direction a B 
on the surface separating a from B is a quantity of the form 
M N w*, where N is the number of molecules in the group, and 
uz is the velocity of each molecule resolved in the direction 
AB. The other components of the velocity do not influence 
the pressure in this direction. 

To find the whole pressure, we must find the sum of all 
such expressions as M N «#? for all the groups of molecules 
in the system. We may write this result = M N w?, where 
N now signifies the total number of molecules in unit of 
volume, and #? denotes the mean value of w? for all these 
molecules. Now if v? is the square of the velocity without 
regard to direction, 


v2 = uw? + 7 + w?, 


where z v w are the components in three directions at right 
angles. Hence if w?, v?, and w? denote the mean square of 
these components, and v? the mean square of the resultant, 


V=wt ev? + w 


When, as in every gas at rest, the pressure is equal 
directions, w? = v? = w?, and therefore v? = 8 u?. 
Hence the pressure of a gas is 


fd MMe eee 


where M is the mass of each molecule, n is the number of 
molecules in unit of volume, and v? is the mean equate of *j 
the velocity. a 
In this expression there are two quantities which hand 
never been directly measured—the mass of a single molecule, 
and the number of molecules in unit of volume. But we 
have here to do with the product of these quantities, which — 
is evidently the mass of the substance in unit of volume, or, in a 
other words, its density. Hence we may write the expressions 


Pe sow. vce 


where p is the density of the gas. 

It is easy from this expression to determine, as was first 
done by Joule, the mean square of the velocity of the 
molecules of a gas, for 

Pp = 3 t 
p 


if the intensity of gravity where this relation was 
was 32°2, we have 


= 36593916, 


or, taking the square root of this quantity, 


V = 6097 feet per second. 


This is the velocity of mean square for the molecules of 
hydrogen at 32° F. and at the atmospheric pressure. 


LAW OF BOYLE. 


Two bodies are said to be of the same temperature 
when there is no more tendency for heat to pass from the 
first to the second than in the reverse direction. In the 
kinetic theory of heat, as we have seen, this thermal equili- 
brium is established when there is a certain relation between 
the velocities of agitation of the molecules of the two bodies. 


Hence the temperature of a gas must depend on the velocity - 
of agitation of its molecules, and this velocity must be the 


same at the same temperature, whatever be the density. 
In the expression = 4 v’, the quantity v? depends 
only on the temperature as long as the gas remains the 


same. Hence when the density p varies, the pressure f. 


must vary in the same proportion. This is Boyle’s law, 
which is now raised from the rank of an experimental fact 
to that of a deduction from the kinetic theory of gases. 

If v denotes the volume of unit of mass, we may write this 
expression 

MO Ma oe eNO Si ae 

Now / v is proportional to the absolute temperature, as 
measured by a thermometer, of the particular gas under 
consideration. Hence v?, the mean square of the velocity of 


agitation, is proportional to the absolute temperature mea- 


sured in this way. 


LAW OF GAY-LUSSAC. 


Let us next consider two different gases in thermal equi- 


librium. We have already stated that if mM, My, are the 


masses of individual molecules of these gases,andv, Vv, 


their respective velocities of agitation, it is necessary for 
thermal equilibrium that a, v,2 = M2 V2? by equation (r). 


If the pressures of these gases are f, and fp, and the i 3 


Laws of Boyle and Gay-Lussac. 205 : 


ie 


Ba 
fy 


pO res Lo 


£2 


pe ee ae or 


« A 
eety 
ees 


296 : Molecular Theory. Be 


number of molecules in unit of volume N, and Np, then, by 
equation (2), 
Pi = 4 M, N, v;? and py = 4 My Ng V5", 
If the pressures of the two gases are equal, 
M, N, v;? = Mg Ng Vo?. 
If their temperatures are equal, 
M, v2 = Mo Vo". 


Dividing the terms of the first of these equations by those 

of the second, we find 

iy Me Sys aoe Se 
or when two gases are at the same pressure and tempera- 
ture, the number of molecules in unit of volume is the same in 
both gases. 

If we put p; = M, N, and py = Mg Nz for the densities of 
the two gases, then, since N; = Ng, we get 

Pr 2 Posi My $Mg « ws . & (9) 
or the densities of two gases at the same temperature and 
pressure are proportional to the masses of their individual 
molecules. 

These two equivalent propositions are the expression of a 
very important law established by Gay-Lussac, that the den- 
sities of gases are proportional to their molecular weights. 

The proportion by weight in which different substances 
combine to form chemical compounds depends, according to 
Dalton’s atomic theory, on the weights of their molecules, 
and it is one of the most important researches in chemistry 
to determine the proportions of the weights of the molecules 
from the proportions in which they enter into combination, 
Gay-Lussac discovered that in the case of gases the volumes 
of the combining quantities of different gases always stand 
in a simple ratio to each other. This law of volumes has 
now been raised from the rank of an empirical fact to that of 
a deduction from our theory, and we may now assert, as a 


dynamical proposition, that the weights of the molecules of 


i 


Law of Charles. S267 
gases (that is, those small portions which do not part com- 


pany during their motion) are proportional to the densities 
of these gases at standard temperature and pressure. 


LAW OF CHARLES, 


We must next consider the effect of changes of temperature 
on different gases. Since at all temperatures, when there is 
thermal equilibrium, 

M, V2 = Mg V,°; 

and since the absolute temperature, as measured by a gas 
thermometer, is proportional to v,? when the gas is of the 
first kind, and to v,? when the gas is of the second kind; it 
follows, since v,? is itself proportional to v,2, that the 
absolute temperatures, as measured by the two thermometers, 
are proportional, and if they agree at any one temperature 
(as the freezing point), they agree throughout. This is 
the law of the equal dilatation of gases discovered by 
Charles. 


KINETIC ENERGY OF A MOLECULE. 


The mean kinetic energy of agitation of a molecule is the 
product of its mass by half the mean square of its velocity, or 
A v2. 

This is the energy due to the motion of the molecule asa 
whole, but its parts may be in a state of relative motion. If 
we assume, with Clausius, that the energy due to this 
internal motion of the parts of the molecule tends towards a 
value having a constant ratio to the energy of agitation, the 
whole energy will be proportional to the energy of agitation, 
and may be written 
2 BM V2, 

where /3 is a factor, always greater than unity, and probably 
equal to 1°634 for air and several of the more perfect gases. 
For steam it may be as much as 2'19, but this is very 
uncertain. 


298 | Molecular Theory, 


To find the kinetic energy of the substance contained 
unit of volume, we have only to multiply by the number of 
molecules, and we obtain * ; 

T= PPM NV. 2k Wee eee 4 

Comparing this with the equation (2) which determines 

the pressure, we get 


T SEPP 25 0s 6 eee 


pressure on unit of area multiplied by 3 £3. Z 4 
The energy in unit of mass is found by multiplying this | 
by z, the volume of unit of mass : 


a 2 BPD one ee 


SPECIFIC HEAT AT CONSTANT VOLUME. 


Since the product / v is proportional to the absolute tem-_ 
perature, the energy is proportional to the temperature. I 
The specific heat is measured dynamically by the increa 
of energy corresponding to a rise of one degree of temperature, | 
Hence 


K, = $9 pF? SCTE ee 


= 


To express the specific heat in ordinary thermal units, we 
must divide this by J, the specific heat of water (Joule’s 
equivalent). It follows from this expression that for any 
one gas the specific heat of unit of mass at constant volume 


is the same for all pressures and temperatures, because 


reinains constant. For different gases the specific heat at 
constant volume is inversely proportional to the spec ifie 
gravity, and directly proportional to /3. s 

Since is nearly the same for several gases, the specail C) 
heat of these gases is inversely proportional to their specific 
gravity referred to air, or, since the specific gravity is pro- 
portional to their molecular weight, the specific heat multi- 
plied by the me!lecular weight is the same for all these gases. 


—— 


Law of Dulong and Petit. eg 


This is the law of Dulong and Petit. It would be accu- 
rate for all gases if the value of were the same in every 
case. 

It has been shown at p. 181 that the difference of the two: 


specific heats is ee. Hence their ratio, y, is 


2 I 
= : and os 3 z 
i ea FF h ree 


If u is the velocity of sound in a gas, we have, as at p. 208, 
oY era Se Ure ae eamegie weet 2 1) 

The mean square of the velocity of agitation is 
A Be Ra te 

hence U = os : Vv, or, if y = 1°408, as in air and several 


other gases, 
eo eek ¥ or Vee 1 4sS US. hEg) 

These are the relations between the velocity of sound and 
the velocity of mean square of agitation in any gas for which 
¥ = 1°408: 

The nature of this book admits only of a brief account of 
some other results of the kinetic theory of gases. Two of 
these are independent of the nature of the action between 
the molecules during their encounters. 

The first of these relates to the equilibrium of a mixture of 
gases acted on by gravity. The result of our theory is that 
the final distribution of any number of kinds of gas ina 
vertical vessel is such that the density of each gas at a 
given height is the same as if all the other gases had been 
removed, leaving it alone in the vessel. 

This is exactly the mode of distribution which Dalton 
supposed to exist in a mixed atmosphere in equilibrium, the 
law of diminution of density of each constituent gas being 
the same as if no other gases were present. 

In our atmosphere the continual disturbances caused by 
winds carry portions of the mixed gases from one stratum 


300 Motecular Theory. 


to another, so that the proportion of oxygen and nitrogen at 


different heights is much more uniform than if these gases — 
had been allowed to take their places by diffusion during a 


dead calm. 

The second result of our theory relates to the thermal equi- 
librium of a vertical column. We find that if a vertical 
column of a gas were left to itself, till by the conduction 
of heat it had attained a condition of thermal equilibrium, 
the temperature would be the same throughout, or, in other 
words, gravity produces no effect in making the bottom of 
the column hotter or colder than the top. 

This result is important in the theory of thermodynamics, 
for it proves that gravity has no influence in altering the 
conditions of thermal equilibrium in any substance, whether 
gaseous or not. For if two vertical columns of different 
substances stand on the same perfectly conducting horizontal 
plate, the temperature of the bottom of each column will be 
the same ; and if each column is in thermal equilibrium of 
itself, the temperatures at all equal heights must be the same. 
In fact, if the temperatures of the tops of the two columns 
were different, we might drive an engine with this difference of 
temperature, and the refuse heat would pass down the colder 
column, through the conducting plate, and up the warmer 
column; and this would go on till all the heat was converted 
into work, contrary to the second law of thermodynamics. 

But we know that if one of the columns is gaseous, its 
temperature is uniform. Hence that of the other must be 
uniform, whatever its material. 


This result is by no means applicable to the case of our 


atmosphere. Setting aside the enormous direct effect of 
the sun’s radiation in disturbing thermal equilibrium, the 
effect of winds in carrying large masses of air from one 
height to another tends to produce a distribution of tem- 


perature of a quite different kind, the temperature at any ” 


height being such that a mass of air, brought from one height 
to another without gaining or losing heat, would always find 


__ ee 


Diffusion, Conduction, and Viscosity. 301 


itself at the temperature of the surrounding air. In this 


condition of what Sir William Thomson has called the Con- 
vective equilibrium of heat, it is not the temperature which 
is constant, but the quantity ¢, which determines the adia- 
batic curves. 

In the convective equilibrium of temperature, the abso- 
lute temperature is proportional to the pressure raised to 


the power ane Or 0233. 


The extreme slowness of the conduction of heat in air, 
compared with the rapidity with which large masses of air 
are carried from one height to another by the winds, causes 
the temperature of the different strata of the atmosphere to 
depend far more on this condition of convective equilibrium 
than on true thermal equilibrium. : 

We now proceed to those phenomena of gases which, 
according to the kinetic theory, depend upon the particular 
nature of the action which takes place when the molecules 
encounter each other, and on the frequency of these 
encounters. 

There are three phenomena of this kind of which the 
kinetic theory takes account—the diffusion of gases, the 
viscosity of gases, and the conduction of heat through a gas. 

We have already described the known facts about the 
interdiffusion of two different gases. It is only when the 
gases are chemically different that we can trace the process 
of diffusion, but on the molecular theory diffusion is always 
going on, even in a single gas ; only it is impossible to trace 
the progress of the molecules, because we cannot tell one 
from another. 

The. relation between diffusion and viscosity may be 
explained as follows : Consider the case of motion of a mass 
of gas, which has already been described in Chapter XXL, in 
which the different horizontal layers of the gas slide over 
each other. In diffusion the molecules pass, some of them 
upwards and some of. them downwards, through any 


| 302° . Molecular Theory. 


ave ive oe a hae te a ee ee ee oe bee ae 
’ F i a 5 lay CPE 
j i Teor ‘ 1 at 


F 


horizontal plane. If the medium has different properties of 
any kind above and below this plane, then this interchange 
of molecules will tend to assimilate the properties of the two 
portions of the medium. 

In the case of ordinary diffusion, the proportions of the 
two. diffusing substances are different above and below, and 
vary in the different horizontal layers according to their 
height. In the case of internal friction, the mean horizontal 
momentum is different in the different layers, and when the 
molecules pass through the plane, carrying their momentum 
with them, this exchange of momentum between the upper 
and lower parts of the medium constitutes a force tending to 
equalize their velocity, and this is the phenomenon actually 
observed in the motion of viscous fluids. 

The coefficient of viscosity, when measured in the kine- 
matic way, represents the rate at which the equalization of 
velocity goes on by the exchange of the momentum of the 


molecules, just as the coefficient of diffusion represents the _ 


rate at which the equalization of chemical composition goes 
on by the exchange of the molecules themselves. 

It appears from the kinetic theory of gases that if D is 
the:coefficient of diffusion of the gas info itself, and yv the 
viscosity measured kinematically, 


ee SAG DiS. OA ee 
en Baa ee Ee ae 
The conduction of heat in a gas, according to the kinetic 
theory, is simply the diffusion of the energy of the molecules 
by their moving about in the medium and carrying their 
energy with them till they encounter other molecules, when 
the energy is redistributed. The relation of the conduc- 
iivity «, measured thermometrically, to the viscosity », 
measured kinematically, is 


Nae WL oo on ea 9 ae 
aie (17) 


It appears, therefore, that diffusion, viscosity, and conduc- 


Evaporation and Condensation. 303 


tivity in gases are related to each other in a very simple 
way, being the rate of equalization of three properties of the 
medium—the proportion of its ingredients, its velocity, and 
its temperature. The equalization is effected by the same 
agency in each case—namely, the agitation of the molecules. 
In each case, if the density remains the same, the rate of 
equalization is proportional to the absolute temperature ; 
and if the temperature remains the same, the rate of equal- 
ization is inversely proportional to the density. Hence, 
if we consider the temperature and the pressure as defining 
the state of the gas, the quantities D, v, and « vary directly 
as the square of the absolute temperature and inversely as 
the pressure. 


MOLECULAR THEORY OF EVAPORATION AND CONDENSATION, 


The mathematical difficulties arising in the investigation 
of the motions of molecules are so great that it is not to be 
wondered at that most of the numerical results are confined 
to the phenomena of gases. The general character, however, 
_ of the explanation of many other phenomena by the mole- 
cular theory has been pointed out by Clausius and others. 
We have seen that in the case of a gas some of the mole- 
cules have a much greater velocity than others, so that it is 
only to the average velocity of all the molecules that we can 
ascribe a definite value. It is probable that this is also true 
of the motions of the molecules of liquids, so that, though 
the average velocity may be much smaller than in the vapour 
of that liquid, some of the molecules in the liquid may have 
velocities equal to or greater than the average velocity in 
the yapour. If any of the molecules at the surface of the 
liquid have such velocities, and if they are moving /rom the 
liquid, they will escape from those forces which retain the 
other molecules as constituents of the liquid, and will fly 
about as ‘vapour in the space outside the liquid. This is 
the molecular theory of evaporation. At the same time, a 
molecule of the vapour striking the liquid may become 


LD Sek ss 25 
aes 


aR TE eee i), abt he POS eae yeh 
. ah gl + ’ ate, * . 


—— 
o 


304 | °" Yglecular-T heory. 


entangled among the molecules of the liquid, and may thus~ 
become part of the liquid. This is the molecular explanation 
of condensation. The number of molecules which pass from 
the liquid to the vapour depends on the temperature of the 
liquid. The number of molecules which pass from the 
vapour tc the liquid depends upon the density of the vapour 
as well as itstemperature. If the temperature of the vapour 
is the same as that of the liquid, evaporation will take place 
as long as more molecules are evaporated than condensed ; 
but when the density of the vapour has increased to such a 
value that as many molecules are condensed as evaporated, 
then the vapour has attained its maximum density. It is 
then said to be saturated, and it is commonly supposed that 
evaporation ceases. According to the molecular theory, 
however, evaporation is still going on as fast as ever ; only, 
condensation is also going on at an equal rate, since the 
proportions of liquid and of gas remain unchanged. 

We have hitherto spoken of the case in which the liquid 
and the vapour consist of the same substance in different 
states. 

A similar explanation, however, applies to cases in which 
the vapour or gas is absorbed by. a liquid of a different kind, 
as when oxygen or carbonic acid is absorbed by water or 
alcohol. In such cases a ‘ movable equilibrium’ is attained 
when the liquid has absorbed a quantity of the gas whose 
volume at the density of the unabsorbed gas is a certain 
multiple or fraction of the volume of the liquid; or, in other 
words, the density of the gas in the liquid and outside the 
liquid stand in a certain numerical ratio to each other. This 
subject is treated very fully in Bunsen’s ‘ Gasometry.’ 

The amount of vapour of a liquid diffused into a gas of a 
different kind is generally independent of the nature of the 
gas, except when the gas acts chemically on the vapour. 


£ Riise 305 


MOLECULAR THEORY OF ELECTROLYSIS, 


A very interesting part of molecular science which has not 
been thoroughly worked out, but which hardly belongs to a 
treatise on Heat, is the theory of electrolysis, Here an 
electromotive force acting on a liquid electrolyte causes 
the molecules of one of its components to be urged in one 
direction, while those of the other component are urged in 
the opposite direction. Now these components are joined 
together in pairs by chemical forces of great power, so that 
we might expect that no electrolytic effect could take place 
unless the electromotive force were so strong as to be able 
to tear these couples asunder. But, according to Clausius, in 
the dance of molecules which is always going on, some of the 
linked pairs of molecules acquire such velocities that when 
they have an encounter with a pair also in violent motion 
the molecules composing one or both of the pairs are torn 
asunder, and wander about seeking new partners, If the 
temperature is so high that the general agitation is so violent 
that more pairs of molecules are torn asunder than can pair 
again in an equal time, we have the phenomenon of 
Dissociation, studied by M. St. Claire Deville. If, on the 
other hand, the separated molecules can always find partners 
before they are ejected from the system, the composition of 
the system remains apparently the same. 

Now Professor Clausius considers that it is during these 
temporary separations that the electromotive force comes 
into play as a directing power, causing the molecules of 
one component to move on the whole one way, and those 
of the other the opposite way. Thus the component mole- 
cules are always changing partners, even when no electro- 
motive force is in action, and the only effect of this force is to 
give direction to those movements which are already going on. 

Professor Wiedemann, who has also taken this view of 
electrolysis, compares the phenomenon with that of diffusion, 


and shows that the electric conductivity of an electrolyte may 
x 


? 
sag 
j 


306 Molecular Theory. 


be considered as depending on the coefficient of diffusion of 
the components through each other. — 


MOLECULAR THEORY OF RADIATION, 


The phenomena already described are explained on the 
molecular theory by the motion of agitation of the molecules, 
a motion which is exceedingly irregular, the intervals between 
successive encounters and the velocities of a molecule 
during successive free paths not being subject to any law 
which we can express. The internal motion of a single 
molecule is of a very different kind. If the parts of the 
molecule are capable of relative motion without being 
altogether torn asunder, this relative motion will be some 
kind of vibration. The small vibrations of a connected sys- 
tem may be resolved into a number of simple vibrations, the 
law of each of which is similar to that of a pendulum. It is 
probable that in gases the molecules may execute many of 
such vibrations in the interval between successive encounters. 
At each encounter the whole molecule is roughly shaken. 
During its free path it vibrates according to its own laws, 
the amplitudes of the different simple vibrations being deter- 
mined by the nature of the collision, but their periods 
depending only on the constitution of the molecule itself. 
If the molecule is capable of communicating these vibrations 
to the medium in which radiations are propagated, it will 
send forth radiations of certain definite kinds, and if these 
belong to the luminous part of the spectrum, they will be 
visible as light of definite refrangibility. This, then, is the 
explanation, on the molecular theory, of the bright lines 
observed in the spectra of incandescent gases. They repre- 
sent the disturbance communicated to the luminiferous 
medium by molecules vibrating in a regular and periodic 
manner during their free paths. If the free path is long, 
the molecule, by communicating its vibrations to the ether, 
will cease to vibrate till it encounters some other molecule. 

By raising the temperature we increase the velocity of 


: Radiation. 


the motion of agitation and the force of each encounter. 
The higher the temperature the greater will be the ampli- 
tude of the internal vibrations of all kinds, and the more 
likelihood will there be that vibrations of short period will 
be excited, as well as those fundamental vibrations which 
are most easily produced. By increasing the density we 
diminish the length of the free path of each molecule, and 
thus allow less time for the vibrations excited at each 
encounter to subside, and, since each fresh encounter dis- 
turbs the regularity of the series of vibrations, the radiation 
will no longer be capable of complete resolution into a 
series of vibrations of regular periods, but will be analysed 
into a spectrum showing the bright bands due to the regular 
vibrations, along with a ground of diffused light, forming a 
continuous spectrum due to the irregular motion introduced 
at each encounter. 

Hence when a gas is rare the bright lines of its spectrum 
are narrow and distinct, and the spaces between them are 
dark. As the density of the gas increases, the bright lines 
become broacer and the spaces between them more 
luminous. 

There is another reason for the broadening of the bright 
lines and the luminosity of the whole spectrum in dense 
gases, which we have already stated at p. 225. There is 
this difference, however, between the effect there mentioned 
and that described here. At p. 225 the light from a 
certain stratum of incandescent gas was supposed to pene- 
trate through other strata, which absorbed the brighter rays 
faster than the less luminous ones. ‘This effect depends 
only on the total quantity of gas through which the rays 
pass, and will be the same whether it isa mile of gas at 
thirty inches pressure, or thirty miles at one inch pressure. 
The effect which we are now considering depends on the 
absolute density, so that it is by no means the same whether 
a stratum containing a given quantity of gas is one mile or 


thirty miles thick. 
x2 


308 =—s—=~*«<« Molecular Theory. 


When the gas is so far condensed that it assumes the 


liquid or solid form, then, as the molecules have no free _ 


path, they have no regular vibrations, and no bright lines 
are commonly observed in incandescent liquids or solids. 
Mr. Huggins, however, has observed bright lines in the 
spectrum of incandescent erbia and lime, which appear to 
be due to the solid matter, and not to its vapour. 


LIMITATION OF THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS, 


Before I conclude, I wish to direct attention to an aspect 
of the molecular theory which deserves consideration. 

One of the best established facts in thermodynamics is 
that it is impossible in a system enclosed in an envelope 


_ which permits neither change of volume nor passage of heat, 


and in which both the temperature and the pressure are every- 
where the same, to produce any inequality of temperature or 
of pressure without the expenditure of work. ‘This is the 
second law of thermodynamics, and it is undoubtedly true 
as long as we can deal with bodies only in mass, and have 
no power of perceiving or handling the separate molecules 
of which they are made up. But if we conceive a being 
whose faculties are so sharpened that he can follow every 
molecule in its course, such a being, whose attributes are still 
as essentially finite as our own, would be able to do what is 
at present impossible to us. For we have seen that the 
molecules in a vessel full of air at uniform temperature are 
moving with velocities by no means uniform, though the 
mean velocity of any great number of them, arbitrarily 
selected, is almost exactly uniform. Now let us suppose 
that such a vessel is divided into two portions, A and B, by 
a division in which there is a small hole, and that a being, 
who can see the individual molecules, opens and closes this 


hole, so as to allow only the swifter, molecules to pass 


from A to B, and only the slower ones to pass from B to A. 
- He will thus, without expenditure of work, raise the tem- 


et 


Statistical K nowledge of Bodies. 309 


perature of B and lower that of a, in contradiction to the 
second law of thermodynamics. 

This is only one of the instances in which conclusions 
which we have drawn from our experience of bodies con- a 
sisting of an immense number of molecules may be found 
not to be applicable to the more delicate observations and 
experiments which we may suppose made by one who can 
perceive and handle the individual molecules which we deal 
with only in large masses. 

In dealing with masses of matter, while we do not perceive 
the individual molecules, we are compelled to adopt what I 
have described as the statistical method of calculation, and 
to abandon the strict dynamical method, in which we follow 
every motion by the calculus. 

It would be interesting to enquire how far those ideas 
about the nature and methods of science which have been 
derived from examples of scientific investigation in which 
the dynamical method is followed are applicable to our 
actual knowledge of concrete things, which, as we have seen, 
is of an essentially statistical nature, because no one has 
yet discovered any practical method of tracing the path 
of a molecule, or of identifying it at different times. 

I do not think, however, that the perfect identity which 
we observe between different portions of the same kind of 
matter can be explained on the statistical principle of the | 
stability of the averages of large numbers of quantities Es 
each of which may differ from the mean. For if of the 
molecules of some substance such as hydrogen, some were 
of slightly greater mass than others, we have the means 
of producing a separation between molecules of different 
masses, and in this way we should be able to produce two 
kinds of hydrogen, one of which would be somewhat denser 
than the other. As this cannot be done, we must admit that 
the equality which we assert to exist between the molecules 
of hydrogen applies to each individual molecule, and not 
merely to the average of groups of millions of molecules. 


y 
‘g 
i 


310 Molecular Theory. 


NATURE AND ORIGIN OF MOLECULES. 


We have thus been led by our study of visible things to a 
theory that they are made up of a finite number of parts or 
molecules, each of which has a definite mass, and possesses 
other properties. The molecules of the same substance are 
all exactly alike, but different from those of other substances. 
There is not a regular gradation in the mass of molecules 
from that of hydrogen, which is the least of those known to 
us, to that of bismuth ; but they all fall into a limited 
number of classes or species, the individuals of each 
species being exactly similar to each other, and no inter- 
mediate links are found to connect one species with 
another by a uniform gradation. 

We are here reminded of certain speculations concerning 
the relations between the species of living things. We find 
that in these also the individuals are naturally grouped into 
species, and that intermediate links between the species are 
wanting. But in each species variations occur, and there is 
a perpetual generation and destruction of the individuals of 
which the species consist. 

Hence it is possible to frame a theory to account for the 
present state of things by means of generation, variation, 
and discriminative destruction. 

In the case of the molecules, however, each individual is 
permanent ; there is no generation or destruction, and no 
variation, or rather no difference, between the individuals of 
each species. 

_ Hence the kind of speculation with which we have 
become so familiar under the name of theories of evolution 
is quite inapplicable to the case of molecules. 

It is true that Descartes, whose inventiveness knew no 
bounds, has given a theory of the evolution of molecules. 
He supposes that the molecules with which the heavens 
are nearly filled have received a spherical form from the 
long-continued grinding of their projecting parts, so that, 


— * 


Equality and Permanence of Molecules. 311 


like marbles in a mill, they have ‘rubbed each other’s angles 
down.’ The result of this attrition forms the finest kind of 
molecules, with which the interstices between the globular 
molecules are filled. But, besides these, he describes another 
elongated kind of molecules, the particula striata, which 
have received their form from their often threading the 
interstices between three spheres in contact. They have thus 
acquired three longitudinal ridges, and, since some of them 
during their passage are rotating on their axes, these ridges 
are not in general parallel to the axis, but are twisted like 


the threads of a screw. By means of these little screws 


he most ingeniously attempts to explain the phenomena of 
magnetism. 

But it is evident that his molecules are very different from 
ours. His seem to be produced by some general break-up 
of his solid space, and to be ground down in the course of 
ages, and, though their relative magnitude is in some degree 
determinate, there is nothing to determine the absolute 
magnitude of any of them. 

Our molecules, on the other hand, are unalterable by any 
of the processes which go on in the present state of things, 
and every individual of each species is of exactly the same 
magnitude, as though they had all been cast in the same 
mould, like bullets, and not merely selected and grouped 
according to their size, like small shot. 

The individuals of each species also agree in the nature of 
the light which they emit—that is, in their natural periods of 
vibration. ‘They are therefore like tuning-forks all tuned to 
concert pitch, or like watches regulated to solar time. 

In speculating on the cause of this equality we are debarred 
from imagining any cause of equalization, on account of the 
immutability of each individual molecule. It is difficult, on the 
other hand, to conceive of selection and elimination of inter- 
mediate varieties, for where can these eliminated molecules 
have gone to if, as we have reason to believe, the hydrogen, 
&c., of the fixed stars is composed of molecules identical in 


312 Molecular Theory. “el 


all respects with our own? ‘The time required to eliminate 
from the whole of the visible universe every molecule whose 
mass differs from that of some one of our so-called elements, 
by processes similar to Graham’s method of dialysis, which 
is the only method we can conceive of at present, would 
exceed the utmost limits ever demanded by evolutionists 
as many times as these exceed the period of vibration of a 
molecule. 


But if we suppose the molecules to be made at all, or if 


we suppose them to consist of something previously made, 
why should we expect any irregularity to exist among them? 
If they are, as we believe, the only material things which 
still remain in the precise condition in which they first 
began to exist, why should we not rather look for some 
indication of that spirit of order, our scientific confidence 
in which is never shaken by the difficulty which we expe- 
rience in tracing it in the complex arrangements of visible 
things, and of which our moral estimation is shown in all 
our attempts to think and speak the truth, and to ascertain 
the exact principles of distributive justice ? 


LONDON: PRINTED BY ; 
SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE i 
AND PARLIAMENT STREET 


=~ 
os 
' 
1 
i 
i ' 
{ 
\ 
y 
’ ‘ 
‘ 
; 
} 
{ 
‘4 . 
. 


Tee 


COTS 
4 


Sheek 


¥ : - a te = 
nS seh pim base cesetrac sce 
se hE hae 


