THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 

OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 

GIFT 

Dr.  M.  N.  Beigelinan 


\'   ^ 


L   / 


\ 


OPTICKS: 

O  R,    A 

TREATISE 

O  F    T  H  E 

Refledions ,    Refractions , 
Inflexions  and  Colours 

O  F 

LIGHT. 


The  Second  Rditton^  with  Addit'tons. 


By  Sir  Isaac  Newton,    Knt. 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  W.  and  J.  Innys,  Printers  to  the 
Royal  Society,  at  the  Prince' s-Jrms  in  St.  PauVs 
Church- Yard.     1718. 


Advertisement  L 

ART  of  the  enfiiing  Dif- 
coiirje  about  Light  was 
written  at  the  De/ire  of 
fome  Gentlemen  oftheKoyal  So- 
ciety, in  the  Tear  i6is,  ^^d  then 
fent  to  their  Secretary,  and  read 
at  their  Meetings,  and  the  rejl 
was  added  about  twelveTears  af- 
ter to  complete  the  Theory ;  except 
the  Third  Book,  and  the  laft  Oh 
fervatton  in  the  laft  Part  of  the 
Second,  which  were  finceput  to- 
gether out  of  fcatterd  Papers.  To 
amid  being  engaged  in  Difputes 

A  2  about 


Advertifement. 

dhont  thefe  Matters,  I  have  hi- 
therto delayed  the  printing,  and 
Jhotildftillhave  delay  edit,  had  not 
the  Importunity  of  Friends  pre- 
vailed upon  ?ne.  If  any  other  Pa- 
pers writ  on  this  SiibjeB  are  got 
out  of  my  Hands  they  are  imper- 
fect, and  were  perhaps  written 
before  I  had  tried  all  the  Expe- 
rhnents  here  fet  down,  and  f idly 
fatisfied  my  f elf  alout  the  Laws 
of  Refractions  and  Compo/ition 
of  Colours.  I  have  here  pullijljd 
ivhat  I  think  proper  to  come  A- 
broad,  xviJJnng  that  it  may  not  he 
trav fated  into  another  Language 
Without  my  Confent. 

The  Crowns  of  Colours,  which 
fometimes  appear  about  the  Sun 
and  Moon,  I  have  endeavoured 
to  give  an  Account  of-,  but  for 

want 


Advertifement. 

want  of  fi/fficient  Olfervatiom 
leave  that  Matter  to  he  farther 
examined.  The  Siihjecl  of  the 
Third  Book  I  have  alfo  left  im- 
perfect, not  havifig  tried  all  the 
Experiments  which  I  intended 
when  I  was  Soui^thcfe  Matters, 
nor  repeated  fonie  of  thofe  which 
I  did  try ,  until  I  had  fatisfied 
my  felf  ahoiit  all  their  Circum- 
fiances.  To  communicate  what 
I  have  tried,  and  leave  the  reft 
to  others  for  farther  Enquiry , 
is  all  ?ny  De/ign  in  puUijlnng 
thefe  Papers. 

In  a  Letter  written  to  ]\  Ir.  Lei  b- 
liitz  /;;  the  Tear  1676,  and  pnh- 
lified  hy  Dr  Wallis,  I inentiond 
a  Method  l?y  which  I  had  found 
fome  general  Theorems  about 
fquaring   Curvilinear  figures , 

or 


Advertifemcnt. 

or  comparing  them  with  the  Co- 
nic SeBions,  or  other  the  jimplefl 
Figures  with  which  they  may  he 
compared.    And  fome  Tears  ago 
I  lent  out  a  Manufcrtpt  contain-' 
ing  fiich  Theorems,  and  having 
fince  met  with  ^ome  Things  cop- 
ed out  of  it,  I  have  on  this  Occa- 
fion  made  it  piblick,  prefixi.g  to 
it  an  Introdutlion,  andfubjoin- 
tng  a  Scholium  concerning  that 
Method,  And  I  have  joined  with 
it  another  f mall  Tract  concerning 
the  Curvilinear  Figures  of  the 
Second  Kind,    which  was  alfo 
written  many  Tears  ago,   and 
made  known  to  fome  Friends , 
who  have  folicited  the  inaking  it 
pulTick. 


April  I.  T     ]\I 

1704.  -  ^'   ^^' 


Advertisement  IL 

A^  tins  Second  Edition  of 
thefe  Opticks  I  have  o- 
mitted  the  Mathematical 
TraBs  puMiJhed  at  the  End  of 
the  former  Edition ,  as  not  be- 
longing to  the  SnhjeEt.  And  at 
the  End  of  the  Third  Book  I 
have  added  fome  ^/ejtions.  And 
to  JJjew  that  I  do  not  take  Gra- 
vity for  an  ejfential  Property  of 
Bodies,  I  have  added  one  ^le- 
Jiion  concerning  its  Caufe,  chti- 
fing  to  propoje  it  hy  way  of  a 
:^ie/iion,  fecanfe  I  am  not  yet 
fatisfied  alout  it  for  want  of 
J^xperiments. 


I  N. 

July  16. 

1717. 


^  jg  IK  « JK -K  «»•« -K  «•!•  IS  IK -K «*■«?«)«•«•« -S -K  jK * 

w''  X  \        .         ■  •         •    •■ 


CORRIGENDA. 


PAGE  3.  line  17.  read  turned  back.,  p.  7..  1.  ult.  forF'^g.  5.  r.  Mucb. 
p.  4c.  l.io.  r.de  znd  fg.  p.  5-7.  I'i.r.-wliole.  p.9f.  l.zj.  r.PT{pP.VUl. 
p.m.  ].Z^.  Intervab,  andyou.  p.  i  li.  1.  Zf.  r/jat  »f  ^»j*r-  p.IJJ.l.li. 
r.  rt»(^  the  breadth.  p.  157.  1.  24..  Y.redhomogeneal  Light,  p.  I^o.  J.  $Z.  X.the  VeJJel 
appeared  of  a  red  Colour  like.  p.  i(Sy.  1.  4.  r.  they  entered,  p.  19(3.  1,22.  r.  ff'""  «/ 
thePnfin,  on.  p.204.  1.  27.  r.  ru'W  *«  Fx,  F  ,</.  p.  212.  l.T.  r.  {that  is,  in  the 
Cirtumfereme  on  one  fide.  p.  237.  1.  30.  r.  more  ftrongly  refleBing.  p.  238.  1.  3. 
T.  invented  by  Ono  GuCric,  ""d  improved  and  made  ufeful  by  Mr.  Boyie)  p.  242. 
Ll^.r. than.  p.  244.  1. 19.  r.^io.  '/  p.z66.  \. '^l-  r. Colours.  p.322.  1.31. 
X. continue  to  arife  and  be  propagated,  -when  p.  33^.  i.zi.  r.  to  the  Power,  p.334. 
1.  6.   r.  1^7.    p.  336.  1.  22.  r.  to  the  dijlance  of. 


^««*«rH!KrK««««-K^«JS««JKj^««»!««««»»jK3'«  «■«•}•« 


[I] 


THE 


FIRST  BOOK 


OF 


OPTICKS. 

PART  I. 


Y  Defign  in  this  Book  is  not  to  ex- 
plain the  Properties  of  Light  by  Hy- 
pothefes,  but  to  propofe  and  prove 
them  by  Reafon  and  Experiments:  In 
which  I  iliall  premile  the  foUou^ing 


order  to  wliich  1  liiall  pi 
Definitions  and  Axioms. 

e 


TfEFL 


[  ^  1 

DEFINITIONS. 
DEFIN.  I. 

V  i  T  the  Rays  of  Light  I  under  ft  and  Its  leafl 
\3  ^  aris;^  andthofi  as  well  Succejjive  in  the 
Jam^  lines  as  Contemporary  in  feveral  lines. 
For  it  li  manifeit  that  Light  confifls  of  parts 
both  bucceflive  and  Contemporary ;  becaufe  in 
'tnefame  place  you  may  flop  that  which  comes 
one  moment,  and  let  pafs  that  which  comes  pre- 
fentl)^  after ;  and  in  the  fame  time  you  may 
Hop  it  in  any  one  place,  and  let  it  pafs  in  any 
other.  For  that  part  of  Light  which  is  llopt 
cannot  be  the  fame  with  that  which  is  let  pais. 
The  leaft  Light  or  part  of  Light,which  may 
be  ftopt  alone  without  the  reft  of  the  Light,  or 
propogated  alone,  or  do  or  fuffer  any  thing  alone 
which  the  reft  of  the  Light  doth  not  or  fuffers 
not,  I  call  a  Ray  of  Light. 

DEFIN.  II. 

Refrangibility  of  the  Rays  of  Lights  is  their 
'Dijpojition  to  be  refra6ied  or  turned  out  of  their 
Way  in  puffing  out  of  one  tranjparent  Body  or 
Medium  into  another.  And  a  greater  or  lefs  Re- 
frangibility of  Rays,  is  their  'Dijpojition  to  be 
turned  more  or  lejs  out  of  their  Way  in  like  In- 
cidences on  the  fame  Medium.  Mathematicians 
ufually  confider  the  Rays  of  Light  to  be  Lines 
reachmg  from  the  luminous  Body  to  the  Body 
illuminated,  and  the  refraftion  of  thofe  Rays  to 
be  the  bending  or  breaking  of  thofe  lines  in 

their 


t3] 


their  pafling  out  of  one  Medium  into  another. 
And  thus  may  Rays  and  Refrac^tions  be  conli- 
dered,  if  Light  be  propagated  in  ail  inltant. 
But  by  an  Argument  taken  fi-om  the  /Equa- 
tions of  the  times  of  the  Ecfipfes  oi  Jupiter^ 
Satellites  it  feems  that  Light  is  propagated  in 
time,  fpending  in  its  paflage  from  the  Sun  to  us 
about  leven  Minutes  of  time :  And  therefore  1 
have  chofen  to  define  Rays  and  Refradions  in 
fuch  general  terms  as-may  agree  to  Light  in  both 
cafes. 

DEFINf.  III. 

Reflex ibiltty  of  Rays^  is  their  Difpofition  to  be 
rvflettedor  turned  back  into  the  fime  Medium  from 
any  other  Medium  upon  whofe  Surface  they  fall. 
And  Rays  are  more  or  lefs  reflexible^  'which  are 
returned  back  more  or  lefs  eafily.  As  if  Light 
pafs  out  of  Glafs  into  Air,  and  by  being  inchned 
more  and  more  to  the  common  Surface  of  the 
Glafs  and  Air,  begins  at  length  to  be  totally  re- 
flefted  by  that  Surface;  thofe  forts  of  Kays 
which  at  Hke  Incidences  are  reflected  moil  co- 
pioully,  or  by  inclining  the  Rays  begin  foonelt 
to  be  totally  refleded,  are  moll  reilexible. 

DEFIN.  IV. 

The  Angle  of  Incidence  is  that  Angle-,  which 
the  Line  defcribed  by  the  incident  Ray  contains 
'with  the  Perpendicular  to  the  refie^ling  or  re^ 
framing  Surface  at  the  Toint  of  Incidence  i 


B 1  DEFIN; 


Ul 

DEFIN.  V. 

The  Angle  of  RefeBion  or  RefraEimh  i^  ^he 
Angle  which  the  line  defcribed  hy  the  refleBed 
or  refradied  Ray*contatneth  with  the  Perpendi- 
cular to  the  refle5ling  or  refradting  Surface  at 
the  ^oint  of  Incidence. 

DEFIN.  VI. 

The  Sines  of  Incidence^  Reflexion^  and  Re fr a- 
Bion^  are  the  Sines  of  the  Angles  of  Incidence y 
Reflexion^  and  Refra^ion, 

DEFIN.  VII. 

The  Light  whofe  Rays  are  all  alike  Refrau" 
gible-i  I  call  Simple^  Homogeneal  and  Similiar ; 
and  that  whofe  Rays  are  fome  more  Refrangible 
than  others^  I  call  compound,  Heterogenal  and 
*T>iffimilar.  The  former  Light  I  call  Homoge- 
neal, not  becaufe  I  would  affirm  it  fo  in  all  re- 
fpefts ;  but  becaufe  the  Rays  which  agree  in  Re- 
frangibility,  agree  at  leafl  in  all  thofe  their  other 
Properties  which  I  confider  in  the  following 
Difcourfe. 

DEFIN.  VIII. 

The  Colours  of  Homogeneal  Lights,  I  call  Tri- 
mary,  Homogeneal  and  Simple-,  and  thofe  of 
Heterogeneal  Lights,  Heterogeneal  and  Com- 
ponnd.  For  thefe  are  always  compounded  of 
the  colours  of  Homogeneal  Lights ;  as  will  ap- 
pear in  the  following  Difcourfe- 

AXIOMS. 


[5] 


AXIO  MS. 
AX.  I. 

THE  Angles  of  Reflexion,  and  Refra^iion^ 
lie  in  one  and  the  fame  Tlane  ijuitb  the 
jingle  of  Incidence. 

AX.  n. 

The  Angle  of  Reflexion  is  equal  to  the  Angle 
of  Incidence. 

AX.  in. 

If  the  Re  framed  Ray  be  returnea  direBly 
back  to  the  ^oint  of  Incidence.^  it  floall  be  re- 
fratfed  into  the  Line  before  defcribedby  the  in- 
cident  Ray, 

AX.  IV. 

RefraBion  out  of  the  rarer  Medium  intothe 
denfer,  is  made  toijvards  the  "Perpendicular,  that 
is,  fo  that  the  Angle  of  Re f ration  be  lefs  than 
the  Angle  of  Incidence. 

AX.  V. 

The  Sine  of  Incidence  is  either  accurately  or 
very  nearly  in  a  given  Ratio  to  the  Sine  of  Re'- 
fraction. 

Whence  if  that  Proportion  be  known  in  any 
one  Inclination  of  the  incident  Ray,  'tis  known 
in  all  the  Inclinations,  and  thereby  the  Refra- 
^lon  in  all  cafes  of  Incidence  on  the  fame  refra^ 
ding  Body  may  be  determined.    Thus  if  the 

B  3  Refra- 


Rj2fra(^tion  be  made  out  of  Air  into  Water,  the 
Sine 'of  Incidence  of  the  red  Light  is  to  the  Sine 
pfitsRefradionas  4to  3.  If  out  of  Air  into  Glafs, 
the  Sines  are  as  17  to  11.  In  Light  of  other 
Colours  the  Sines  have  other  Proportions :  but 
the  difference  is  fo  little  that  it  need  feldom  be 
confidered. 

Snppofe therefore, that  R S  [mFig.i.^  repre- 
fents  the  Surfaceof  ftagnating  Water,  and  that  C 
is,  the  point  of  Incidence  in  which  any  Ray  coming 
in  the  Air  from  A  in  the  Line  AC  is  retiedted  or 
reffraded,  and  I  would  know  whither  this  Ray 
fliall  go  after  Reflexion  or  Refradion :  I  ereA 
Vipon  the  Surface  of  the  Water  from  the  point 
of  Incidence  the  Perpendicular  CP  and  produce 
it  downwards  to  Q,  and  conclude  by  the  firft 
Axiom.,  that  the  Ray  after  Reflexion  and  Re- 
fraction, ihall  be  found  fomewhere  in  the  Plane 
of  the  Angle  of  Incidence  A  CP  produced.  I  let 
fall  therefore  upon  the  Perpendicular  CP  the 
Sine  of  Incidence  AD;  and  if  the  refleded 
Ray  be  defired,  I  produce  AD  to  B  fo  that 
DB  be  equal  to  AD,  and  draw  CB.  For  this 
Line  C  B  iliall  be  the  reflefted  Ray ;  the  Angle 
pf  Reflexion  BCP  and  its  Sine  BD  being  e- 
qual  to  the  Angle  and  Sine  of  Incidence,  as  they 
ought  to  fcje  by  the  fecond  Axiom.  But  if  the 
refi'a6led  Ray  be  defired,  I  produce  AD  to  H, 
fo  that  DH  may  be  to  AD  as  the  Sine  of  Re- 
iraftion  to  the  Sine  of  Incidence,  that  is  (if  the 
Light  be  red)  as  3  to  4 ;  and  about  the  Center 
C  and  in  the  Plane  ACP  with  the  Radius C  A 
defcribing  a  Circle  ABE  I  draw  Parallel  to  the 
Perpendicular  C  P  Q,  the  Line  H  E  cutting  the 

Cireum- 


[7] 


Circumference  inE,  and  joyningCE,  this  Line 
CE  ihall  be  the  Line  of  the  refraded  Ray. 
For  if  EF  be  let  fall  perpendicularly  on  the 
Line  PQ,  this  Line  EF  ihall  be  the  Sine  of  Re- 
fradion  of  the  Ray  C  E,  the  Angle  of  Refradion 
being  E  C  Q ;  and  this  Sine  E  F  is  equal  to  D  H, 
and  confequently  in  Proportion  to  the  Sine  of 
Incidence  A  D  as  3  to  4. 

In  like  manner,  if  there  be  a  Prifm  of  Glafs 
(that  is  a  Glafs  bounded  with  two  Equal  and 
Parallel  Triangular  ends,  and  three  plain  and 
w^ell  poliilied  Sides,  which  meet  in  three  Parallel 
Lines  running  from  the  three  Angles  of  one 
end  to  the  three  Angles  of  the  other  end)  and 
if  theRefraftion  of  the  Light  in  palling  crofs  this 
Prifm  be  defired :  Let  AC  B  [in  Fig.  i.]  reprefent 
a  Plane  cutting  this  Prifm  tranfverlly  to  its  three 
Parallel  lines  or  edges  there  where  the  Light 
paffeth  through  it,  and  let  DE  be  the  Ray  inci- 
dent upon  the  firit  fide  of  the  Prifm  A  C  where 
the  Light  goes  into  the  Glafs ;  and  by  putting 
the  Proportion  of  the  Sine  of  Incidence  to  the 
Sine  of  Refradion  as  17  to  11  find  EF  the 
firll  refrafted  Ray.  Then  taking  this  Ray  for  the 
Incident  Ray  upon  the  fecond  fide  of  the  Glafs 
BC  where  the  Light  goes  out,  tind  the  next 
refraded  R^y  F  G  by  putting  the  Proportion 
of  the  Sine  of  Incidence  to  the  Sine  of  Re- 
fradion  as  11  to  17.  For  if  the  Sine  of  Inci- 
dence out  of  Air  into  Glafs  be  to  the  Sine  of 
Refradion  as  17  to  11,  the  Sine  of  Incidence  out 
of  Glafs  into  Air  muft  on  the  contrary  be  to  the 
Sine  of  Refradion  as  11  to  17,  by  the  third 
Axiom. 

B  4  P^g'^^ 


[8] 


Much  after  the  fame  manner,  if  ACBD  [in 
Fig.  3.]  reprefent  a  Glafs  fpherically  Convex  on 
both  fides  (ufually  called  a  Lens^  fuch  as  is  a  Birrn- 
ing-glafs,  or  Spedacle-giafs,  or  an  Objeft-glafs  of 
a  Telefcope)  and  it  be  required  to  know  how 
Light  falling  upon  it  from  any  lucid  point  Q 
iliall  be  relra(^ted,  let  QM  reprefent  a  Ray 
falling  upon  any  point  M  of  its  firft  fpherical 
Surface  A  C  B,  and  by  ereft ing  a  Perpendicular 
to  the  Glafs  at  the  point  M,  find  the  firft  re- 
fra6fed  Ray  MN  by  the  Proportion  of  the 
Sines  17  to  11.  Let  that  Ray  in  going  out.  of 
the  Glafs  be  incident  upon  N,  and  then  find 
the  fecond  refraded  Ray  N  q  by  the  Proporti- 
on of  the  Sines  11  to  17,  And  after  the  fame 
inanner  may  the  Refraction  be  found  when  the 
Lens  is  Convex  on  one  fide  and  Plane  or  Con- 
cave on  the  other,  or  Concave  on  both  fides. 

A  X.   VI 

Hofnogeneal  Rays  <whtch  flow  from  federal 
joints  of  any  Obje^^  and  fall pcr.pendktilarly  or 
almo ft  perpendicularly  on  any  refleir'tng  or  refraEi- 
ing  Plane  or  fphertcal  Surface^  jloall  afterwards 
diverge  from  fo  many  other  Point  s^  or  be  Parallel 
tofo  many  other  Lines,  or  converge  tofo  many  other 
Points  J  either  accurately  or  without  any  fenfible 
Error.  And  the  fame  thing  will  happen,  if  the 
Rays  be  refieBed  or  refra6ledfucce£ively  by  twot 
Qr  three  or  mere  Plane  or  Spherical  Surfaces. 

The  Point  from  which  Rays  diverge  or  to 
which  they  converge  may  be  called  their  Focm. 
And  the  Focus  of  the  incident  Rays  being  gi- 
ven^ th^t  of  the  rf  fleded  or  refraded  ones  may 
.  be 


[9] 


be  found  by  finding  the  Refraftion  of  any  two 
Rays,  as  above ;  or  more  readily  thus. 

Caf  I.  Let  A  C  B  [in  Fig.  4.]  be  a  reflecting  or . 
refrading  Plane,  and  Q  the  Focus  of  the  incident 
Rays,  and  Q  ^  C  a  perpendicular  to  that  Plane. 
And  if  this  perpendicular  be  produced  to  ^, 
fo  that  ^  C  be  equal  to  QC,  the  point  q,  Ihall 
be  the  Yocus  of  the  refleded  Rays.  Or  if  ^  C 
be  taken  on  the  fame  fide  of  the  Plane  with 
Q  C  and  in  Proportion  to  Q  C  as  the  Sine  of 
Incidence  to  the  Sine  of  Refradion,  the  point 
^  ihall  be  the  Focus  of  the  refraded  Rays. 

Cafz.  Let  A  C  B  [in  Fig.  5.]  be  the  refleding 
Surface  of  any  Sphere  whofe  Center  is  E.  .Bi- 
{e&i  any  Radius  thereof  (fuppofe  EC)  in  T, 
and  if  in  that  Radius  on  the  fame  lide  the 
point  T  you  take  the  Points  Q  and  ^,  fo  that 
T  Q,  TE,  and  T  a,  be  continual  Proportionals, 
^nd  the  point  Q  be  the  Focus  of  the  incident 
Rays,  the  point  ^  Ihall  be  the  Focus  of  the  re- 
flec^ted  ones. 

Ca/:  3.  Let  A  C  B  [in  Fig.  6.]  be  the  refrading 
Surface  of  any  Sphere  wnofe  Center  is  E.  In 
any  Radius  thereof  EC  produced  both  ways 
take  E  T  and  C  f  equal  to  one  another  and  fe- 
verally  in  fuch  Proportion  to  that  Radius  as 
the  leffer  of  the  Sines  of  Incidence  and  Re- 
fradion  hath  to  the  difference  of  thofe  Sines. 
And  then  if  in  the  fame  Line  you  find  any  two 
Points  Q  and  q,  fo  that  TQ  be  to  ET  as  Ef 
to  f  ^,  taking  /^  ^  the  contrary  way  from  ^  which 
TQ  lieth  from  T,  and  if  the  Point  Q  be  the 
Focus  of  any  incident  Rays,  the  Point  ^  Ihall  be 
the  Focus  of  the  refraded  ones. 

And 


[lo] 


And  by  the  fame  means  the  Focus  of  the 
Rays  after  two  or  more  Reflexions  or  Refrac- 
tions may  be  found. 

Caf.  4.  Let  AC  B  D  [in  Fig,  7.]  be  any  refraft- 
ing  Lens,  fpherically  Convex  or  Concave  or 
Plane  on  either  fide,  and  let  C  D  be  its  Axis 
(that  is  the  Line  which  cuts  both  its  Surfaces 
perpendicularly,  and  palTes  through  the  Centers 
of  the  Spheres,)  and  in  this  Axis  produced  let 
F  and  /be  the  Foci  of  the  refracted  Rays  found  as 
above,  when  the  incident  Rays  on  both  fides  the 
Lens  are  Parallel  to  the  fame  Axis ;  and  upon  the 
Diameter  F/bifeded  in  E,  defcribe  a  Circle. 
Suppofe  now  that  any  Point  Q  be  the  Focus  of 
any  incident  Rays.    Draw  QE  cutting  the  faid 
Circle  in  T  and  ^,  and  therein  take  ^  ^  in  fuch 
Proportion  to  /^  E  as  ^  E  or  TE  hath  to  TO. 
Let  t  q  lye  the  contrary  way  from  t  which  T  Q 
doth  from  T,  and  q  fliall  be  the  Focus  of  the 
refra(^ted  Rays  without  any  fenfible  Error,  pro- 
vided the  Point  Q  be  not  fo  remote  from  the 
Axis,  nor  the  Lens  fo  broad  as  to  make  any  of 
the  Rays  fall  too  oblicjuely  on  the  refraaing 
Surraces. 

And  by  the  like  Operations  may  the  refleft- 
ing  or  refrafting  Surfaces  be  found  when  the 
two  Foci  are  given,  and  thereby  a  Lens  be  form- 
ed, which  fhall  make  the  Rays  flow  towards  or 
from  what  place  you  pleafe. 

So  then  the  meaning  of  this  Axiom  is,  that 
if  Rays  fall  upon  any  Plane  or  Spherical  Surface 
or  Lens,  and  before  their  Incidence  flow  from 
or  towards  any  Point  Q,  they  fhall  after  Re- 
flexion or  Refradion  flow  from  or  tow^ards  the 

Point 


["] 

Point  q  found  by  the  foregoing  Rules.  And  if 
the  incident  Rays  fiow  from  or  towards  feveral 
points  Q,  the  refleded  or  refraded  Rays  fliall 
flow  from  or  towards  fo  many  other  Points  q 
found  by  the  fame  Rules.  Whether  the  rcfleft- 
ed  and  refracted  Rays  flow  from  or  towards  the 
Point  q  is  eafily  known  by  the  fituation  of  that 
Point.  For  if  that  Point  be  on  the  fame  fide 
of  the  reflecting  or  refrading  Surface  or  Lens 
with  the  Point  Q,  and  the  incident  Rays  flow 
from  the  Point  Q,  the  refleded  flow  towards 
the  Point  q  and  the  refrafted  from  it ;  and  if  the 
incident  Rays  flow  towards  Q,  the  refleded 
flow  from  ^,  and  the  refraded  towards  it.  And 
the  contrary  happens  when  q  is  on  the  other 
fide  of  that  Surface. 

AX.    VII. 

Wherever  the  Rays  "juhich  come  from  all  the 
'Points  of  any  Object  meet-  again  in  fo  many 
Joints  after  they  have  been  made  to  converge 
by  Reflexion  or  RefraBion^  there  they  i2;ill  make 
a  TiBtire  of  the  Obje6f  ufon  any  white  Body 
on  which  they  fall. 

So  if  P  R  [in  Fig.  3 .]  reprefent  any  Objeft  with- 
out Doors,  and  A  B  be  a  Lens  placed  at  a  hole 
in  the  Window-ihut  of  a  dark  Chamber,  where- 
by the  Rays  that  come  from  any  Point  Q  of 
that  Objedf  are  made  to  converge  and  meet  a- 
gain  in  the  Point  q\  and  if  a  Sheet  of  white  Pa- 
per be  held  at  q  for  the  Light  there  to  fall  up- 
on it :  the  Picture  of  that  Objed:  PR  will  ap- 
pear upon  the  Paper  in  its  proper  Ihape  and  Co- 
lours 


[12] 


lours.  For  as  the  Light  which  comes  from  the 
Point  Qgoes  to  the  Point  q^  fo  the  Light  which 
comes  from  other  Points  P  and  R  of  the  Objeft, 
will  go  to  fo  many  other  correfpondent  Points 
/  and  r  (as  is  manifeit  by  the  fixth  Axiom ;)  fo 
that  every  Point  of  the  Objeft  fliall  illuminate  a 
correfpondent  Point  of  the  Pidure,  and  there- 
by make  a  Pidure  like  the  Objed  in  Shape  and 
Colour,  this  only  excepted  that  the  Pidure 
lliall  be  inverted .  And  this  is  the  reafon  of  that 
vulgar  Experiment  of  caftingthe  Species  of  Ol> 
jeds  from  abroad  upon  a  Wall  or  Sheet  of  white 
Paper  in  a  dark  Room. 

In  Uke  manner,  when  a  Man  views  any  Objed 
PQR,  [ini^i^,8.]  the  Light  which  comes  from 
the  feveral  Points  of  the  Objed  is  fo  refracted 
by  the  tranfparent  skins  and  humours  of  the 
Eye,  (that  is  by  the  outward  coat  EFG  called 
the  Tunica  Cornea^  and  by  the  cryftalline  hu- 
mour A?j  which  is  beyond  the  Pupil  m  k)  as  to 
converge  and  meet  again  at  fo  many  Points  in 
the  bottom  of  the  Eye,  and  there  to  paint  the 
Pidurc  of  the  Objeft  upon  that  skin  (called  the 
Tunica  Retina)  with  which  the  bottom  of  the 
Eye  is  covered,  For  Anatomilts  when  they  have 
taken  off  from  the  bottom  of  the  Eye  thatout- 
w^ard  and  moll  thick' Coat  called  the  2)//r^  Ma- 
ter^ can  then  fee  through  the  thinner  Coats, 
the  Pictures  of  Objeds  lively  painted  there- 
on. And  thefe  Pidures  propagated  by  Mo- 
tion along  the  Fibres  of  the  Optick  Nerves  in- 
to the  Brain,  arc  the  caufe  of  Vifion.  For  ac- 
cordingly as  thefe  Pidures  are  perfed  or  im^ 
perfed,  the  Objed  is  feen  perfedly  or  imperfecl- 


[13] 


ly.    If  the  Eye  be  tinged  with  any  colour  (as  in 
the  Difeafe  of  the  JaundifeJ  fo  as  to  tinge  the 
Pidlures  in  the  bottom  of  the  Eye  with  that 
Colour,  then  all  Objects  appear  tinged  with  the 
fame  Colour.    If  the  humours  of  the  Eye  by 
old  Age  decay,  fo  as  by  flirinking  to  make  the 
Cornea  and  Coat  of  the  Cryftalline  htimoitr  grow 
flatter  than  before,   the  Light  will  not  be  re- 
fraded  enough,  and  fornvant  of  a  fuiiicient  Re- 
fradion  will  not  converge  to  the  bottom  of  the 
Eye  but  to  fome  place  beyond  it,  and  by  con- 
fequencc  paint  in  the  bottom  of  the  Eye  a  con- 
fuled  Pidure,  and  according  to  the  indiitind- 
nefs  of  this  Pidure  the  Objed  will  appear  con- 
fufcd.    This  is  the  reafon  of  the  decay  of  fight 
in  old  Men,  and  fhews  why  their  Sight  is  mend- 
ed by  Spedacles.    For  thole  Convex-glalFes  fup- 
ply  the  defed  of  plumpnefs  in  the  Eye,  and  by 
encreafmg  the  Refradion  make  the  Rays  con- 
verge fooner  fo  as  to  convene  diilindly  at  the 
bottom  of  the  Eye  if  the  Glafs  have  a  due  de- 
gree of  convexity.     And  the  contrary  happens 
in  fliort-fighted  Men  whofe  Eyes  are  too  plump. 
For  the  Refradion  being  now  too  great,  the 
Rays  converge  and  convene  in  the  Eyes  before 
they  come  at  the  bottom ;   and  therefore  the 
Pidure  made  in  the  bottom  and  the  Vifion 
caufed  thereby  will  not  be  diflind,  unlefs  the 
Objed  be  brought  fo  near  the  Eye  as  that  the 
place  where  the  converging  Rays  convene  may 
be  removed  to  the  bottom,  or  that  the  plump- 
nefs of  the  Eye  be  taken  off  and  the  Refradi- 
on s  diminifhed  by  a  Concave-glafs  of  a  due  de- 
gree of  Concavity,  or  laftly  that  by  Age  the 

I  Eye 


[14] 

Eye  gro'<^'  flatter  till  it  come  to  a  due  Figure : 
For  iliort-fighted  Men  fee  remote  Objeds  befl 
in  Old  Age,  and  therefore  they  are  accounted 
to  have  the  moft  laiting  Eyes. 

A  X.  VIII. 

An  Obje5f  feen  by  Reflexion  or  RefraBton^ 
nf fears  in  that  flace  from  whence  the  Rays  af- 
ter their  laft  Reflexion  or  RefraSiion  diverge  in 
falling  on  the  SfeBator^s  Eye. 

If  the  Objeft  A  [in  Fig,  9.]  be  feen  by  Reflexion 
of  a  Looking-glafs  m  n,  it  fhall  appear,  not  in  its 
proper  place  A,  but  behind  the  Glafs  at  a,  from 
whence  anyRays  AB,  AC,  AD,  which  flow  from 
one  and  the  fame  Point  of  the  Objed,  do  after 
their  Reflexion  made  in  the  Points  B,  C,  D,  di- 
verge in  going  from  the  Glafs  to  E,  F,  G, 
where  they  are  incident  on  the  Speftator'sEyes. 
For  thefe  Rays  do  make  the  fame  Pi6lure  in  the 
bottom  of  the  Eyes  as  if  they  had  come  from 
the  Objeft  really  placed  at  a  without  the  inter- 
pofition  of  the  Looking-glafs ;  and  all  Villon  is 
made  according  to  the  place  and  fliape  of  that 
Pidure. 

In  like  manner  the  Objeft  D  [in  Fig.  2.]  feen 
through  a  Prifm,  appears  not  in  its  proper  place 
D,  but  is  thence  tranflated  to  fome  other  place 
d  fituated  in  the  lait  refraded  Ray  F  G  drawn 
backward  from  F  to  ^. 

And  fo  the  Objeft  Q  [in  Fig.  10.]  feen  through 
the  Lens  AB,  appears  at  the  place  q  from  whence 
the  Rays  diverge  in  pafliingfrom  the  Lens  to  the 
Eye.    Now  it  is  to  be  noted>  that  the  Image  of 

the 


[»5] 

the  Objeft  at  q  is  fo  much  bigger  or  lefler  than 
the  Objed:  it  felf  at  Q,  as  the  diftance  of  the 
Image  at  q  from  the  Lens  AB  is  bigger  or  lefs 
than  the  dillance  of  the  Objed  at  Q  from  the 
fame  Lens.  And  if  the  Objed  be  feen  through 
two  or  more  fuch  Convex  or  Concave-glilies, 
every  Glafs  Ihall  make  a  new  Image,  and  the 
Objed  fliall  appear  in  the  place  and  of  the  big- 
nefs  of  the  lail  Image.  Which  confideration  un- 
folds the  Theory  of  Microfcopes  and  Telefcopes. 
For  that  Theory  confilh  in  almoft  nothing  elfe 
than  the  defcribing  fuch  GlafTes  as  fliall  make 
the  laft  Image  of  any  Objeft  as  diilinft  and 
large  and  luminous  as  it  can  conveniently  be 
made. 

I  have  now  given  in  Axioms  and  their  Ex- 
plications the  fumm  of  what  hath  hitherto  been 
treated  of  in  Opticks.  P'or  what  hath  been  ge- 
nerally agreed  on  I  content  my  felf  to  alTume 
under  the  notion  of  Principles,  in  order  to  what 
I  have  farther  to  write.  And  this  may  fuffice 
for  an  Introdudion  to  Readers  of  quick  Wit 
and  good  Underflanding  not  yet  verled  in  Op- 
ticks  :  Although  thofe  who  are  already  acquain- 
ted with  this  Science,  and  have  handled  GlaiTes, 
will  more  readily  apprehend  what  folio weth. 


TROTO^ 


[•«] 


L 


PROPOSITIONS. 

TROT.l    The  OR.  I. 

IG  HTS  which  differ  in  Colour^  differ  alfi 
in  T>egrees  of  Refrangihility, 

The  Proof  by  Experiments. 


Exfer.  I.  I  took  a  black  oblong  fliff  Paper 
terminated  by  Parallel  Sides,  and  with  a  Per- 
pendicular right  Line  drawn  crofs  from  one 
Side  to  the  other,  dillinguiflied  it  into  two  e- 
quai  Parts.    One  of  thefe  parts  I  painted  with 
a  red  colour  and  the  other  with  a  blew.    The 
Paper  was  very  black,  and  the  Colours  intenfe 
and  thickly  laid   on,  that  the  Phaenomenon 
might  be  more  confpicuous.    This  Paper  I 
view'd  through  a  Prifm  of  folid  Glafs,  whofe 
two  Sides  through  which  the  Light  palTed  to  the 
Eye  were  plane  and  well  polifhed ,  and  contained 
an  Angle  of  about  fixty  degrees :  which  Angle 
I  call  the  refrafting  Angle  of  the  Prifm.    And 
whiKlI  viewed  it,  I  held  it  and  the  Prifm  before 
a  Window  infuch  manner  that  the  Sides  of  the 
Paper  were  parallel  to  the  Prifm,  and  both  thofe 
Sides  and  the  Prifm  were  parallel  to  the  Horizon, 
and  the  crofs  Line  was  alfo  parallel  to  it ;  and 
that  the  Light  which  fell  from  the  Window  upon 
the  Paper  made  an  Angle  with  the  Paper,  equal 
to  that  Angle  which  was  made  with  the  fame 

Papef 


[17] 


Paper  by  the  Light  refle6ted  from  it  to  the  Eye. 
Beyond  thePriim  was  the  Wall  of  the  Chamber* 
under  the  Window  covered  over  with  black 
Cloth,  and  the  Cloth  was  involved  in  Darknei's 
that  no  Light  might  be  refleded  from  thence, 
which  in  palling  by  the  edges  of  the  Paper  to 
the  Eye,  might  mingle  it  felf  with  the  Light  of 
the  Paper,  and  obfcure  the  Phaenomenon  there- 
of Thefe  things  being  thus  ordered,  I  found 
that  if  the-  refradiing  Angle  of  the  Prifm  be 
turned  upwards,  fo  that  the  Paper  may  feem  to 
be  lifted  upwards  by  the  Refraction,  its  blue 
half  will  be  lifted  higher  by.  the  Refraclion  than 
its  red  half  But  if  the  refrading  Angle  of  the 
Prifm  be  turned  downward,  fo  that  the  Paper 
may  feem  to  be  carried  lower  by  the  Re. ra- 
tion, its  blue  half,  will  be  carried  fomething 
lower  thereby -than  it^s  red  half  W  herefore  in 
both  cafe?  the  Light  which  comes  from  the 
blue  half  of  the  Paper  through  the  Prii'm  to 
the  Eye,  does  in  like  Circumltances  futier  a 
greater  Refradion  than  the  Light  which  comes 
from  the  red  half,  and  by  confcquence  is  more 
refrangible. 

Illtijtration.  In  the  eleventh  Figure,  MN 
reprefents^ the  Window,  and  DE  the  Paper 
terminate,d  with  parallel  Sides  DJ  and  HE, 
and  by  the  tranfverfe  Line  FG  dilbnguifhed 
into  ;two  halfs,  .fhe  one  D  G  of  an  intenfely 
blue  Colour,  the  other  FE  of  an  intenfely 
red.  And  B  A  C^  ^^  reprefents  the  Prifm 
whofe  refrafting  Planes  A  B  ^  ^  and  A  C  ^  ^ 
rneet  in  the  edge  of  the  refrading  Angle  A  a. 
This  edge  A.a  being  upward,  is  parallel  both  to 

C  thof 


I  .8] 


the  Horizon  and  to  the  parallel  edges  of  the 
Paper  DJ  and  HE,  and  the  tranfverfe  Line  FG 
is  perpendicular  to  the  Plane  of  the  Window. 
And  de  reprefents  the  Image  of  the  Paper  feen 
by  Refradion  upwards  in  fuch  manner  that  the 
blue  half  D  G  is  carried  higher  to  dg  than  the 
red  half  FE  is  to/^,  and  therefore  fuffers  a 
greater  Refradion.  If  the  edge  of  the  refraft- 
ing  Angle  be  turned  downward,  the  Image  of 
the  Paper  will  be  refrafted  downward,  fuppofe 
to  <5^€,  and  the  blue  half  will  be  refraded  lower 
to  ly  than  the  red  half  is  to  <p6. 

Exper.  2.  About  the  aforefaid  Paper,  whofe 
two  halfs  were  painted  over  with  red  and  blue, 
and  which  was  IHfFlike  thinPaftboard,  I  lapped 
feveral  times  a  flender  thred  of  very  black  Silk, 
in  fuch  manner  that  the  feveral  parts  of  the 
thred  might  appear  upon  the  Colours  like  fo 
many  black  Lines  drawn  over  them,  or  like 
long  and  (lender  dark  Shadows  call  upon  them. 
I  might  have  drawn  black  Lines  with  a  Pen, 
but  the  threds  were  fmaller  and  better  defined. 
This  Paper  thus  coloured  and  Hned  I  fet  againft 
a  Wall  perpendicularly  to  the  Horizon,  fo  that 
one  of  the  Colours  might  Hand  to  the  right 
hand,  and  the  other  to  the  left.  Clofe  before 
the  Paper  at  the  confine  of  the  Colours  below 
I  placed  a  Candle  to  illuminate  the  Paper  llrong- 
ly :  For  the  Experiment  was  tried  in  the  Night. 
The  flame  of  the  Candle  reached  up  to  the 
lower  ^dig^  of  the  Paper,  or  a  very  little  higher. 
Then  at  the  diftance  of  fix  Feet  and  one  or  two 
Inches  from  the  Paper  upon  the  Floor  I  erefted 
a  glafs  Lens  four  Inches  and  a  quarter  broad, 

which 


[19] 


whieh  might  colleft  the  Rays  coming  from  the 
fevcral  Points  of  the  Paper,  and  make  them  con- 
verge towards  fo  many  other  Points  at  the  fame 
diflance  of  fix  Feet  and  one  or  two  hiches  on 
the  other  fide  of  the  Lens,  and  fo  form  the  I- 
mage  of  the  coloured  Paper  upon  a  white  Pa- 

Eer  placed  there,  after  the  fame  manner  that  a 
iCns  at  a  hole  in  a  Window  calls  the  Images  of 
Objeds  abroad  upon  a  Sheet  of  white  Paper  in 
a  dark  Room.  The  aforefiiid  white  Paper,  e- 
refted  perpendicular  to  the  Horizon  and  to  the 
Rays  which  fell  upon  it  from  the  Lens,  I  moved 
fometimes  towards  the  Lens,  fometimes  from 
it,  to  find  the  places  where  the  Images  of  the 
blue  and  red  parts  of  the  coloured  Paper  appear- 
ed moll:  diftinft.  Thofe  places  I  eafilyknew  by 
the  Images  of  the  black  Lines  which  I  had  made 
by  winding  the  Silk  about  the  Paper.  For  the 
Images. of  thole  fine  arid  flender  Lines  (which 
by  rcafon  of  their  blacknefs  were  like  Shadows 
on  the  Colours)  were  confufed  and  fcarce  vili- 
ble,  unlels  when  the  Colours  on  either  fide  of 
each  Line  were  terminated  moll  dillinctly.  No- 
ting therefore,  as  diligently  as  I  could,  the 
places  where  the  Images  of  the  red  and  blue 
halfs  of  the  coloured  Paper  appeared  moll  di- 
llinft,  I  found  that  where  the  red  half  of  the 
Paper  appeared  dillind,  the  blue  half  appeared 
confufed ,  fo  that  the  black  Lines  drawn  upon 
it  could  fcarce  be  feen  ;  and  on  the  contrary, 
where  the  blue  half  appeared  mofl  dillindl,  the 
red  half  appeared  confufed ,  fo  that  the  black 
Lines  upon  it  were  fcarce  vifible.  And  between 
the  two  places  where  thefe  Images  appeared 

C  -L  diflina 


[20] 


diftin(f^  there  was  the  diftance  of  an  Inch  and  ^ 
half:  the  diftance  of  the  white  Paper  from  the 
Lens,  when  the  Image  of  the  red  half  of  the 
coloured  Paper  appeared  moft  diilincft,  being 
greater  by  an  Inch  and  an  half  than  the  diflance 
of  the  fame  white  Paper  from  the  Lens  when 
the  Image  of  the  blue  half  appeared  moft  di- 
flinft.  in  like  Incidences  therefore  of  the  blue 
and  red  upon  the  Lens,  the  blue  was  refrafted 
more  by  the  Lens  than  the  red,  fo  as  to  con- 
verge fooner  by  an  Inch  and  an  half,  and  there- 
fore is  more  refrangible. 

Illuftration.  In  the  twelfth  Figure,.  DE  fig- 
nifies  the  coloured  Paper,  DG  theblue  half, 
FE  the  red  half,  MN  the  Lens,  H  J  the  white 
Paper  in  that  place  'where  the  red  half  with  its 
black  Lines  appeared  diftind,  and  hi  the  fame 
Paper  in  that  place  where  the  blue  half  appear- 
ed diftinft.  The  place  h  t  was  nearer  to  the 
Lens  MN  than  the  place  HJ  by  an  Inch  and 
an  half, 

Scholhim.  The  fame  things  fucceed  notwith- 
ftanding  that  fome  of  the  Circumftances  be  va- 
ried :  as  in  the  firft  Experiment  when  the  Prifm 
and  Paper  are  any  ways  inclined  to  the  Hori- 
zon, and  in  both  when  coloured  Lines  are 
drawn  upon  very  black  Paper.  But  in  the  De- 
fcription  of  thefe  Experiments,  I  have  fet  down 
fuch  Circumftances  by  which  either  the  Phse- 
nomenon  might  be  rendred  more  confpicuous, 
or  a  Novice  might  more  eafily  try  them,  or  by 
which  I  did  try  them  only.  The  fame  thing  I 
have  often  done  in  the  following  Experiments : 
Concerning  all  which  this  one  Admonition  may 

fuffice- 


[ 


21 


fuffice.    Now  from  thefe  Experiments  it  fol- 
lows not  that  all  the  Light  of  the  blue  is  more 
Refrangible  than  all  the  Light  of  the  red  :  For 
both  Lights  are  mixed  of  Rays  differently  Re- 
frangible, fo  that  in  the  red  there  are  fome  Rays 
not  lefs  Refrangible  than  thofe  of  the  blue,  and 
in  the  blue  there  are  fome  Rays  not  more  Re- 
frangible than  thofe  of  the  red  :  But  thefe  Rays 
in  proportion  to  the  whole  Light  are  but  few, 
and  ferve  to  diminifli  the  Event  of  the.Experi- 
ment,  but  are  not  able  to  deftroy  it.     For  if 
the  red  and  blue  Colours  were  more  dilute  and 
weak,  the  diflance  of  the  Images  would  be  iefs 
than  an  Inch  and  an  half;  and  if  they  were  more 
intenfe  and  full,  that  diftancc  would  be  greater, 
as  will  appear  hereafter.    Thefe  Experiments 
may  fuffice  for  the  Colours  of  Natural  Bodies. 
For  in  the  Colours  made  by  the  Refradion  of 
Prifms  this  Proportion  will  appear  by  the  Ex- 
periments which  are  now  to  follow  in  the  next 
Propofition. 

TROT.   n.     Theor.  II. 

The  Light  of  the  Sun  conjifts  of  Rays  differently 
Refrangible. 

The  Proof  by  Experiments. 

Exper.  a.TN  a  very  dark  Chamber  at  around 
\^  hole  about  one  third  part  of  an 
Inch  broad  made  in  the  Shut  of  a  Window  I 
placed  a  Glafs  Prifm,  whereby  the  beam  of  the 
Sun's  Light  which  came  in  at  that  hole  might 

C  3  be 


[  22  ] 


be  refracted  upwards  toward  the  oppofite  Wall 
of  the  Chamber,  and  there  form  a  colour'd  I- 
mage  of  the  Sun.  The  Axis  of  the  Prifm  (that 
is  the  Line  paffing  through  the  middle  of  the 
Prifm  from  one  end  of  it  to  the  other  end  pa- 
rallel to  the  edge  of  the  Refrading  Angle)  was 
in  this  and  the  following  Experiments  perpen- 
dicular to  the  incident  Rays.  About  this  Axis 
I  turned  the  Prifm  flowly,  and  faw  the  refra- 
&d  Light  on  the  Wall  or  coloured  Image  of 
the  Sun  firll  to  defcend,  and  then  to  afcend. 
Between  the  Defcent  and  Afcent  when  the  I- 
mage  feemed  Stationary,  I  ftopp'd  the  Prifm, 
and  fix'd  it  in  that  pofturc,  that  it  fliould  be 
moved  no  more.  For  in  that  pofture  the  Re- 
fractions of  the  Light  at  the  two  fides  of  the 
refrac^ting  Angle,  that  is  at  the  entrance  of  the 
Rays  into  the  Prifm,  and  at  their  going  out  of 
it,  were  equal  to  one  another.  So  alfo  in  other 
Experiments,  as  often  as  I  would  have  the  Re- 
fraftions  on  both  fides  the  Prifm  to  be  equal  to 
one  another,  I  noted  the  place  where  the  Image 
of  the  Sun  formed  by  the  refrafted  Light  flood 
Hill  between  its  two  contrary  Motions,  in  the 
common  Period  of  its  progrefs  and  regrefs ;  and 
when  the  Image  fell  upon  that  place,  I  made 
fail  the  Prifm.  And  in  this  Pofture,  as  the  mofl 
convenient,  it  is  to  be  underftood  that  all  the 
Prifms  are  placed  in  the  following  Esjg^riments, 
unlefs  where  fome  other  pofture  is  defcribed. 
The  Prifm  therefore  being  placed  in  this  po- 
fture, I  let  the  refraded  Light  fall  perpendicu- 
larly upon  a  Sheet  of  white  Paper  at  the  oppo- 
fite Wall  of  the  Chamber,  and  obferved  the  Fi- 
gure 


[23] 

gure  and  Dimenfions  of  the  Solar  Image  form- 
ed  on  the  Paper  by  that  Light.    This  Image 
was  Oblong  and  not  Oval,  but  terminated  with 
two  Redilinear  and  Parallel  Sides,  and  two  Se- 
micircular Ends.     On  its  Sides  it  was  bounded 
pretty  diitindly,  but  on  its  Ends  very  confufed- 
ly  and  indiilindly,   the  Light  there  decaying 
and  vanifhing  by  degrees.    The  breadth  of  this 
Image  anfwered  to  the  Sun's  Diameter,  and  was 
about  two  Inches  and  the  eighth  part  of  an 
Inch,  including  the  Penumbra.    For  the  Image 
was  eighteen  Feet  and  an  half  diftant  from  the 
Prifm,  and  at  this  diftance  that  breadth  if  di- 
minifhed  by  the  Diameter  of  the  hole  in  the 
W' indow-ihut,  that  is  by  a  quarter  of  an  Inch, 
fubtended  an  Angle  at  the  Prifm  of  about  half 
a  Degree,  which  is  the  Sun's  apparent  Diame- 
ter.   But  the  length  of  the  Image  was  about  ten 
Inches  and  a  quarter,  and  the  length  of  the  Re- 
6liUnear  Sides  about  eight  Inches ;  and  the  re- 
frading  Angle  of  the  Prifm  whereby  fo  great  a 
length  was  made,  was  64  degrees.     W  ith  a  lefs 
Angle  the  length  of  the  Image  was  lefs,  the 
breadth  remaining  the  fame.    If  the  Prifm  was 
turned  about  its  Axis  that  way  which  made  the 
Rays  emerge  more  obliquely  out  of  the  fecond 
refrafting  Surface  of  the  Prifm,  the  Image  foon 
became  an  Inch  or  two  longer,  or  more ;  and 
if  the  Pi;ifm  was  turned  about  the  contrary 
way,  fo  as  to  make  the  Rays  fall  more  oblique- 
ly on  the  fii'it  refrading  Surface,  the  Image  loon 
became  an  Inch  or  two  fliorter.     And  there- 
fore in  trying  this  Experiment,  I  was  as  curi- 
ous as  I  could  be  in  placing  the  Prifm  by  the 

C  4  above- 


[24] 


above-mentioned  Rule  exac^lly  in  fuch  a  pollure 
that  the  Refradions  of  the  Rays  at  their  emer- 
gence out  of  the  Prifm  might  be  equal  to  that 
at  their  incidence  on  it.  This  Prifm  had  fome 
Veins  running  along  within  the  Glafs  from  one 
end  to  the  other,  which  fcattered  fome  of  the 
Sun's  Light  irregularly,  but  had  no  fet^fible  ef- 
fed  in  encreafing  the  length  of  the  coloured 
Spedrum.  For  I  tried  the  fame  Experiment 
with  other  Prifms  with  the  fame  Succefs.  And 
particularly  with  a  Prifm  which  feemed  free 
from  fuch  Veins,  and  whofe  refracting  Angle 
was  6i4  Degrees,  I  found  the  length  of  the 
Image  94  or  10  Inches  at  the  dillance  of  184 
Feet  from  the  Prifm,  the  breadth  of  the  hole 
in  the  Window-iliut  being  ^  of  an  Inchj  as  be- 
fore. And  becaufe  it  is  caiie  to  commit  a  mi- 
flake  in  placing  the  Prifm  in  its  due  poliure,  I 
repeated  the  Experiment  four  or  hve  times, 
and  always  found  the  length  of  the  Image  that 
which  is  fet  down  above.  With  another  Priim 
of  clearer  Glafs  and  better  Poliih,  which  feem- 
ed free  from  Veins,  and  whofe  refrading  Angle 
was  63V  Degrees,  the  length  of  this  Image  at 
the  fame  diltance  of  184  Feet  was  alfo  about  10 
Inches,  or  104.  Beyond  thefe  Meafures  for  a- 
bout  4  or  4  of  an  Inch  at  either  end  of  the  Spe- 
ctrum the  Light  of  the  Clouds  feemed  to  be  a 
little  tinged  with  red  and  violet,  but  fo  very 
faintly,  that  I  fufpedted  that  tinClure  might  ei- 
ther wholly  or  in  great  meafure  arife  from  fome 
Rays  of  the  Speflrum  fcattered  irregularly  by 
fome  inequaUties  in  the  Subflance  and  Polifh  of 
f;he  Glafs,  and  therefore  I  did  not  include  it  in 

l^tiefe 


[25] 


thefe  Meafures.  Now  the  different  Magnitude 
of  the  hole  in  the  Window- iliut,  and  different 
thicknefs  of  the  Prifm  where  the  Rays  pafTed 
through  it,  and  different  inclinations  of  the 
Prifm  to  the  Hori'/on,  made  no  fenfible  chan- 
ges in  the  length  of  the  Image.  Neither  did 
the  different  matter  of  the  Prifms  make  any : 
for  in  a  Veffel  made  of  poliilied  Plates  of  Glals 
cemented  together  in  the  ihape  of  a  Prifm  and 
filled  with  Water,  there  is  the  like  Succefs  of 
the  Experiment  according  to  the  quantity  of 
the  Refradion.  It  is  farther  to  be  obfcrved, 
that  the  Rays  WTnt  on  in  right  Lines  from  the 
Prifm  to  the  Image,  and  therefore  at  their  ve- 
ry  going  out  of  the  Prifm  had  all  that  Inclina- 
tion to  one  another  from  which  the  length  of 
the  Image  proceeded,  that  is  the  Inclination  of 
more  than  two  Degrees  and  an  half.  And  yet 
acGOfding  to  the  L^ws  of  Opticks  vulgarly  re- 
ceived, they  could  not  poffibly  be  fo  much  incli- 
ned to  one  another.  For  let  KG  [in  F{(^.  i  ^]  rc- 
prefent  theWindow-lliut,  F  the  hole  made  there- 
in through  which  a  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light  was 
•tranfmitted  into  the  darkned  Chamber,  and 
2ABC  a  Triangular  Imaginary  Plane  whereby  the 
•Prifm  is  feigned  to  be  cut  tranlVcrlly  through 
the  middle  of  the  Light.  Or  if  you  pleafe,  let 
ABC  reprefent  the  Prifm  it  felf ,  looking  di- 
redly  towards  the  Speftator's  Eye  with  its  near- 
er end :  And  let  X  Y  be  the  Sun,  M  N  the  Pa- 
mper upon  which  the  Solar  Image  or  Speftrum  is 
call,  and  PT  the  Image  it  felf  whofe  Tides  to- 
wards ^'and  w  are  Rectilinear  and  Parallel,  and 
ends  towards  P  and  T  Semicircular,    YKHP 

and 


{26  ] 

and  XLJT  are  two  Rays,  the  firfl  of  which 
comes  from  the  lower  part  of  the  Sun  to  the 
higher  part  of  the  Image,  and  is  refradled  in  the 
Prifm  at  K  and  H,  and  the  latter  comes  from 
the  higher  part  of  the  Sun  to  the  lower  part  of 
the  Image,  and  is  refraded  at  L  and  J.     Since 
the  Refradtions  on  both  fides  the  Prifm  are  e- 
qual  to  one  another,  that  is  the  Refradion  at 
K  equal  to  the  Refraflion  at  J ,  and  the  Refra- 
ction at  L  equal  to  the  Refradion  at  H,  fo  that 
the  Refradions  of  the  incident  Rays  at  K  and  L 
taken  together  are  equal  to  the  Refraftions  of 
the  emergent  Rays  at  H  and  J  taken  together : 
it  follows  by  adding  equal  things  to  equal  things, 
that  the  Refradions  at  K  and  H  taken  together^ 
are  equal  to  the  Refradions  at  J  and  L  taken 
together,  and  therefore  the  two  Rays  being  e- 
qually  refraded  have  the  fame  Inclination  to 
one  another  after  Refradion  which  they  had 
before,  that  is  the  Inclination  of  half  a  Degree 
anfwering  to  the  Sun's  Diameter.     For  fo  great 
was  the  Inclination  of  the  Rays  to  one  another 
before  Refradion.     So  then,  the  length  of  the 
Image  FT  would  by  the  Rules  of  Vulgar  Op- 
ticks  fubtend  an  Angle  of  half  a  Degree  at  the 
Prifm,  and  by  confequence  be  equal  to  the 
breadth  v  w ;    and  therefore  the  Image  would 
be  round.    Thus  it  would  be  were  the  two 
Rays  X  L  J  T  and  Y  K  H  P,  and  all  the  reft  which 
form  the  Image  V wT v ^    ahke  refrangible. 
And  therefore  feeing  by  Experience  it  is  found 
that  the  Image  is  not  round  but   about   five 
times  longer  than  broad,  the  Rays  which  go- 
ing to  the  upper  end  P  of  the  Image  fuffer  the 

greateft 


[27] 


greatefl  Refraftion,  mufl  be  more  refrangible 
than  thofe  which  go  to  the  lower  end  T,  un- 
lefs  the  inequality  of  Refradion  be  cafual. 

This  Image  or  Speftrum  P  T  was  coloured, 
being  red  at  its  leait  refraded  end  T,  and  vio- 
let  at  its  moll  refraded  end  P,  and  yellow 
gi'een  and  blue  in  the  intermediate  Spaces. 
Which  agrees  with  the  firll  Proportion ,  that 
Lights  which  differ  in  Colour  do  alio  diiler  in 
Refrangibility.  The  length  of  the  Image  in  the 
foregoing  Experiments  I  meafurcd  from  the 
fainted  and  outmoit  red  at  one  end,  to  the 
faintell  and  outmofl  blue  at  the  other  end,  ex- 
cepting only  a  little  Penumbra,  whofe  breadth 
fcarce  exceeded  a  quarter  of  an  Inch,  as  was 
faid  above. 

Exper.  4.  In  the  Sun's  beam  which  was  pro- 
pagated into  the  Room  through  the  hole  in  the 
Window-fliut,  at  the  diftance  of  fome  Feet 
from  the  hole,  I  held  the  Prifm  in  fuch  a  po- 
flure  that  its  Axis  might  be  perpendicular  to 
that  beam.  Then  I  looked  through  the  Prifm 
Vipon  the  hole ,  and  turning  the  Prifm  to  and 
fro  about  its  Axis  to  make  the  Image  of  the 
hole  afcend  and  defcend,  when  between  its 
two  contrary  Motions  it  feemed  ftationary,  I 
ftopp'd  the  Prifm  that  the  Refraftions  of  both 
fides  of  the  refracting  Angle  might  be  equal  to 
each  other,  as  in  the  former  Experiment.  In 
this  Situation  of  the  Prifm  viewing  through  it 
the  faid  hole,  I  obferved  the  length  of  its  re- 
fracted Image  to  be  many  times  greater  than 
its  breadth ,  and  that  the  moft  refracted  part 
thereof  appeared  violet,  the  leaft  refraCted  red, 

the 


[28] 


the  middle  parts  blue  green  and  yellow  in  or- 
der. The  lame  thing  happen'd  when  I  remo- 
ved the  Prifm  out  of  the  Sun's  Light,  and  look- 
ed through  it  upon  the  hole  ihining  by  the 
Light  of  the  Clouds  beyond  it.  And  yet  if  the 
Refraftion  were  done  regularly  according  to 
"one  certain  Proportion  of  the  Sines  of  Inci- 
dence and  Refradion  as  is  vulgarly  fuppofed , 
the  refracted  Image  ought  to  have  appeared 
round. 

So  then,  by  thefe  two  Experiments  it  appears 
that  in  equal  Incidences  there  is  a  confiderable 
inequality  of  Refraftions.  But  whence  this  in- 
equality arifes,  whether  it  be  that  fome  of  the 
incident  Pvays  are  refradcd  more  and  others  lefs, 
conftantly,  or  by  chance,  or  that  one  and  the 
fame  Ray  is  by  Refra61ion  dillurbed,  fliatter'd, 
dilated,  and  as  it  were  fplit  and  fpread  into 
many  diverging  Rays,  as  Grmaldo  fuppofes, 
does  not  yet  appear  by  thefe  Experiments,  but 
will  appear  by  thofe  that  follow, 

Ex^er.  y.  Confidering  therefore ,  that  if  in 
the  third  Experiment  the  Image  of  the  Sun 
fliould  be  drawn  out  into  an  oblong  form,  ei- 
ther by  a  Dilatation  of  every  Ray,  or  by  any  o- 
ther  cafual  inequality  of  the  Refradions,  the 
fame  oblong  Image  would  by  a  fecond  Refra- 
ction made  fideways  be  drawn  out  as  much  in 
breadth  by  the  like  Dilatation  of  the  Rays,  or  o- 
ther  cafual  inequality  of  the  Refraftions  fide- 
ways,  I  tried  what  would  be  the  effects  of  fuch 
a  fecond  Refraction.  For  this  end  I  ordered 
all  things  as  in  the  third  Experiment,  and  then 
placed  a  fecond  Prifm  immediately  after  the 


[29] 


firfl  in  a  crofs  Pofition  to  it,  that  it  might  again 
refrav^l:  the  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light  which  came 
to  it  through  the  fidt  Prifm.  In  the  iirftPrilm 
this  beam  was  refraded  upwards,  and  in  the 
fecond  iideways.  And  I  found  that  by  the  Re- 
fradion  of  the  fecond  Prifm  the  breadth  of  the 
Image  was  not  increafed,  but  its  fuperior  part 
which  in  the  firll  Priim  fuflfered  the  greater 
Refraiiiion  and  appeared  violet  and  blue,  did 
again  in  the  fecond  Prifm  fulfer  a  greater  Re- 
fraction than  its  inferior  part,  which  appeared 
red  and  yellow,  and  this  without  any  Dilatation 
of  the  Image  in  breadth. 

llliiftration.  Let  S  [in /Tj.  14.]  reprefent 
the  Sun,  F  the  hole  in  the  Wmdow,  ABC  the 
firit  Prifm,  D  H  the  fecond  Prifm,  Y  the  round 
Image  of  the  Sun  made  by  a  dired  beam  of 
Light  when  the  Prifms  arc  taken  away,  PT 
the  oblong  Image  of  the  Sun  made  by  that  beam 
palling  through  the  tirll  Prifm  alone  when  the 
fecond  Prifm  is  taken  away,  and/^  the  Image 
made  by  the  crofs  Refractions  of  both  Prilms 
together.  Now  if  the  Rays  which  tend  to- 
wards the  feveral  Points  of  the  round  Image  Y 
were  dilated  and  fpread  by  the  RefraClion  of 
the  firlt  Prifm,  fo  that  they  fliould  not  any  lon- 
ger go  in  fmgle  Lines  to  fingle  Points,  but  that 
every  Ray  being  fplit,  iliattered,  and  changed 
from  a  Linear  Ray  to  a  Superficies  of  Rays  di- 
verging from  xhe  Point  of  Refradtion,  and  ly- 
ing in  the  Plane  of  irhe  Angles  of  Incidence  and 
Refradion,  they  fliould  go  in  thofe  Planes  to 
fo  many  Lines  reaching  almofl  from  one  end  of 
the  Image  PT  to  the  other,  and  if  that  Image 

Hiould 


[3o] 


fhould  thence  become  oblong:  thofcRays  and 
their  feveral  parts  tending  towards  the  ieveral 
Points  of  the  Image  P  T  ought  to  be  again  di- 
lated and  fpread  Tideways  by  the  tranfverfe 
Refraction  of  the  fecond  Prifm,  fo  as  to  com- 
pofe  a  four  fquare  Image,  fuch  as  is  reprefent- 
ed  at  Trj.  For  the  better  underftanding  of  which, 
let  the  Image  P  T  be  diltinguiflied  into  five  e- 
qual  parts  PQK,  KQRL,  LRSM,  MSVN, 
N  V  T.  And  by  the  fame  irregularity  that  the 
orbicular  Light  Y  is  by  the  Refradion  of  the 
firit  Prifm  dilated  and  drawn  out  into  a  long 
Image  PT,  the  Light  PQK  which  takes  up  a 
fpace  of  the  fame  length  and  breadth  with  the 
Light  Y  ought  to  be  by  the  Refradion  of  the 
fecond  Prifm  dilated  and  drawn  out  into  the 
long  Image  tt  qkp^  and  the  Light  KQRL  in- 
to the  long  Image  kqr  l^  and  the  Lights  LRSM, 
MSVN,  NVT,  into  fo  many  other  long  I- 
mages  Irsm,  msv n,  nvt"}  \  and  all  thefe  long 
Images  would  compofe  the  four  fquare  Image 
9r7.  Thus  it  ought  to  be  were  every  Ray  dila- 
ted byRefraftion,  and  fpread  into  a  triangular 
Superficies  of  Rays  diverging  from  the  Point 
of  Refraflion.  For  the  fecond  Refradtion 
would  fpread  the  Rays  one  way  as  much  as  the 
firft  doth  another,  and  fo  dilate  the  Image  in 
breadth  as  much  as  the  firft  doth  in  length. 
And  the  fame  thing  ought  to  happen,  were 
fome  Rays  cafually  refraded  more  than  others. 
But  the  Event  is  otherwife.  The  Image  P  T 
was  not  made  broader  by  the  Refradion  of  the 
fecond  Prifm,  but  only  became  oblique,  as  'tis 
reprefented  at  /  r,  its  upper  end  P  being  by 

the 


[31] 

the  Refraftion  tranllatcd  to  a  greater  cliflance 
than  its  lower  end  T.  So  then  the  Light  which 
went  towards  the  upper  end  P  of  the  Image, 
was  ( at  equal  Incidences)  more  refraded  in 
the  fecond  Prifm  than  the  Light  which  tended 
towards  the  lower  end  T,  that  is  the  blue  and 
violet,  than  the  red  and  yellow ;  and  therefore 
was  more  refrangible.  The  fame  Light  was  by 
the  Refraftion  of  the  firft  Prifm  tranllated  far- 
ther from  the  place  Y  to  which  it  tended  before 
Refra(^Hon;  and  therefore  fuftered  as  well  in 
the  firft  Prifm  as  in  the  fecond  a  greater  Refra- 
ftion  than  the  reft  of  the  Light,  and  by  con- 
fequence  was  more  refrangible  than  the  reft, 
even  before  its  incidence  on  the  firft  Prifm. 

Sometimes  I  placed  a  third  Prifm  after  the 
fecond,  and  fometimes  alfo  a  fourth  after  the 
third,  by  all  which  the  Image  might  be  often 
refraded  fideways:  but  the  Rays  which  were 
more  refraded  than  the  reft  in  the  firft  Prifm 
were  alfo  more  refraded  in  all  the  refl,  and  that 
without  any  Dilatation  of  the  Image  fideways : 
and  therefore  thofe  Rays  for  their  conftancy  of 
a  greater  Refradion  are  defervcdly  reputed 
more  refrangible. 

But  that  the  meaning  of  this  Experiment  may 
more  clearly  appear,  it  is  to  be  confidered  that 
the  Rays  which  are  equally  refrangible  do  fall 
upon  a  circle  anfwering  to  the  Sun's  Difque. 
For  this  was  proved  in  the  third  Experiment. 
By  a  Circle  I  underftand  not  here  a  perfeft  geo- 
metrical Circle,  but  any  orbicular  Figure  whofe 
length  is  equal  to  its  breadth,  and  which,  as 
to  fenfe,  may  feem  circular.  Let  therefore  A  G 

^        [in 


[32] 


[in  Fig.  15-.]  reprefent  the  Circle  which  all 
the  molt  refrangible  Rays  propagated  from  the 
whole  Difque  of  the  Sun,  would  illuminate  and 
paint  upon  the  oppofite  Wall  if  they  were  a- 
lone  ;  E  L  the  Circle  which  all  the  lead  refran- 
gible Rays  would  in  like  manner  illuminate  and 
paint  if  they  were  alone;  B  H,  CJ,  DK,  the 
Circles  which  fo  many  intermediate  forts  of 
Rays  would  fucccfTively  paint  upon  the  Wall, 
if  they  were  fmgly  propagated  from  the  Sun 
in  fucceffive  order,  the  rell  being  always  in- 
tercepted ;  and  conceive  that  there  are  other 
intermediate  Circles  without  number,  which 
innumerable  other  intermediate  forts  of  Rays 
would  fucceilively  paint  upon  the  Wall  if  the 
Sun  fliould  fucceflively  emit  every  fort  apart. 
And  feeing  the  Sun  emits  all  thefe  ibrts  at  once, 
they  muit  all  together  illuminate  and  paint  in- 
numerable equal  Circles,  of  all  which,  being 
according  to  their  degrees  of  Refrangibihty 
placed  in  order  in  a  continual  Series,  that  ob- 
long Spedrum  P  T  is  compofed  which  1  de- 
fcribed  in  the  third  Experiment.  Now  if  the 
Sun's  circular  Image  Y  [in  Fig.  14,  15-.]  which 
is  made  by  an  unrefraded  beam  of  Light  was 
by  any  Dilatation  of  the  iingle  Rays,  or  by  any 
other  irregularity  in  the  Refraction  of  the  firll 
Prifm,  converted  into  the  oblong  Speftrum, 
FT:  then  ought  every  Circle  A  G,  BH,  CJ, 
^c.  in  that  Spedrum,  by  the  crofs  Refraction 
of  the  fecond  Prifm  again  dilating  or  otherwife 
fcattering  the  Rays  as  before,  to  be  in  like  man- 
ner drawn  out  and  transformed  into  an  oblong 
Figure,  and  thereby  the  breadth  of  the  Image 

PT 


[  33  ] 

P  T  would  be  now  as  much  augmented  as  the 
length  of  the  Image  Y  was  before  by  the  Refra- 
ction of  the  firft  Prifm ;  and  thus  by  the  Refra- 
ctions of  bothPrifms  togecher  would  be  form- 
ed a  four  fquare  Figure  /  TT  r7,  as  I  defcribed  a- 
bove.  Wherefore  fmce  the  breadth  of  the  Spe- 
ctrum PT  is  not  increafed  by  the  Refraction 
Tideways,  it  is  certain  that  the  Rays  are  not 
fpHt  or  dilated,  or  otherways  irregularly  fcat- 
ter'd  by  that  Refraction,  but  that  every  Circle 
is  by  a  regular  and  uniform  RcfraCtion  tranila- 
ted  entire  into  another  place,  as  the  (Circle  A 
G  by  the  greateit  Refraaion  into  the  place  ag^ 
the  Circle  BH  by  a  Icfs  Refradion  into  the 
place  b  hi  the  Cifcle  C  J  by  a  RefraCtion  ftill 
lefs  into  the  place  f /,  and  fo  of  the  reft;  by 
which  means  a  new  SpeCtrum  p  t  inclined  to 
the  former  P  T  is  in  like  manner  compofcd  of 
Circles  lying  in  a  right  Line ;  and  thefe  Circles 
mult  be  of  the  fame  bignefs  with  the  former, 
becaufe  the  breadths  of  all  the  SpeCtrums  Y, 
P  T  and  />  /^  at  equal  diilances  from  the  Prifms 
are  equal. 

I  confidered  farther,  that  by  the  breadth  of 
the  hole  F  through  \^'hich  the  Light  enters  in- 
to the  dark  Chamber,  there  is  a  Penumbra 
made  in  the  circuit  of  the  SpeCtrum  Y,  and 
that  Penumbra  remains  in  the  reCtilinear  Sides 
of  the  SpeCtrums  P T  and  pt.  I  placed  there- 
fore at  that  hole  a  Lens  or  ObjcCt-glafs  of  aTe- 
lefcope  which  might  calt  the  Image  of  the  Sun 
diftinctly  on  Y  without  any  Penumbra  at  all, 
and  found  that  the  Penumbra  of  the  reCtilinear 
Sides  of  the  oblong  SpeCtrums  PT  and/^  was 

D  alfd 


[34] 


^Ifo  thereby  taken  away, .  fo  that  thofc  Sides  ap- 
peared as  difdnftly  defined  as  did  the  Chxum- 
ferenee  of  the  firlMmage  Y.  Thus  it  happens 
if  the  Glais  of  the  Prilrns  be  .free  from. Veins, 
and  their  Sides  be  accurately  plane  and  well 
pohllied  without  thole  numberiels  Waves  or 
Curies  which  ufually  ariic  from  Sand-holes  a 
little  fmoothed  in  polifliing  with  Putty.  If  the 
Glafs  be  only  well  polillied  and  free  from  Veins 
and  the  Sides  not  accurately  plane  but  a  Httle 
Convex  or  Concave,  as  it  frequently  happens ; 
yet  may  the  three  Speflrums  V,  PT  and  /  t 
want  Penumbras,  but  not  in  e^ual  diitances 
from  the  Prifms.  Now  from  this  want  of  Pen- 
umbras, I  knew  more  certainly  that  every  one 
of  the  Circles  was  refradled  according  to  fome 
moft  regular,  uniform,  and  conilant  law.  For 
if  there  were  any  irregularity  in  the  Refraftion, 
the  right  Lines  A  E  and  G  L  which  all  the  Cir- 
cles in  the  Spedrum  PT  do  touch,  could  not 
by  that  Refraftion  be  tranllated  into  the  Lines 
ae  and  ^/  as  diftinft  and  ftraight  as  they  were 
before,  but  there  would  arife  in  thofe  tranllated 
Lines  fome  Penumbra  or  Crookednefs  or  Un- 
dulation, or  other  fenfible  Perturbation  con- 
trary tG  what  is  found  by  Experience.  What- 
foever  Penumbra  or  Perturbation  Ihould  be 
made  in  the  Circles  by  the  crofs  Refraction  of 
the  fecond  Prifm,  all  that  Penumbra  or  Pertur- 
bation would  be  confpicuous  in  the  right  Lines 
a  e  and  g  I  which  touch  thofe  Circles.  And 
therefore  fmce  there  is  no  fuch  Penumbra  or 
Perturbation  in  thofe  right  Lines  there  mult  be 
none  in  the  Circles.    Since  the  diitance  between 

thofe 


[35] 


thofe  Tangents  or  breadth  of  the  Spedlrum  is 
not  increafed  by  the  Refractions,  the  Diameters 
of  the  Circles  arc  not  increafed  thereby.  Since 
thofe  Tangents  continue  to  be  right  Lines,  e- 
very  Circle  which  in  the  firfl  Priini  is  more  or 
lefs  refraded,  is  exadly  in  the  fame  propor- 
tion more  or  lefs  refracted  in  the  fecond.  And 
feeing  all  thefe  things  continue  to  fucceed  af- 
ter the  fame  manner  when  the  Rays  are  again 
in  a  third  Prifm,  and  again  in  a  fourth  refra- 
ded  fideways,  it  is  evident  that  the  Rays  of  one 
and  the  fame  Circle,  as  to  their  degree  of  Re- 
frangibility  continue  always  uniform  and  ho^ 
mogencal  to  one  another,  and  that  thofe  of 
fcveral  Circles  do  ditier  in  degree  of  Refran- 
gibility,  and  that  in  Ibme  certain  and  conltant 
proportion.    W  hich  is  the  thing  I  was  to  prove. 

There  is  yet  another  Circumllance  or  two 
of  this  Experiment  by  which  it  becomes  flill 
more  plaii  aid  convincing.  Let  the  fecond 
Prifm  DH  [in  Fi^.  16.']  be  placed  not  im- 
mediately after  the  firit,  but  at  fome  diftance 
from  it  5  fuppofe  in  the  mid- way  between  it 
and  the  Wall  on  which  the  oblong  Spectrum 
PTis  caft,  lb  that  the  Light  from  the  firll 
Prifm  may  fall  upon  it  in  the  form  of  an  oblong 
Speftrum  tt]  parallel  to  this  fecond  Prifm,  and 
be  refraded  fideways  to  form  the  oblong 
Speftrum  p  t  upon  the  Wall.  And  you  will 
find  as  before,  that  this  Speftmm/ ^Js. inclined 
to  that  Spectrum  P  T,  which  the  firit  Prifm 
forms  alone  without  the  fecond ;  the  blue  ends 
P  and  p  being  farther  diltant  from  one  another 
than  the  red  ones  T  and  t^  and  by  confequence 

D  2,  that 


[  3^  1 


that  the  Rays  which  go  to  the  blue  eftd  tt  of 
the  Imager?  and  which  therefore  futfer  the 
greateil  Refra^ion  in  the  firftPrifm,  are  again 
in  the  fecond  Prifm  more  refraded  than  the 
reft. 

The  fame  thing  I  try'd  alfo  by  letting  the 
Sun's  Light  into  a  dark  Room  through  two  lit- 
tle round  holes  F  and  (p  [in  Fig.  17.]  made  in 
the  Window ,  and  with  two  parallel  Prifms 
ABC  and  ctf^y  placed  at  thofe  holes  (one  at 
each)  refracting  thole  two  beams  of  Light  to 
the  oppofite  Wall  of  the  Chamber,  in  fuch  man- 
ner that  the  two  colour'd  Images  PT  and  MN 
which  they  there  painted  were  joined  end  to 
end  and  lay  in  one  ftraight  Line,  the  red  end  T 
of  the  one  touching  the  blue  end  M  of  the  o- 
ther.  For  if  thefe  two  refraded  Beams  were 
again  by  a  third  Prifm  D  H  placed  crofs  to  the 
two  firft,  refrafted  fideways,  and  the  Spedrums 
thereby  tranflated  to  fome  other  part  of  the 
Wall  of  the  Chamber,  fuppofe  the  Spedrum 
PT  to/^  and  the  Spedrum  MN  to  »?;?,  thefe 
tranflated  Spedrums/^  and  m  n  would  not  lie 
in  one  ftraight  Line  with  their  ends  contiguous 
as  before,  but  be  broken  off  from  one  another 
and  become  parallel,  the  blue  end  m  of  the  L 
mage  m  n  being  by  a  greater  Refradion  tran- 
flated farther  from  its  former  place  M  T,  than 
the  red  end  t  of  the  other  Image  / 1  from  the 
fame  place  MT;  which  puts  the  Propoiition 
paft  difpute.  And  this  happens  whether  the 
third  Prifm  DH  be  placed  immediately  after 
the  two  firft,  or  at  a  great  diftance  fro^n 
them,  fo  that  the  Light  refraded  in  the  two 

fiiit 


[37] 

firil  Prifms  be  either  white  and  circular,  or  co- 
loured and  oblong  when  it  falls  on  the  third. 

Expcr.  6.  In  the  middle  of  two  thin  Boards 
I  made  round  holes  a  third  part  of  an  Inch  in 
diameter,  and  in  the  Window-lliur  a-'  much 
broader  hole  being  made  to  let  into  my  dark- 
ned  Chamber  a  large  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light ; 
I  placed  a  Prifm  behind  the  Shut  in  that  beam 
to  refradt  it  towards  the  oppoiite  Wall,  and 
clofe  behind  the  Prifm  I  fixed  one  of  the  Boards, 
in  fuch  manner  that  the  middle  of  the  refrafted 
Light  might  pafs  through  the  hole  made  in  it, 
and  the  relt  be  intercepted  by  the  Board.  Then 
at  the  diftance  of  about  twelve  Feet  from  the 
tirll;  Board  I  fixed  the  other  Board  in  fuch  man- 
ner that  the  middle  of  the  refra6led  Light  which 
came  through  the  hole  in  the  hrll  Board  and 
fell  upon  the  oppofiteW'all  might  pafs  through 
the  hole  in  this  other  Board,  and  the  rell  being 
intercepted  by  the  Board  might  paint  upon  it 
the  coloured  Spedrum  of  the  Sun.  And  ciofe 
behind  this  Board  I  fixed  another  Prifm  to  re- 
fract the  Light  which  came  through  the  hole. 
Then  I  returned  fpeedily  to  the  firlt  Prifm,  and 
by  turning  it  flowly  to  and  fro  about  its  Axis, 
I  caufed  the  Image  which  fell  upon  the  fecond 
Board  to  move  up  and  down  upon  that  Board, 
that  ail  its  parts  might  fucceifively  pafs  through 
the  hole  in  that  Board  and  fall  upon  the  Prifm 
behind  it.  And  in  the  mean  time,  I  noted  the 
places  on  the  oppofite  Wall  to  which  that  Light 
after  its  Refraction  in  the  fecond  Prifm  did  pafs ; 
aftd  by  the  difference  of  the  places  I  found  that 
the  Light  which  being  mofl  refraded  in  the 

D  3  tirft 


[  38  ]i 


firflPrifm  didgo  to  the  blue  end  of  the  Image, 
was  again  more  refracted  in  the  fecond  Prifm 
than  the  Light  which  went  to  the  red  end  of 
that  Image,  which  proves  as  well  the  tirlt  Pro- 
portion as  the  fecond.  And  this  happened 
whether  the  Axis  of  the  two  Prilms  were  pa- 
rallel, or  inclined  to  one  another  and  to  the 
Horizon  in  any  given  Angles. 

llluftratton.  Let  F  [inF/^.  i8.]  be  the  wide 
hole  in  the  Window-fliut,  through  which  the 
Sun  fhines  upon  the  firft  Prifm  ABC,  and  let 
the  refrafted  Light  fall  upon  the  middle  of  the 
Board  DE,  and  the  middle  part  of  that  Light 
upon  the  hole  G  made  in  the  middle  of  that 
Board.  Let  this  trajeded  part  of  the  Light 
fall  again  upon  the  middle  of  the  fecond  Board 
de  and  there  paint  fuch  an  oblong  coloured  I- 
mage  of  the  Sun  as  was  defcribed  in  the  third 
Experiment.  By  turning  the  Prifrn  ABC  flow- 
ly  to  and  fro  about  its  Axis  this  Image  will  be 
made  to  move  up  and  down  the  Board  d  e, 
and  by  this  means  all  its  parts  from  one  end  to 
the  other  may  be  made  to  pafs  fucceflively 
through  the  hole  g  w^hich  is  made  in  the  mid- 
dle of  that  Board.  In  the  mean  while  another 
Prifm  aifcis  to  be  fixed  next  after  that  hole  g 
to  refraft  the  trajefted  Light  a  fecond  time. 
And  thefe  things  being  thus  ordered,  I  marked 
the  places  M  and  N  of  the  oppofite  Wall  upon 
which  the  refradted  Light  fell,  and  found  that 
whilit  the  two  Boards  and  fecond  Prifm  re- 
mained unmoved,  thofe  places  by  turning  the 
firil  Prifm  about  its  Axis  were  changed  perpe- 
tually.   For  when  the  lower  part  of  the  Light 

which 


[39] 


which  fell  upon  the  fecond  Board  d  e  was  caft 
through  the  hole  g  it  went  to  a  lower  place  M 
on  the  Wailj  and  when  the  higher  part  of  that 
Light  was  cad  through  the  fame  hole  g;  it  went 
to  a  higher  place  N  on  the  Wall,  and  when  ^- 
ny  intermediate  part  of  the  Light  was  catt 
through  that  hole  it  went  to  fome  place' on  thb 
Wall  between  M  andN.  ■  The  unchanged  Po- 
fition  of  the  Holes  in  the  Boards,  made  the  In- 
<:idence  of  the  Rays  upon-tlie  fecond  Prifm  to 
be  the  fame  in  all  caies.  And  yet  in  that  corat- 
mon  hicidence  fome  of  the  Rays  were  more  re- 
fraded  and  others  lefs..  And  thole  were  more 
refrat^ed  in  this  Prifm  wiiich  by  a  greater  Re- 
fradion  in  the  firll  Prifm  were  more  turned 
out  of  the  way,  and  therefore  for  their  con- 
ftancy  of  being  more  retracted  are-  defervedly 
called  more  refrangible. 

Expcr.  7.  At  two  holes  made  near  one  ano- 
ther in  my  Window-flnit  I  placed  two  Prifms, 
one  at  each,  A^^hich  might  cait  upon  the 'opp.o- 
fiteWall  (after  the  manner  of  the  thirdExpe- 
criment)  two  oblong  cdlour-ed  Images' "oF  the 
"Sun.  And  at  a  little  diitance  from  the  Wall  I 
placed  a  long  llender  Paper  with  llraight  and 
parallel  edges,  and  ordered  the  Prifms  and  Pa- 
per fo,  that  the  red  Colour  of  one  Image  niight 
'•fall  diredly  upon  one  half  of  the  Paper,  and  "he 
violet  Colour  of  the  other  Image  upon  the  o- 
ther  half  of  the  fame  Paper ;  lo  that  the  Pa- 
per appeared  of  two  Colours',  red  and  violet, 
much  after  the  manner  of  the  painted  Paper 
in  the  firil  and  fecond  Experiments.  Tnen 
With  a  black  Cloth  I  covered  the  Wall  behind 

D  4  the 


[4o] 


the  Paper,  that  no  Light  might  be  refle(fi:ed 
from  it  to  diflurb  the  Experiment ,  and  viewr 
ing  the  Paper  through  a  third  Prifm  held-  pa- 
rallel to  it,  I  faw  that  half  of  it  which  was  il- 
luminated by  the  violet  Light  to  be  divided 
from  the  other  half  by  a  greater  Refradiori,  Cr 
fpecially  when  I  went  a  good  way  gff  from  the 
Paper.  For  when  I  viewed  it  too  near  at  hand, 
the  two  halfs  of  the  Paper  did  not  appear  fully 
divided  from  one  another,  but  feemed  conti^ 
guous  at  one  of  their  Angles  Hke  the  painted 
Paper  in  the  firlt  Experiment,  Which  alfo 
happened  when  the  Paper  was  too  broad. 

Sometimes  inflead  of  the  Paper  I  ufed  a  white 
Thred,  and  this  appeared  through  the  Prifm 
divided  into  two  parallel  Threds  as  is  reprer 
fented  in  the  nineteenth  Figure,  where  DG 
denotes  the  Thred  illuminated  with  violet  Light 
from  D  to  E  and  with  red  Light  from  F  to  G, 
and  de  fg  are  the  parts  of  the  Thred  fcen  by 
Rcfradion.  If  one  half  of  the  Thred  be  con- 
ftantly  illuminated  with  red,  and  the  other  half 
be  illuminated  with  all  the  Colours  fuccefTively, 
( which  may  be  done  by  caufing  pne  of  the 
Prifms  to  be  turned  about  its  Axis  whilll  the 
other  remains  unmoved)  this  other  half  in  view- 
ing the  Thred  through  the  Prifm,  will  appear 
in  a  continued  right  Line  with  the  firil  half  when 
illuminated  with  red,  and  begin  to  be  a  little 
divided  from  it  when  illuminated  with  orange, 
and  remove  farther  from  it  when  illuminated 
with  yellow,  and  Hill  farther  when  with  green, 
and  farther  when  with  blue,  and  go  yet  farther 
pff  when  illuminated  with  indigo,  and  fartheft 

W^hcn 


[4i] 

when  with  deep  violet.  Which  plainly  iliewsV 
that  the  Lights  of  feveral  Colours  are  more  ani 
more  refrangibkjong  than  (ai)pther,  in  this  or- 
der of  theii^  Colours,  red,  ordfvge5,yellouVgj;pen,- 
blue,  indigo,  deep  violet ;  ai)4;fo  proves;  ^^Wj^il' 
the  tirllPropolition  as  the;fecy>ud^ ..:  ..::,,.  ij^:^ 
I  G.aufed  aUp  tl}Q  colouj-ed,. Spcclrur^s :: Pol/ 
[in Fig.  17.'}  and  MN  ma4^  in,a-dark  Cham- 
ber by  the  Rpfradions  of  two  j^riirhiSfto  lye  in 
a  right  Line  end  to  end,  as  wasdefcril>e4-abpve 
in-  the  fifth.  Experiment,  iind  viewing: them 
thrpugh  a  thir^.Prifm  held  parallel  to  theic 
ls^>gthj  they  appeared  no  longer  in  a  right  Line, 
})ut  became  broken  from  one  another,  as  they 
^re;  reprefentcjd  af.//^  aijd  //;.;/,  the  violet  Qndpt 
pf  the  Spe6lrum  m  n  being  by  a  greater  Refra- 
jftion  tranllated  farther  from  its  former  place 
M  T  than  the  red  end  t  of  the  otfier  Spcii^trum 

pi'  ./rJ7^'J  - 

-,  I  farther  caufcd  thofe  two'Spedrums  PT 
£in  Ftg.  20.]  and  MN  to  become  co-incident 
in  an  inverted  order  of  their  Colours,  the  red 
end  of  each  falling  on  the  violet  end  of  the  o- 
ther,  as  they  are  reprefented  in  the  oblong  Fi- 
gure P  T  M  N ;  and  then  viewing  them  through 
a  Prifm  DH  held  parallel  to  their  length,  they 
appeared  not  co-incident  as  when  viewed  with 
the  naked  Eye,  but  in  the  form  of  two  dillinc^l 
Spedrums  /  t  and  m  ;/  croffing  one  another  in 
the  middle  after  the  manner  of  the  letter  X. 
Which  iliews  that  the  red  of  the  one  Spedrum 
and  violet  of  the  other,  which  were  co-incident 
at  P  N  and  M  T,  being  parted  from  one  another 
by  a  greater  Refi'adion  of  thq  violet  to/  and  m 

than 


f  42  ] 


thai!  of  the  red'  to;;/'and^,-(ioi  differ  in  degrees 
of Refrangibility.  •-'--  .■'>-;        •     -       -1 

i  illuminated  alfo  a  little  circular  piece?  of 
white  Paper  all  over  With  the  Lights  of  both 
Prifms  intermixed  r^nd  when  it  was  illumina- 
ted with  the  red' of  one  Spe(?Lrum  and  ddep 
violet  of  the  other,  fo  as  by  the  mixture^of 
thofe  Colours  to  appear  all  over  purple,  I  view-l- 
ed the  Paper,  firil  at  a  lefs  diltoce,-  and-theh 
at  a  greater,  through  a  third  Vviihi ;  ^and-^as  I 
went  from  the  Paper,  the  refraijled  Image  t-here- 
of  became  more  anel-more  divided  by  the  uMi 
qual  Refraction  of: the  two  Mxe"d> Colours,  afld 
at  length  parted  into  two  diftincl'Ithages,  ii  tdA 
one  and  a  violet  one,  whereof  the  violet"  Was 
farthefl  from  the  Paper,  arid  therefore,;  fufFered 
the  greateflRefradion.  And  when  that  Prifm 
at  the  Window  wliich  caft  the  violet  on  theP^- 
per  was  taken  away,  the  violet  Image  difap- 
peared;  but  when  the  other  Prifm  was  taken 
away  the  red  vaniflied :  which  lliews  that  thefe 
two  Images  were  nothing  elfe  than  the  Lights 
df  the  two  Prifms  which  had  been  intermixed 
on  the  purple  Paper,  but  were  parted  again  by 
their  unequal  Refradions  made  in  the  third 
Prifm  through  which  the  Paper  was  viewed. 
This  alfo  was  obfervable ,  that  if  one  of  the 
Prifms  at  theWindbw,  fuppofe  that  which  caft 
the  violet  on  the  Paper,  was  turned  about  its 
Axis  to  make  all  the  Colours  in  this  order,  vio- 
let, indigo,  blue,  green,  yellow,  orange,  red, 
fall  fucceffively  on  the  Paper  from  that  Prifm , 
the  violet  Image  changed  Colour  accordingly; 
turning  fucceffively  to  indigo,  blue,  green,  yel- 
low 


[43] 


low  and  red,  and  in  changing  Colour  came' 
nearer  and  nearer  to  the  red  Image  made  by 
the  other  Prilm,  until  when  it  was  alibred  both 
Images  became  fullv  co-incident. 

I  placed  alio  two  Paper  Circles  very  near  6ne 
another,  the  one  in  the  red  Liglit  of  onePriiirtj 
and  the  other  in  the  violet  Light  of  the  othcr^. 
The  Circles  were  each  of  them  an  Inch  in  dia- 
meter, and  behind  them  the  Wall  was  dark  that 
the  Experiment  might  not  be  dillurbed  by  any 
Light  coming  from  thence.  Thefe  Circles  thus 
illuminated,  I  viewed  through  a  Prifm  fo  heM 
that  the  Refradlion  might  be  made  towards  the 
red  Circle,  and  as  I  went  from  them  they  camt 
nearer  and  nearer  together ,  and'  at-  length  be- 
came co-incident;  and  afterwards  when  I  went 
Hill  farther  ofti  they  parted  again  in  a  cojitrary 
order,  the  violet  by  a  greater  Refradion  being 
carried  beyong  the  red.  -i>i-« 

Exper.  8.  In  Summer  when  the  Sun's  Light 
ufes  to  be  ftrongell,  I  placed  a  Prifm  at  the 
hole  of  the  Wind ow-lhut,  as  in  the  third  Expe- 
riment, yet  lb  that  its  Axis  might  be  parallel  to 
the  Axis  of  the  World,  and  at  the  oppofite 
Wall  in  the  Sun's  refracted  Light,  I  placed  an 
open  Book.  Then  going  fix  Feet  and  two  In- 
ches from  the  Book,  I  placed  there  the  above- 
mentioned  Lens,  by  which  the  Light  reflefted 
from  the  Book  might  be  made  to  converge  and 
meet  again  at  the  diftance  of  fix  Feet  and  two 
Inches  behind  the  Lens,  and  there  paint  the 
Species  of  the  Book  upon  a  Iheet  of  white  Pa- 
per much  after  the  manner  of  the  fecond  Ex- 
periment. The  Book  and  Lens  being  made  fall, 

I  no- 


[44] 


I  noted  the  place  where  the  Paper  was,  when 
thie  Letters  of  the  Book ,,  illuminated  by  the 
fullell  red  Light  of  the  folar  hnage  falling  up- 
on it,  did  call  their  Species  on  that  Paper  molt 
diftindly :  And  then  I  ftay'd  til]  by  the  Motion 
of  the  Sun  and  confequent  Motion  of  his  Image 
on  the  Book,  all  the  Colours  from  that  red  to 
the  middle  of  the  blue  pafs'd  over  thofe  Let- 
ters ;  and  when  thofe  Letters  were  illuminated 
by  that  blue,  I  noted  again  the  place  of  the  Pa- 
per, when  they  call  their  Species  moll  dillindly 
upon  it :  And  I  found  that  this  lalt  place  of  the 
i?aper  was  nearer  to  the  Lens  than  its  former 
place  by  about  two  Inches  and  an  half,  or  two 
and  three  quarters.    So  much  fooner  therefore 
did  the  Light  in  the  violet  end  of  the  Image 
by  a  greater  Refradion  converge  and  meet, 
than  the  Light  in  the  red  end.     But  in  trying 
this  the  Chamber  was  as  dark  as  I  could  make 
it.     For  if  thefe  Colours,  be  diluted  and  weak- 
tied  by  the  mixture  of  any  adventitious  Light, 
the  diftance  between  the  places  of  the  Paper 
will  not  be  fo  great.     This  diltance  in  the  fe- 
cond  Experiment  where  the  Colours  of  natural 
Bodies  were  made  ufe  of,  was  but  an  Inch  and 
an  half,  by  reafon  of  the  imperfedion  of  thofe 
Colours.     Here  in  the  Colours  of  the  Prifm , 
which  are  manifeftly  more  full,  intenfe,  and  live- 
ly than  thofe  of  natural  Bodies,   the  dillance  is 
two  Inches  and  three  quarters.     And  were  the 
Colours  flill  more  full,  I  queftion  not  but  that 
the  dillance  would  be  confiderably  greater.  For 
the  coloured  Light  of  the  Prifm,  by  the  inter- 
fering of  the  Circles  defcribed  in  the  fecond 

Figure 


45  ] 


Figure  of  the  fifth  Experiment,  and  alfobythe 
Light  of  the  ^'ery  bright  Clouds  next  the  Sun's 
Body  intermixing  with  thefe  Colours,  and  by 
the  Light  fcattered  by  the  inequalities  in  the 
Polifh  of  the  Prifm ,  was  fo  very  much  com- 
pounded, that  the  Species  which  thofe  faint  and 
dark  Colours,  the  indigo  and  violet,  cait  upon 
the  Paper  were  not  diltinCt  enough  to  be  well 
obferved. 

Exper.  9.  A  Prifm,  whofe  two  Angles  at  its 
Bale  were  equal  to  one  another  and  half,  right 
ones,  and  the  third  2  right  one,  I  placed  in  a 
beam  of  the  Sun's  Light  let  into  a  dark  Cham- 
ber through  a  hole  in  the  W'indow-ihut  as  in 
the  third  Experiment.  And  turning  the  Prifm 
flovvly  about  its  Axis  until  all  the  Light  which 
went  through  one  of  its  Angles  and  was  refra- 
fted  by  it  began  to  be  reflected  by  its  Bafe,  at 
which  till  then  it  v\x>nt  out  of  the  Glafs,  I  ob- 
ferved that  thofe  Rays  which  had  fuffered  the 
greatell  Refraction  were  fooner  rcflecfted  than 
the  reft.  I  conceived  therefore  that  thofe  Rays 
of  the  reflecfcd  Light,  which  were  molt  re- 
frangible ^  did  tirlt  of  all  by  a  total  Reflexion 
become  more  copious  in  that  Light  than  the 
reft,  and  that  afterwards  the  reft  alio,  by  a  to- 
tal Reflexion,  became  as  copious  as  thefe.  To 
try  this,  I  made  the  reflected  Light  pais  through 
another  Prifm,  and  being  refracted  by  it  to  fall 
afterwards  upon  a  ilieet  of  white  Paper  placed 
at  fome  diltance  behind  it ,  and  there  by  that* 
Refradion  to  paint  the  ufual  Colours  of  the 
Prifm.  And  then  caufmg  the  firlt  Prifm  to  be 
turned  about  its  Axis  as  above,  I  obferved  that 

'  wiien 


[40 


when  thofe  Rays  which  in  thisPrifm  had  fuf^ 
fered  the  greatellRefradionand  appeared  of  at 
a  blue  and  violet  Colour  began  to  be  totally  re-* 
flecled,  the  blue  and  violet  Light  on  the  Papei? 
which  was  moll  refrafted  in  the  fecond  Prifm 
received  a  fenfible  increafe  above  that  of  the 
red  and  yellow,  which  was  lead  refrafted  ;  and 
afterwards  when  the  rell  of  the  Light  which 
was  green,  yellow  and  red  began  to  be  totally 
refleded  in  the  firfl  Prifm,  the  Light  of  thofe 
Colours  on  the  Paper  received  as  great  an  in- 
creafe as  the  violet  and  blue  had  done  before. 
Whence  'tis  manifefl,  that  the  beam  of  Light 
refleded  by  the  Bafe  of  the  Prifm,  being  aug- 
mented hrll  bv  the  more  refrangible  Rays  and 
afterwards  by  the  lefs  refrangible  ones,  is  com- 
pounded of  Rays  diflerently  refrangible.  And 
that  all  fuch  refleded  Light  is  of  the  fame  na- 
ture with  the  Sun's  Light  before  its  Incidence 
on  the  Bale  of  the  Prifm,  no  Man  ever  doubt- 
ed :  it  being  generally  allowed ,  that  Light  by 
fuch  Reflexions  fullers  no  alteration  in  its  Mo- 
difications and  Properties.  I  do  not  here  take 
notice  of  any  Refradions  made  in  the  fides  of 
the  firll  Prifm,  becaufe  the  Light  enters  it  per- 
pendicularly at  the  firit  fide,  and  goes  out  per- 
pendicularly at  the  fecond  fide,  and  therefore 
iufFers  none.  So  then,  the  Sun's  incident  Light 
being  of  the  fame  Temper  and  Conflitution 
with  his  emergent  Light,  and  the  latf  being 
compounded  of  Rays  differently  refrangible,  the 
firlt  muft  be  in  Uke  manner  compounded. 

lllnjtrat'ion.  In  the  twenty  firll  Figure,  ABC 
is  the  firfl  Prifm,  BC  its  Bafe,  B  and  C  its 

equal 


[47] 


equal  Angles'  at .  the , Bafe,  each .  of  45-  Degrees, 
A  its  rettanguliir  Vertex,  F  M  a  beam  of  the 
Sun's  Light  let  into  a  dark  Room  through  a 
hole  F  one  third  part  of  an  hich  broad,  M  its 
Incidence  on  the  Bale  of  the  Prifm,  M  G  a  lefs 
refraded  Ray,  M  H  a  more  rejraded  Ray,  MN 
the  beam  of  Light  reflected ; from  the  Bafe, 
VX  Y  the  fecond  Prifm  by  which  this  beam  in 
palling  through  it  is  refracted,  N^  the  lels  re- 
fraded  Light  of  this  beam,  and  N/  the  more 
refra(^l:ed  part  thereof  VV  hen  the  firll  Prifm 
ABC  is  turned  about  its  Axis  according  to  the 
order  of  the  Letters  ABC,  the  Rays  MH  e- 
mcrge  more  and  more  obUquely  out  of  that 
Prifm ,  and  at  length  after  their  mofi:  oblique 
Emergence  are  reileded  towards  N,  and  going 
on  to  /  do  increafe  the  number  of  the  Rays 
N/.  Afterwards  bv  continuing  the  Morion  of 
the  firfc  Priim,  the  Rays  M  G  are  aUb  refleded 
to  N  and  increaic  the  number  of  tiie  Rays  Nt. 
And  therefore  the  Light  M  N  admits  into  its 
Compofition  ,  firll  the  more  refrangible  Rays, 
and  then  the  lefs  refrangible  Ravs,  and  yet  af- 
ter this  Compoiition  is  of  the  iame  nature  with 
the  Sun's  immediarte  Light  F  M,  the  PvcHexion 
of  the  fpecular  Bafe  B  C  caufmg  no  alteration 
therein. 

Efcper.  10.  Two  Prifms,  which  were  alike 
in  fliape,  I  tied  lo  together,  that  then*  Axes  and 
oppoiite  bides  being  parallel,  they  compofed  a 
Parallelopiped.  And,  the  Sun  ihining  into  my 
dark  Chamber  through  a  little  hole  in  the  Win- 
dow-ftiut,  I  placed  that  Parallelopiped  in  his 
beam  at  ibme  dillance  from  the  hole,  in  fuch  a 
-  poiture 


[  48  ] 


poflure  that  the  Axes  of  the  Prifnis  might  Be 
perpendicular  to  the  incident  Rays,  and  that 
thole  Rays  being  incident  upon  the  lirlt  Side 
of  one  Prifm ,  might  go  oh  through  the  two 
contiguous  Sides  of  both  Prifms ,  and  emerge 
out  of  the  laft  Side  of  the  fecond  Prifm.  This 
Side  being  parallel  to  the  firfl  Side  of  the  firfl 
Prifm,  caufed  the  emerging  Light  to  be  paral- 
lel to  the  incident.  Then,  beyond  thefe  two 
Prifms  I  placed  a  third,  which  might  refraft 
that  emergent  Light ,  and  by  that  Refradlion 
call  the  ulual  Colours  of  the  Prifm  upon  the 
oppofite  Wall,  or  upon  a  Iheet  of  white  Papel^ 
held  at  a  convenient  dillance  behind  the  Prifm- 
for  that  refrafted  Light  to  fall  upon  it.  After 
this  I  turned  the  Parallelopiped  about  its  Axis, 
and  found  that  when  the  contiguous  Sides  of 
the  two  Prifms  became  fo  oblique  to  the  inci- 
dent Rays  that  thofe  Rays  began  all  of  therh  to 
be  reflected,  thofe  Rays  which  in  the  third 
Prifm  had  fuffered  the  greatefl  Refradion  and 
painted  the  Paper  with  violet  and  blue,  were 
iirft  of  all  by  a  total  Reflexion  taken  out  of  the 
tranfmitted  Light,  the  rell  remaining  and  on 
the  Paper  painting  their  Colours  of  green,  yel- 
lowy orange,  and  red  as  before ;  and  afterwards 
by  continuing  the  Motion  of  the  two  Prifms, 
the  reft  of  the  Rays  alfo  by  a  total  Reflexion 
vanifhed  in  order,  according  to  their  degrees 
of  Refrangibility.  The  Light  therefore  which 
emerged  out  of  the  tw^o  Prifms  is  compound- 
ed of  Rays  diflerently  refrangible,  feeing  the 
more  refrangible  Rays  may  be  taken  out  of  it 
while  the  lefs   refrangible  remain.    But  this 

Light 


[49] 


Light  being  trajefted  only  through  the  parallel 
SuperHcies  of  the  two  Prifms,  if  it  fuftcr'd  any 
change  by  the  Refradion  of  one  Superficies  it 
loll:  that  imprcllion  by  the  contrary  Refradion 
of  the  other  Superhcies,  and  lb  being  rcllored 
to  its  prifline  Conllitution  became  of  the  lame 
nature  and  condition  as  at  firil:  before  its  hici- 
dence  on  thofe  Prifms ;  and  therefore,  before 
its  Incidence,  was  as  much  compounded  of 
Rays  differently  refrangible,  as  afterwards. 

IlliLJiration.  In  the  twenty  fecond  Figure 
ABC  and  BCD  are  the  two  Prifms  tied  toge- 
ther in  the  form  of  a  Parallelopiped,  their  Sides 
B  C  and  C  B  being  contiguous,  and  their  Sides 
AB  and  CD  parallel.  And  HJK  is  the  third 
Prifm,  by  which  the  Sun's  Light  propagated 
through  the  hole  F  mto  the  dark  Chamber,  and 
there  paffing  through  thofe  iidcs  of  the  Prifms 
AB,  BC,  CB  and  CD,  is  refraded  at  O  tc> 
the  white  P^^perPT,  falling  there  partly  upon 
P  by  a  greater  Refradion,  partly  upon  T  by  t 
lefs  Refradion,  and  partly  upon  Rand  other  in- 
termediate places  by  intermediate  Refradions. 
By  turning  the  Parallelopiped  AC  B  D  about  its 
Axis,  according  to  the  order  of  the  Letters  Aj 
C,  D,  B,  at  length  when  the  contiguous  Planes 
B  C  iind  C  B  become  fufficiently  oblique  to'  the 
RaysFM,  which  are  incident  upon  them  atM,- 
there  will  vaniih  totally  out  of  the  refraded 
Light  OPT,  tirftofiill  the  moll  refraded  Rays 
OP,  (the  reft  OR  and  OT  remaining  as  be- 
fore) then  the  Rays  O  R  and  other  intermedi- 
ate ones,  and  laftly,  theleaft  refraded  RaysOT- 
For  wh€Fi  the  Plane  B  C  becomes  futhcienrly 

E  oblique 


-       [  50  ] 

oblique  to  the  Rays  incident  upon  it ,  tliole 
Rays  will  begin'  to  be  totally  refiecled  by  it  to- 
wards N;  and  firll  the  moll  refrangible  Rays 
wiTi  be  totally  reflc(^kd  (as  was  explained  in 
the  preceding  Experiment)  and  by  confcquencc 
mult  lirfl  dilappear  at  P,  and  afterwards  the 
reil  as  they  are  in  order  totally,  rctieded  to  N, 
they  mull  dilappear  in  the  i'ame  order  at  R 
and  T.  So  then  the  Rays  which  at  O  fuf- 
fer  the  greateft  Refrac4ion,  may  be  taken  out 
of  the  Light  M  O  whillt  the  reil  of  the  Rays 
remain  in  it,  and  therefore  that  Light  MO 
is.  compounded  of  Rays  diflerently  refrangi- 
ble. And  becaufe  the  Planes  A  Pj  and  CD 
are  paiialiel,  and  therefore  by  equal  and  con- 
trary Refradions  dcUroy  one  anothers  Ef- 
fQtis,  the  incident  Light  FM  mutl  be  of  the 
fame  kind  and  nature  with  the  emergent  Light 
MO,  and  therefore  doth  alfo  conlid  of  Rays 
differently  refrangible.  Thefe  two  Lights  F  M 
and  jM  O,  before  the  moil  refrangible  Rays  arc 
feparated  out  of  the  emergent  Light  MO,  a- 
gree  in  colour ,  and  in  all  other  properties  fo 
far  as  my  oblervation  reaches,  and  therefore 
are  defervcdly  reputed  of  the  famx  nature  and 
confutution,  and  by  confequence  the  one  is 
compounded  as  well  as  the  other.  But  after 
the  moil  refrangible  Rays  begin  to  be  totally 
rcileded,  and  thereby  feparated  out  of  the  e- 
mergent  Light  MO,  that  Light  changes  its  co- 
lour from  white  to  a  dilute  and  faint  yellow, 
a  pretty  good  orange ,  a  very  full  red  iuccef- 
iivcly  and  then  totally  vanifhes.  For  after  the 
moft  refrangible  Rays  which  paint  the  Paper  at 

"       ■  P  with 


[?l] 


P  with  a  purple  Colour,  arc  by  a  total  Refle- 
xion taken  out  of  the  beam  of  Light  M  O,  the 
refl;  of  the  Colours  which  appear  on  the  Paper 
at  R  and  T  being  mixed  in  the  Light  MO 
compound  there  a  faint  yellow ,   and  after  the 
blue  and  part  of  the  green  which  appear  on  the 
Paper  between  P  and  R  are  taken  away,  therelfc 
which  appear  between  R  and  T  (that  is  the  yel- 
low, orange,  red  and  a  little  green)  being  mix- 
ed in  the  beam  MO  compound  there  an  orange ; 
and  when  all  the  Rays  are  by  Reilexion  takert 
out  of  the  beam  MO,  except  the  leait  refran- 
gible, which  at  T  appear  of  a  full  red,  their 
Colour  is  the  farrie  in  that  beam  M  O  as  after- 
wards at  1\  the  Refradion  of  the  Prifm  H J  K 
ferving  only  to  feparate  the  differently  refran- 
gible Rays,  without  making  any  alteration  iri 
their  Colours,   as  ihall  be  more  fully  proved 
hereafter.     All  which  confirms  as  well  the  tiril 
Proportion  as  the  fecond. 

Scljolinm.  If  this  Experiment  and  the  former 
be  conjoined  and  made  one  by  applying  a  fourth 
Prifm  VX  Y  [in  Fig.  xx.]  torefradthe  refleft-^ 
ed  beam  MN  towards  r/,  the  conciufion  will 
be  clearer.  For  then  the  Light  N/  which  in 
the  fourth  Prifm  is  more  refracted,  will  become 
fuller  and  flronger  when  the  Light  O  P,  which 
in  the  third  Prifm  HJ  K  is  more  refracled,  va- 
nilhes  at  P ;  and  afterwards  wiien  the  lefs  re- 
fracted Light  OT  vanifiies  at  T,  the  lefs  re- 
fracted Light  N  t  will  become  ericreafed  whiKl 
the  more  refraded  Light  at  p  receives  no  far- 
ther encreafe;  And  as  the  trajeded  beam  MO 
in  vanifhing  is  always  of  fuch  a  Colour  as  oiight 

E  2;  te^ 


t52l 


to  refult  from  the  mixture  of  the  Colours  which 
fall  upon  the  Paper  PT,  fo  is  the  reflc(^kd 
beam  M  N  always  of  fuch  a  Colour  as  ought  to 
refult  from  the  mixture  of  the  Colours  which 
fall  upon  the  Paper  p  t.  For  when  the  moil 
refrangible  Rays  are  by  a  total  Reflexion  taken 
out  ot  the  beam  M  O,  and  leave  that  beam  of 
an  orange  Colour,  the  Excels  of  thole  Rays  in 
the  refie(^kd  Light,  does  not  only  make  the 
violet,  indigo  and  blue  at  /  more  full,  but  alfo 
makes  the  beam  MN  change  from  the  yellow- 
ilh  Colour  of  the  Sun's  Light,  to  a  pale  white 
inclining  to  blue,  and  afterward  recover  its 
yellovvifli  Colour  again,  fo  foon  as  all  the  reft 
of  the  tranimitted  Light  MOT  is  refleded. 

Now  feeing  that  in  all  this  variety  of  Expe- 
riments, whether  the  Trial  be  made  in  Light 
refleded,  and  that  either  from  natural  Bodies, 
as  in  the  firll  and  fecond  Experiment,  or  fpe- 
cular,  as  in  the  ninth  ;  or  in  Light  refrained, 
and  that  either  before  the  unequally  refradcd 
Rays  are  by  diverging  feparated  frome  one  an- 
other, and  lofmg  their  whitenefs  which  they 
have  altogether,  appear  feverally  of  feveral  Co-^ 
lours,  as  in  the  tifth  Experiment ;  or  after  they 
are  leparaied  from  one  another,  and  appear  co- 
lour'd  as  in  the  iixth,  fcventh,  and  eighth  Ex- 
periments ;  or  in  Light  trajeded  through  paral- 
lel buperticics,  deltroying  each  others  Etfec^ls, 
as  in  the  tenth  Experiment;  there  are  always 
found  Ravs,  which  at  equal  Incidences  on  the 
fame  Alcdium  luiier  unequal  Reflations,  and 
that  without  any  iplitting  or  dilating  of  fingle 
Raysj  or  contingence  in  the  inequality  of  the 

Reira- 


[53] 


Refraflions,  as  is  proved  in  the  fifth  and  fixth 
Experiments*.    And  feeing  the  Rays  which  dif- 
fer in  Refrangibility  may  be  parted  and  farted 
from  one  another,   and  that  either -by  Refra- 
dion  as  in  the  third  Experiment,  or  by  Re- 
flexion as  in  the  tenth ,  and  then  the  fevcral 
forts  apart  at  equal  Incidences  fu'der  unequal 
Refractions,  and  thofe  forts  are  more  refra^rted 
than  others  after  fcparation,  which  were  more 
refraded  before  it,  as  in  the  fixth  and  follow- 
ing Experiments,  and  if  the  Sun's  Light  be  tra- 
jected  through  three  or  more  crofs  Prifms  fuc- 
cellively,    thole  Rays  which  in  the  tirdPrifm 
are  refrafled  more  than  others,  are  in  all  the 
following  Prifms  refracted  more  than  others  in 
the  fame  rate  and  proportion,   as  appears  by 
the  fifth  Experiment ;    it's  manifcil  that  the 
Sun's  Light  is  an  heterogeneous  mixture  of 
Rays,   fome  of  which  are  conltantly  more  re- 
frangible than  others,  as  was  propoled. 

TROT,  in.    The  OR.  III. 

The  Suns  Light  conjifts  of  Rays  differing  in  Re- 
flexibility^  and  thofe  Rays  are  more  refiexible 
than  others  which  are  more  refrangible. 

THIS  is  manifeft  by  the  ninth  and  tentl^ 
Experiments :  For  in  the  ninth  Experi- 
ment, by  turning  the  Prifm  about  its  Axis,  un- 
til the  Rays  within  it  which  in  going  out  into, 
the  Air  were  refrafled  by. its  Bafe,  became  fo 
oblique  to  that  Bafe,  as  to  begin  to  be  totally 

E  a  refledeci 


[54] 


reflefled  thereby ;  thofe  Rays  became  -firfl  of 
all  totally  reflected,  wnich  before  at  equal  In- 
cidences with  the  reft  had  fuftered  the  greatell 
Refradlion.  And  the  fame  thing  happens  in  the 
Reflexion  made  by  the  common  Bafe  of  the 
two  Prifms  in  the  tenth  Experiment. 

TROT.  IV.    Prob.  I. 

To  feparate  from  one  another  the  heterogeneous 
Rays  of  compound  Light. 


Tf^H  E  heterogeneous  Rays  are  in  fome  mea- 
\^  fure  feparated  from  one  another  by  the 
Refraftion  of  the  Prifm  in  the  third  Experi- 
ment, and  in  the  fifth  Expcrinient  by  taking  a- 
v/ay  the  Penumbra  from  the  redilinear  fides  of 
the  coloured  Image,  that  feparation  in  thofe  ve- 
ry redilinear  lides-  or  ftraight  -edges  of  the  Ir 
mage  becomes  perfec^l.  But  in  all  places  be- 
tween thofe  rectilinear  edges,  thofe  innumera- 
ble Circles  there  defcribed,  which  are  fcveral- 
ly  illuminated  by  homogeneal  Rays,  by  interfe- 
ring vvith  one  another,  and  being  every  where 
comimix'd,  do  render  the  Light  fufhciently 
compound.  But  if  thefe  Circles ,  whilli:  their 
centers  keep  their  diftances  and  pofitions,  could 
be  made  kfs  in  diameter,  their  interfering  one 
"with  another  and  by  confequence  the  mixture 
of  the  heterogeneous  Rays  would  be  propor- 
tionally diminifiied.  In  the  tv/enty  third  Figure 
let  AG,  BH,  CJ,.DK,  EL,  FM  be  the  Cir- 
cles which  iQ  many  forts  of  Rays  flowing  from 

the 


[  55  ] 


the  fame  difqiic  of  the  Sun,  do  in  the  third 
Experiment  illuminate  ;  of  all  which  and  in- 
numerable other  intermediate  ones  lying  in  a 
continual  Scries  between  the  two  rectilinear 
and  parallel  edges  of  the  Sun's  oblong  Image 
P  T,  that  Image  is  compofed  as  was  explained 
in  the  fifth  Experiment.  And  let  ag^  S/j,  ci, 
dk^  el,  fm  be  fo  many  lefs  Circles  lying  in  a 
like  continual  Series  between  two  parallel  right 
Lines  af'\wd\.gm  with  the  fame  diilances  be- 
tween their  centers,  and  illuminated  by  the 
iame  forts  of  Rays,  that  is  the  Circle  ag  with 
the  fame  fort  by  which  the  corrcfponding  Cir- 
cle AG  was  illuminated,  .and  the  Circle  bb 
with  the  fame  fort  by  which  the  corrcfponding 
Circle  BEI  w^as  illuminated,  and  the  rell:  of  the 
Circles  f /*,  dk,  el,  fni  refpeCtivcly,  with  the 
fame  forts  of  Rays  by  which  the  fever al  corrc- 
fponding Circles  Cj,"DK,  EL,  FM  were  il- 
luminated. In  the  Figure  P  T  compofed  of  the 
greater  Chxles,  three  of  thofe  Circles  AG,  BH, 
C  J,  are  fo  expanded  into  one  another,  that  the 
three  forts  of  Rays  by  which  thofe  Circles  are 
illuminated  ,  together  with  other  innumerable 
forts  of  intermediate  Rays,  are  mixed  at  QR 
in  the  middle  of  the  Circle  B  H.  And  the  like 
mixture  happens  throughout  almod  the  whole 
length  of  the  Figure  P  T.  But  in  the  Figure 
pt  compofed  of  the  lefs  Circles,  the  three  lefs 
Circles  ag,  b  h,  c  i,  which  anfwer  to  thofe  three 
greater,  do  not  extend  into  one  another;  nor 
are  there  any  where  mingled  fo  m.uch  as  any 
two  of  the  three  forts  of  Rays  by  which  thofe 

E  4  Circles 


[50 


Circles  are  illuminated ,  and  which  in  the  Fi- 
gure PT  are  all  of  them  intermingled  at  B  H. 

Now  he  that  fhall  thus  confider  it,  will  eafily 
underltand  that  the  mixture  is  diminiilicd  in 
the  fame  proportion  with  the  Diameters  of  the 
Circles.  If  the  Diameters  of  the  Circles  whilft 
their  Centers  remain  the  fame,  be  made  three 
times  lefs  than  before,  the  mixture  will  be  alfo 
three  times  lefs ;  if  ten  times  lefs,  the  mixture 
will  be  ten  times  lefs,  and  fo  of  other  propor- 
tions. That  is,  the  mixture  of  the  Rays  in  the 
greater  Figure  PT  will  be  to  their  mixture  iri 
the  lefs  /  ^,  as  the  Latitude  of  the  greater  Fi- 
gure is  to  the  Latitude  of  the  lefs.  For  the 
Latitudes  of  thefe  Figures  are  equal  to  the  Di- 
ameters of  their  Circles.  And  lience  it  caiily 
follows,  that  the  mixture  of  the  Rays  in  the  re- 
frafted  Speftrum  /  r  is  to  the  mixture  of  the 
Rays  in  the  direft  and  immediate  Ligtit  of  the 
Sun,  as  the  breadth  of  that  Speclrum  is  to  the 
diflerence  between  the  length  and  breadth  of 
the  fame  Spectrum. 

So  then ,  if  we  would  diminifh  the  mixture 
of  the  Rays ,  we  are  to  diminiih  the  Diameters 
of  the  Circles.  Now  thefe  would  be  diminifli- 
ed  if  the  Sun's  Diameter  to  which  they  anfwer 
could  be  made  lefs  than  it  is,  or  (which  comes 
to  the  fame  purpofe )  if  without  doors ,  at  a 
great  diilance  from  the  Prifm  towards  the  Sun, 
lome  opake  Body  were  placed ,  with  a  round 
hole  in  the  middle  of  it ,  to  intercept  all  the 
Sun's  Light ,  excepting  fo  much  as  coming 
from  the  middle  of  his  Body  could  pals  through 

that 


[  57  ] 


t\nt  hole  to  the  Prifm.  For  fo  the  Circles  AG, 
BH  and  the  reU,  would  not  any  longer  anl'wcr 
to  the  whofe  Dilque  of  the  Sun,  but  only  to 
that  part  of  it  which  could  be  Jeen  from  the 
Prilm  through  that  hole ,  that  is  to  the  appa- 
rent magnitude  of  that  hole  viewed  from  the 
Prifm.  But  that  thefe  Circles  may  anfwer  more 
diftindly  to  that  hole,  a  Lens  is  to  be  placed  by 
the  Prifm  to  call  the  Image  of  the  hole,  (that 
is,  everyone  of  the  Circles  AG,  BPI,  &c.)  di- 
Itindly  upon  the  Paper  at  PT,  after  fuch  a 
manner  as  by  a  Lens  placed  at  a  W  indow  the 
Species  of  Objeds  abroad  arc  cail  diitinCtly  up- 
on a  Paper  within  the  Room,  and  the  redili- 
near  Sides  of  the  oblong  folar  Image  in  the  fifth 
Experiment  became  dillind  without  any  Pen- 
umbra. If  this  be  done  it  will  not  be  nccefia- 
ry  to  place  that  hole  very  far  off,  no  not  beyond 
the  \V indow.  And  therefore  initead  of  that 
hole,  I  ufed  the  hole  in  the  Window-ihut  as 
follows. 

Exper,  II.  In  the  Sun's  Light  let  into  my 
darkned  Chamber  through  a  fmall  round  hole 
in  my  Window- fhut,  at  about  ten  or  twelve 
Feet  from  the  Window,  I  placed  a  Lens,  by 
which  the  Image  of  the  hole  might  be  dillinft- 
ly  call  upon  a  Sheet  of  white  Paper,  placed  at 
the  diflance  of  fix,  eight,  ten  or  twelve  Feet 
from  the  Lens.  For  according  to  the  diffe- 
rence of  the  Lenfes  I  ufed  various  diilances, 
which  I  think  not  worth  the  v^hile  to  defcribe. 
Then  immediately  after  the  Lens  I  placed  a 
Prifm,  by  which  the  trajec'led  Light  might  be 
refraded  either  upwards  or  Tideways,  and  there- 
by 


[58] 


by  the  round  Image  which  the  Lens  alone  did 
cafl  upon  tlie  Paper  might  be  drawn  out  into  a 
long  one  with  parallel  Sides,  as  in  the  third  Ex- 
periment. This  oblong  Image  I  let  fall  upon 
another  Paper  at  about  the  (iam.e  didance  from 
the  Priim  as  before,  moving  the  Paper  either' 
towards  the  Prifm  or  from  it,  until  I  found  the 
juil  diflance  where  the  reciilinear  Sides  of  the 
image  became  moil  diflind.  For  in  this  cafe 
the  circular  Images  of  the  hole  which  compofe 
that  Image  after  the  fame  manner  that  the  Cir- 
cles ^?^,  bh^  r/',  &c.  do  the  Figure/^  \mFig. 
a-3.]  were  terminated  moil  diitinftly  without 
any  Penumbra,  and  therefore  extended  into 
one  another  the  lead  that  they  could,  and  by 
confcquence  the  mixture  of  the  heterogeneous 
Rays  was  now  the  Icail  of  all.  By  this  means 
I  uled  to  form  an  oblong  Image  (luch  as  is/^) 
[iniv^.  23,  and  24.]  of  circular  Images  of  the 
hole  (fuch  as  are  ag^  bh^  ci^  &:c.)  and  by  u- 
iing  a  greater  or  lefs  hole  in  the  Window-ihut, 
I  made  the  circular  Images  ag^  bh^  c  i,  &c.  of 
which  it  was  formed,  to  become  greater  or  lefs 
at  pleafure,  and  thereby  the  mixture  of  the 
Rays  in  the  Iniage  /  ^  to  be  as  much  or  as  lit- 
tle as  I  defired. 

Illnftrat'wn.  In  the  twenty  fourth  Figure,  F 
reprcicnts  the  circular  hole  in  the  W  indow- 
iliut,  MN  the  Lens  whereby  the  Image  or  Spe- 
cies of  that  hole,  is  call  diitindly  upon  a  Paper 
at  J,  ABC  the  Prifm  whereby  the  Rays  are  at 
their  emerging  out  of  the  Lens  refraded  from 
J  towards  another  Paper  at  /  ^,  and  the  round 
Image  at  J  is  turned  into  an  oblong  Image  / 1 

falling 


S9  ] 


Ming  on  that  other  Paper.  This  Image/ /'con- 
flits  of  Circles  placed  one  after  another  in  a  rc- 
,6tilincar  order,  as  was  fuiiicienily  explained  in 
the  fifth  Experiment;  and  thefe  Circles  are  e- 
qual  to  the  Circle  J,  and  conlcquently  anfwer 
in  magnitude  to  the  hole  F ;.  and  therefore  by 
diminiihing  that  hole  they  may  be  at  pleafure 
diminiihed,  whilil  their  Centers  remain  in  their 
places.  By  this  means  I  m.ade  the  breadth  of 
the  Image  /  r  to  be  forty  times,  and  fometimes 
fixty  or  feventy  times  lefs  than  its  length;  As  for 
inflance,  if  the  breadth  of  the  hole  F  be  one  tenth 
of  an  Inch,  and  MF  the  diilance  of  the  Lens  f -om 
the  hole  be  ii  Feet?  and  if/B  or  /  Mthe  di- 
ilance of  the  Image  /  t  from  the  Prifm  or  Lens 
be  lo  Feet,  and  the  refra6i:ing  Angle  of  the 
Prifm  be  61  Degrees,  the  breadth  of  the  L 
mage  /  /  will  be  one  twelfth  of  an  Inch  and  the 
length  about  fix  Inches,  and  therefore  the 
length  to  the  breadth  as  71  to  i,  and  by  confe- 
quence  the  Light  of  this  Image  71  times  lefs 
compound  than  the  Sun's  diredri:  Light.  And 
Light  thus  fir  fimple  and  homogeneal,  is  fulH- 
cicnt  for  trying  all  the  Experiments  in  this  Book 
•about  iimple  Light.  For  the  compofition  of 
-heterogeneal  Rays  is  in  this  Light  fo  little  that 
it  is  fcarce  to  be  difcovered  and  perceived  by 
Senfe,  except  perhaps  in  the  indigo  and. vio- 
let. For  thele  being  dark  Colours,  do  eafily 
.fuffer  a  fenfible  allay  by  that  little  fcattering 
Light  which  ufes  to  be  reft-acf  ed  irregularly  by 
the  inequalities  of  the  Priiin. 

Yet  inflead  of  the  circular  hole  F,  'tis  better 
to  fubftitute  an  oblong  hole  ihaped  like  a-  lontr 

ParaU 


I^o] 


Parallelogram  with  its  length  parallel  to  the 
Priim  ABC.  For  if  this  hole  be  an  Inch  or 
two  long,  and  but  a  tenth  or  twentieth  part  of 
an  Inch  broad,  or  narrower:  the  Light  of  the 
Image /i^  will  beas  fin^ple  as  before, or  fimpler, 
and  the  Image  will  become  much  broader,  and 
therefore  more  fit  to  have  Experiments  tried  in 
its  Light  than  before. 

Inilcad  of  this  parallelogram  hole  may  be  fub- 
llituted  a  triangular  one  of  equal  Sides,  whofe 
Bale  for  inllance  is  about  the  tenth  part  of  an 
Inch,  and  its  height  an  Inch  or  more.  For  by 
this  means,  if  the  Axis  of  the  Prhm  be  parallel 
to  the  Perpendicular  of  the  Triangle,  the  Image 
ft  [in  Fig.  zf.]  will  now  be  formed  of  equi- 
crural Triangles  ag^  bh^  cl,  dk^  el^  fm,  ike, 
and  innumerable  other  intermediate  ones  an- 
fwering  to  the  triangular  hole  in  fliape  and  big- 
nefs,  and  lying  one  after  another  in  a  continual 
Series  between  two  parallel  Lines  <?/and  ^/^. 
Thefe Triangles  are  a  little  intermingled  at  their 
Bafes  but  not  at  their  Vertices,  and  therefore 
the  Light  on  the  brighter  fide  afo^  thelujage 
where  the  Bafes  of  the  Triangles  are,  is  a  little 
compounded,  but  on  the  darker  fide  g  m  is  al- 
together uncompounded,  and  in  all  places  be- 
tween the  lides  ttie  Compolition  is  proportio- 
nal to  the  dillances  of  the  places  from  that  ob- 
fcurer  fide  g  m.  And  having  a  Spedrum  / 1 
of  inch  a  Compofition,  we  may  try  Experiments 
either  in  its  Wronger  and  lels  fimple  Light  near 
the  fide  af^  or  in  its  weaker  and  limpler  Light 
near  the  other  fide  gm^  as  it  ihall  ieem  molt 
convenient. 

But 


I6i] 


But  in  making  Experiments  of  this  kind  the 
Chamber  ought  to  be  made  as  dark  as  can  be, 
Jelt  any  foreign  Light  mingle  it  felf  with  the 
Light  of  the  bpedrum//',  and  render  it  com- 
pound ;  efpecially  if  we  would  try  Experiments 
in  the  more  iimple  Liht  next  the  fide^^  m  of 
the  Spedrum;  which  being  fainter,  wifl  have 
a  lefs  proportion  to  the  foreign  Light,  and  fo 
by  the  mixture  of  that  Light  be  more  troubled 
and  made  more  compound.  The  Lens  alfo 
ought  to  be  good,  fuch  as  may  ferve  for  opti- 
cal ufes,  and  the  Priim  ought  to  have  a  large 
Angle,  fuppofe  of  65-  or  70  Degrees,  and  to  be 
well  wrought,  being  made  of  Glals  free  from 
bubbles  and  veins,  with  its  Sides  not  a  little 
convex  or  concave,  as  ufually  happens,  but  truly 
plane,  and  itsPolilh  elaborate,  as  in  working 
Optick-glafles,  and  not  fuch  as  is  ufually  wrought 
with  Putty,  whereby  the  edges  of  the  Sand- 
holes  being  worn  av\  ay,  there  are  left  all  over 
the  Glafs  a  numberlefs  company  of  very  little 
convex  polite  Rifmgs  like  Waves.  The  edges 
alfo  of  the  Prilm  and  Lens  fo  far  as  they  may 
make  any  irregular  Refraction,  mull  be  covered 
with  a  black  Paper  glewed  on.  And  all  the 
Light  of  the  Sun's  beam  let  into  the  Chamber 
which  is  uielel's  and  unprofitable  to  the  Experi- 
ment, ought  to  be  intercepted  with  black  Pa- 
per or  other  black  Obftacles.  For  otherwife 
the  uJelefs  Light  being  refleded  every  way  in 
the  Chamber,  will  mix  with  the  oblong  Spe- 
d-rum  and  help  to  dillurb  it.  In  trying  thefe 
things  fo  much  diligence  is  not  altogether  ne- 
€€llary,  but  it  will  promote  the  iuccefs  of  the 

.^  Expe- 


[62-] 

Experiments,  and  by  a  very  fcrupiilous  Exa- 
miner of  things  deierves  to  be  applied.  It's 
diiiicult  to  get  Glafs  Prifms  fit  for  tiiis  purpofe, 
and  therefore  I  iifed  fometimes  prifmatickVef- 
fels  made  with  pieces  of  broken  Looking-glaf- 
feSi  and  filled  with  Rain  Water.  And  to  in- 
creafc  the  Refradion,  I  fometimes  impregnated 
the  W  ater  Itrongly  with  Saccharttm  Saturnt. 

TROT,  V.    Theor.  IV. 

Homogeneal  Light  is  refrd&ed  regularly  'with^ 
out  any  ^Dilatation  Jplitting  or  Jhattering  of 
the  Rays,  and  the  confufed  Vijion  of  ObjcBs 
fic7i  through  refradting  Bodies  by  heterogeneal 
Light  arifes  from  the  different  Refrangible 
lity  of  fever  al  forts  of  Rays. 

THE  firil  part  of  this  Proportion  has  been 
already  fufiiciently  proved  in  the  fifth 
Experiment,  and  will  farther  appear  by  theEx-^ 
periments  which  follow. 

Expcr.  12.  In  the  middle  of  a  black  Paper  I 
made  a  round  hole  about  a  iifth  or  fixth  part  of 
an  Inch  in  diameter.  Upon  this  Paper  Icaufed 
the  Spectrum  of  homogeneal  Light  defcribed 
in  the  formx.er  Proportion,,  fo  to  fall,  that  fome 
part  of  the  Light  might  pafs  throiigh  the  hole: 
of  the  Paper.  This  tranfmitted  part  of  the 
Light  I  refracted  with  a  Prifm  placed  behind 
the  Paper,  and  letting  this  retraced  Light  fall 
perpendicularly  upon  a  Avhite  Paper  two  or 
three  Feet  diilant  from  the  Prifm,  I  found  that 

the 


[^3] 


the  Spcdrum  formed  oa  the  Paper  by  this  Light 
was  not  oblong,  as  wlien  'tis  made  (in  the  third 
Experiment)  by  refracting  the  Sun's  compound 
Light,  but  was  (fo  flir  as  I  could  judge  by  my 
Kye)  perfedly  circular,  the  length  being  no 
greater  than  the  breadth.  Which  ih-ews  that 
this  Light  is  rcfra(^ed  regularly  without  anyDi- 
laHation  of  the  Rays. 

Exper.  13.  In  the  homogcneal  Light  I  placed  a 
Paper  Circle  of  a  quarter  oi:^  an  Inch  in  diameter, 
and  in  the  Sun's  unrefracled  heterogeneal  white 
Light  I  placed  another  Paper  Circle  of  the  fame 
bignefs.  And  going  I'rom  the  Papers  to  the 
diilance  of  fome  Feet,  I  viewed  both  Circles 
through  a  Priim.  The  Circle  illuminated  by 
the  Sun's  heterogeneal  Light  appeared  very  ob- 
long as  in  the  fourth  Experiment,  the  length 
being  many  times  greater  than  the  breadth :  but 
the  other  Circle  illuminated  with  homogeneal 
Light  appeared  circular  and  diilinctly  defined 
as  when  'tis  viewed  with  the  naked  Eye. 
Which  proves  the  whole  Proportion. 

Exper.  14.  In  the  homogeneal  Light  I  placed 
Flies  and  fuch  lilce  minute  Objeds,  and  view- 
ing them  through  a  Prifm,  I  law  their  parts  as 
diiiintftly  defined  as  if  I  had  viewed  them  with 
the  naked  Eye.  The  fame  Objects  placed  in 
the  Sun's  unrefraClcd  heterogeneal  Light  which 
was  white  I  viewed  alio  through  a  Prifm,  and 
faw  them  molt  confufedly  derined,  fo  that  I 
could  not  diitinguilh  their  fmaller  parts  from 
one  another.  I  placed  alio  the  Letters  of  a 
fmall  print  one  while  in  the  homogeneal  Light 
aod  then  in  the  heterogeneal,  and  viewing  them 

tiirough 


[  ^4  ] 


through  a  Prifm,  they  appeared  m  the  latter 
cafe  lb  confufed  and  indiltind  that  I  could  not 
read  them  ;  but  in  the  former  they  appeared  fo 
diilinft  that  I  could  read  readily,  and  thought 
I  faw  them  as  diflindl  as  when  I  viewed  them 
with  my  naked  Eye.  In  both  cafes  I  viewed 
the  fame  Objeds  through  the  fame  Prifm  at  the 
fame  dillance  from  me  and  in  the  fame  fitfta- 
tion.  There  vi^as  no  difterence  but  in  the  Light 
by  which  the  Objed:s  were  illuminated,  and 
which  in  one  cafe  was  fimplc  and  in  the  other 
compound,  and  therefore  the  diltinft  VifiOn  iit 
the  former  cafe  and  confufed  in  the  latter  could 
arife  from  nothing  elfe  than  from  that  ditference 
of  the  Lights.  Which  proves  the  whole  Pro- 
pofition. 

And  in  thcfe  three  Experiments  it  is  farther 
very  remarkable ,  that  the  Colour  of  homoge- 
neal  Light  was  never  changed  by  the  Refra- 
ction. 

0lh^^r^r^.^^^.^^^^^^^^   ^   *   r«j   ^.   A   #.   ^   ^   ^. 

T  RO'P.  VI.     Theor.  v. 

The  sine  of  Incidence  of  every  Ray  conftdered  a-^ 
farty  is  to  its  Sine  of  Re f ration  in  a  givett 
Ratio. 

TH  AT  every  Ray  confidered  apart  is  con- 
llant  to  it  felf  in  fome  degree  of  Refran- 
gibility,  is  fufficiently  manifefl  out  of  what  has 
been  laid.  Thofe  Rays  which  in  the  firit  Re- 
fraftion  are  at  equal  Incidences  moll  refracted, 
are  alfoun  the  following  Refradions  at  equal 

Inci- 


[^5] 


Incidences  mofl  refrafted ;  and  fo  of  the  leaft 
refrangible,  and  the  reit  which  have  any  mean 
degree  of  Refrangibilit}',  as  is  manifeft  by  the 
fifth,  fixth,  feventh,  and  eighth,  and  ninth  Ex- 
periments. And  thofe  which  the  fird  time  at 
like  Incidences  are  equally  refracfed,  are  again 
at  like  Incidences  equally  and  uniformly  refra- 
i^ted,  and  that  whether  they  be  refraded  be- 
fore they  be  feparated  from  one  another  as  in 
the  fifth  Experiment,  or  whether  they  be  re- 
fraded  apart,  as  in  the  twelfth ,  thirteenth  and 
fourteenth  Experiments.  The  Refradlion  there- 
fore of  every  Ray  apart  is  regular,  and  what 
Rule  that  Refraction  obierves  we  are  now  to 
Ihew. 

The  late  Writers  in  Opticks  teach,  that  the 
Sines  of  Incidence  are  in  a  given  Proportion 
to  the  Sines  of  Refradion,  as  was  explained  in 
the  fifth  Axiom  ;.  and  fome  by  Inftruments  tit- 
ted  for  mealuring  of  Refrac^lions,  ot*  othervvife 
experimentally  examining  this  Proportion ,  do 
acquaint  lis  that  they  have  found  it  accurate. 
But  whilfl  they ,  not  underflanding  the  diffe- 
rent Refrangibilitv  of  feveral  Rays ,  conceived 
them  all  to  be  refi-aftcd  according  to  one  and 
the  fame  Proportion,  'tis  to  be  preJuvned  that 
they  adapted  their  meafures  only  to  the  middle 
of  the  refraded  Light ;  fo  that  from  their  mea- 
fures we  may  conclude  only  that  the  Rays 
which  have  a  mean  degree  of  Refrangibility , 
that  is  thofe  which  when  feparated  from  the 
rell  appear  green,  are  refrafted  according  to  a 
given  Proportion  of  their  Sines.  And  there- 
fore we  are  now  to  fliew  that  the  like  given 

F  Pro- 


{66  1 


Proportions  obtain. in  all  the  refl.  That  it 
iliould  be  fo  is  very  realbnable ,  Nature  being 
ever  conformable  to  her  felf :  but  an  experi- 
mental Proof  is  delired.  And  fuch  a  Proof 
will  be  had  if  we  can  fliew  that  the  Sines  of 
Refraction  of  Rays  differently  refrangible  are 
one  to  another  in  a  given  Proportion  when 
their  Sines  of  Incidence  are  equal.  For  if  the 
Sines  of  Refradion  of  all  the  Rays  are  in  .given 
Proportions  to  the  Sine  of  Refra(ition  of  it  Ray 
which  has  a  mean  degree  of  Refrangibility,  and 
this  Sine  is  in  a  given  Proportion  to  the  equal 
Sines  of  hicidence,  thofe  other  Sines  of  Refra- 
dion  will  alfo  be  in  given  Proportions  to  the 
equal  Sines  of  Incidence.  Now  when  the  Sines 
of  Incidence  are  equal,  it  will  appear  by  the 
following  Experiment  that  the  Sines  of  Refra- 
ction are  in  a  given  Proportion  to  one  ano- 
ther. 

Exper.  15-.  The  Sun  iliining  into  a  dark 
Chamber  through  a  little  round  hole  in  the 
Window-fhut,  let  S  [in  Fig.  i6.]  reprefent  his 
round  white  Image  painted  on  the  oppofite 
Wall  by  his  direft  Light,  PT  his  oblong  co- 
loured Image  made  by  refrading  that  Light 
with  a  Prifm  placed  at  the  Window;  and  /  ty 
or  x/  z /,  or  3/*  3  ^5  his  oblong  colour'd  Image 
made  by  refrading  again  the  fame  Light  fide- 
ways  with  a  fecond  Prifm  placed  immediately 
after  the  firlf  in  a  crofs  pofition  to  it,  as  was 
explained  in  the  fifth  Experiment :  that  is  to 
fay ,  p  t  when  the  Refradion  of  the  fecond 
Prifm  is  fmall ,  -Lp  i.t  when  its  Refradion  is 
greater ,  and  3/  3  i^  when  it  is  greatelt.    For 

i  fiich 


[^7] 


luch  will  be  the  diverfiry  of  the  Refradions  if 
the  refrading  x\ngle  of  the  fecond  Prit'm  be  of 
various  magnitudes ;  fuppoie  of  fifteen  or  twen- 
ty Degrees  to  make  the  Image  / 1,  of  thirty  or 
forty  to  make  the  hiiagc  i.p  it^  and  of  fixty  to* 
make  the  Image  3/  3 1.  But  for  want  of  folid 
Glafs  Prifms  with  Angles  of  convenient  big- 
nelies,  there  may  be  \  cilels  made  of  poliihed 
Plates  of  Glafs  cemented  together  in  the  form 
of  Prifms  and  filled  with  Water.  Thefe  things 
being  thus  ordered,  I  obferved  that  all  the  fo- 
lar  Images  or  coloured  Spedrums  PT,  /r,  %p 
^  ^  3  /  3  ^  did  very  nearly  converge  to  the 
place  S  on  which  the  direcl:  Light  of  the  Sun 
fell  and  painted  his  white  round  Image  when 
the  Prifms  were  taken  away.  The  Axis  of  the 
SpcdrumPT,  that  is  the  Line  drawn  through 
the  middle  of  it  parallel  to  its  redilinearSidcsy 
did  when  produced  pafs  exactly  through  the 
middle  of  that  white  round  Image  S.  And  when 
the  Refradion  of  the  fecond  Prifm  was  equal 
to  the  Refradion  of  the  firit,  the  refrading  An- 
gles of  them  both  being  about  60  Degrees,  the 
Axis  of  the  Spedrum  3  J^  i  t  made  by  that  Re- 
fradion, did  when  produced  pafs  alfo  through 
the  mididle  of  the  fame  white  round  Image  S. 
But  when  the  Refradion  of  the  fecond  Prifm 
was  lefs  than  that  of  the  firit,  the  produced 
Axes  of  the  Spedrums  r/  or  x?  x/  made  by 
that  Refradion  did  cut  the  produced  Axis  of 
the  Spedrum  TP  in  the  points  m  and  //,  a  lit- 
tle beyond  the  center  of  that  white  round  I- 
mage  S.  Whence  the  proportion  of  the  Line 
3^T  to  the  Line  3/P  was  a  Httle  greater  than 

F  2,  the 


[«8] 


the  Proportion  of  x^T  to  x/P,  and  this  Pro^ 
portion  a  Httle  greater  than  that  of  /  T  to  /  P. 
Now  when  the  Light  of  theSpeftrum  PT  falls 
perpendicularly  upon  the  Wall ,  thofe  Lines 
3  ^T,  3  / P,  and  x  2^ T,  x/P  and  tT,  j?F,  are 
the  Tangents  of  the  Refradions,  and  therefore 
by  this  Experiment  the  Proportions  of  the  Tan- 
gents of  the  Refractions  are  obtained,  from 
whence  the  Proportions  of  the  Sines  being  de- 
rived, they  come  out  equal,  To  far  as  by  view- 
ing the  Spedrums  and  ufmg  fome  mathemati- 
cal Reafoning  I  could  eltimate.  For  I  did  not 
make  an  accurate  Computation.  So  then  the 
Propolition  holds  true  in  every  Ray  apart ,  fo 
far  as  appears  by  Experiment.  And  that  it  is 
accurately  true,  may  be  demonftrated  upon  this 
Suppofition ,  T/^t  Bodies  refra6i  Light  by  adt- 
ing  upon  its  Rays  in  Lines  perpendicular  to 
their  Surfaces.  But  in  order  to  this  Demon-^ 
Ib'ation,  .1  muil  diftinguifli  the  Motion  of  every 
Ray  into  two  Motions ,  the  one  perpendicular 
to  the  refrafting  Surface ,  the  other  parallel  to 
it,  and  concerning  the  perpendicular  Motion 
lay  down  the  following  Propofition. 

If  any  Motion  or  moving  thing  whatfoever  be 
incident  with  any  velocity  on  any  byoad  and 
thin  fpace  terminated  on  both  fides  by  two  pa- 
rallel Planes,  and  in  its  paiTage  through  that 
fpace  be  urged  perpendicularly  towards  the  far- 
ther Plane  by  any  force  which  at  given  diflances 
from  the  Plane  is  of  given  quantities;  the  per- 
pendicular velocity  of  that  Motion  or  Thing, 
at  its  emerging  out  of  that  fpace,  fliall  be  al- 
ways equal  to  the  fquare  Root  of  the  fum  of 

the 


[^9] 


the  fquare  of  the  perpendicular  velocity  of  that 
Motion  or  Thing  at  its  Incidence  on  that  fpace ; 
and  of  the  fquare  of  the  perpendicular  velocity 
which  that  Motion  or  Thing  would  have  at  its 
Emergence,  if  at  its  Incidence  its  perpendicu- 
lar velocity  v\'as  infinitely  little. 

And  the  fame  Propofition  holds  true  of  any 
Motion  or  Thing  perpendicularly  retarded  in 
its  pafliige  through  that  fpace,  if  inilead  of  the 
fum  of  the  two  Squares  you  take  their  diffe- 
rence. The  demonllration  ^vlathematicians  will 
eafily  find  out,  and  therefore  I  iliall  not  trouble 
the  Reader  with  it. 

Suppofe  now  that  a  Ray  cominj:;  mofl  oblique- 
ly in  the  Line  MC  \\nFig.  i.]  be  refraded  at 
C  by  the  Plane  RS  into  the  Line  CN,  and  if  it 
be  required  to  find  the  Line  C  E  into  which 
any  other  Ray  A  C  fhall  be  refraded  ;  let  MC, 
AD,  be  the  Sines  of  Incidence  of  the  two  Rays, 
and  NG,  EF,  their  Sines  of  Refra6lion,  and 
let  the  equal  Motions  of  the  incident  Rays  be 
reprefented  by  the  equal  Lines  MC  and  AC, 
and  the  Motion  MC  being  confldered  as  paral- 
lel to  the  refrading  Plane,  let  the  other  Motion 
A  C  be  diflinguiihed  into  two  Motions  AD 
and  DC,  one  of  which  AD  is  parallel,  and  the 
other  DC  perpendicular  to  the  refrading  Sur- 
face. In  like  manner,  let  the  Motions  of  the 
emerging  Rays  be  dilHnguifh'd  into  two,  where- 
of the  perpendicular  ones  are  —-  CG  and  — CF. 

And  if  the  force  of  the  refrading  Plane  begins 
to  ad  upon  the  Rays  either  in  that  Plane  or  at 
a  certain  diftance  from  it  on  the  one  fide,  and 
ends  at  a  certain  diftance  from  it  on  the  other 

F  3  fide, 


1 70  ] 

fide,  and  in  all  places  between  thofe  two  limits 
ads  upon  the  Rays  in  Lines  perpendicular  to 
that  refrading  Plane,  and  the  Anions  upon  the 
Ra^^s  at  equal  diftances  from  the  refrading  Plane 
be  equal,  and  at  unequal  ones  either  equal  or 
unequal  according  to  any  rate  whatever  ;  that 
Motion  of  the  Ray  which  is  parallel  to  the  re- 
fra61:ing  Plane  will  furfer  no  alteration  by  that 
force  ,•  and  that  Motion  w^hich  is  perpendicular 
to  it  will  be  altered  according  to  the  rule  of  the 
foregoing  Propofition.  If  therefore  for  the  per- 
pendicular velocity  of  the  emerging  Ray  CN 

MC 
you  write  —  C  G  as  above,  then  the  perpendi- 
cular velocity  of  any  other  emerging  Ray  C  E 
which  was  ^,CF,  will  be  equal  to  the  fquare 

Root  of  C  D  ^  -^  ^— ^  C  G  ^.   And  by  fquaring 

thefe  Equals ,  and  adding  to  them  the  Equals 
A  D  ^  and  M  C  ^  —  C  D  ^ ,  and  dividing  the 
Sums  by  the  Equals  G  T'  <^  4-  EF  ^  and  CGq  -\- 

NGq,  you  will  have  -~-  equal  to  ■— -.    Whence 

AD,  the  Sine  of  Incidence,  is  to  EF  the  Sine 
pf  Refraction,  as  MC  to  NG,  that  is,  in  a  given 
ratio.  And  this  Demonltration  being  general, 
without  determining  what  Light  is,  or  by  what 
kind  of  force  it  is  refraded,  or  afluming  any' 
thing  farther  than  that  the  refrading  Body 
ads  upon  the  Rays  in  Lines  perpendicular  to  its 
Surface ;  I  take  it  to  be  a  very  convincing  Argu- 
ment of  the  full  truth  of  this  Propofition. 

Sq  then ,  if  the  ratio  of  the  Sines  of  Incir 

^ence  and  Refradion  of  any  fort  of  Rays  be 

•  found 


[71] 

found  in  any  one  cafe ,  'tis  given  in  all  cafes ; 
and  this  may  be  readily  found  by  the  method 
in  the  following  Propoiition.  / 

TROT.  Vn.    Theor.  VI. 

The  Terfc^ion  of  Telefcopes  is  impeded  by  the 
different  Rcfrangibility  of  the  Rays  of  Light. 

TPIE  Imperfedion  of  Telefcopes  is  vul- 
garly attributed  to  the  ipherical  Figures 
ot  the  Glaffes,  and  therefore  Mathematicians 
have  propounded  to  figure  them  by  the  coni- 
cal Sedions.  To  fliew  that  they  arc  miilaken , 
1  have  inferted  this  Proportion;  the  truth  of 
which  will  appear  by  the  meafures  of  the  Re- 
fraftions  of  the  feveral  forts  of  Rays ;  and  thefe 
meafures  I  thus  determine. 

In  the  third  Experiment  of  the  firil  Book, 
where  the  refraclirig  Angle  of  the  Prifm  was 
6x4  Degrees,  the  half  of  that  Angle "  31  deg.  1$ 
min.  is  the  Angle  of  Incidence  of  the  Rays  at: 
their  going  out  of  the  Glafs  into  the  Air ;  and 
the  Sine  of  this  Angle  is  5"  18  8,  the  Radius  being 
1 0000.  When  the  Axis  of  this  Prifm  was  pa- 
rallel to  the  Horizon,  and  the  Refraftion  of 
the  Rays  at  their  Incidence  on  this  Prifm  equal 
to  that  at  their  Emergence  out.  of  it,  I  obferved 
with  a  Quadrant  the  Angle  which  the  mean  re- 
frangible Rays  (that  is,  thofe  which  went  to  the 
middle  of  the  Sun's  coloured  Image)  made  with 
the  Horizon  and  by  this  Angle  and  the  Sun's  al- 
titude obferved  at  the  fame  time,  I  found  the 
'\ngle  which  the  emergent  Rays  contained  wdth 

F  4  the 


[  72  ] 

the  incident  to  be  44deg.  and  40  min.  and  the 
half  of  this  Angle  added  to  the  Angle  of  Inci- 
dence 31  deg.  15  min.  makes  the  Angle  of  Re-. 
fradion,  which  is  therefore  5-3  deg.  3  5- min.  and 
its  Sine  8047.  Thefe  are  the  Sines  of  Incidence 
and  Refradion  of  the  mean  refran  ible  Rays, 
and  their  proportion  in  round  numbers  is  20  to 
31.  This  Glafs  was  of  a  colour  inclining  to 
green.  The  lad  of  the  Prifms  mentioned  in  the 
third  Experiment  was  of  clear  white  Glafs.  Its 
refrading  Angle  634  Degrees.  The  Angle  which 
the  emergent  Rays  contained,  with  the  incident 
45-  deg.  50  min.  The  Sine  of  half  the  firft  An- 
gle 5x62.  The  Sine  of  half  the  fum  of  the  An- 
gles 8157.  And  their  proportion  in  round  num- 
bers 20  to  31,  as  before. 

From  the  length  of  the  Image,  which  was  a- 
bout  94  or  10 Inches,  fubduft  its  breadth,  which 
was  24  Inches,  arid  the  remainder  7^  Inches 
would  be  the  length  of  the  Image  were  the  Sun 
but  a  point,  and  therefore  fubtends  the  Angle 
which  the  mioit  and  leatt  refrangible  Rays,  when 
incident  on  the  Prifm  in  the  fame  Lines,  do 
contain  with  one  another  after  their  Emergence. 
Whence  this  Angle  is  2  deg.  o'.  f.  For  the 
diilance  between  the  Image  and  the  Prifm 
where  this  Angle  is  made,  was  184  Feet,  and 
at  that  diilance  the  Chord  7^-  Inches  fubtends  an 
Angle  o'i  2  deg.  d.  y".  Now  half  this  Angle  is 
the  Angle  which  thefe  emergent  Rays  contain 
with  the  emergent  mean  refrangible  Rays,  and 
a  quarter  thereof,  that  is  30'.  z".  may  be  ac- 
counted the  Angle  which  they  would  contain 
with  the  fame  emergent  mean  refi'angible  Rays, 

were 


[73] 


were  they  co-incident  to  them  within  the  Gkfs 
and  fuffered  no  other  Refra(^Hon  than  that  at 
their  Emergence.  For  if  two  equal  Refractions, 
rhe  one  at  the  Incidence  of  the  Rays  on  the 
Prifm,  the  other  at  their  Emergence,  make  half 
the  Angle  x  deg.  o.  f.  then  one  of  thofe  Re- 
fractions will  make  about  a  quarter  oF  that  An- 
gle ,  and  this  quarter  added  to  and  fubduded 
irom  the  Angle  of  Refraction  of  the  mean  re- 
frangible Rays,  which  was  5-3  deg.  35-',  gives 
the  Angles  of  Refradion  of  the  moll  and  leafl 
refrangible  Rays  5-4  deg. /x",  and  53  deg.  4  58'', 
v/hofe  Sines  are  8099  and  7995,  the  common 
Angle  of  hicidence  being  31  deg.  15-'  and  its 
Sine  5'i88;  and  tiiefe  Sines  in  the  leall  round 
numbers  are  in  proportion  to  one  another ,  as 
78  and  77  to  5-0. 

Now  if  you  fubduft  the  common  Sine  of  In- 
cidence 5-0  from  the  Sines  of  Refradion  -j-j  and 
78,  the  remainders  27  and  28  fliew  that  in  fmall 
Reflations  the  Refradion  of  the  leall  refran- 
gible Rays  is  to  the  Refradion  of  the  moll  re- 
frangible ones  as  27  to  28  very  nearly,  and  that 
the  difference  of  the  Refradion  s  of  the  leall  re- 
frangible and  moll  refrangible  Rays  is  about  the 
27!th  part  of  the  whole  Refradion  of  the  mean 
refrangible  Rays. 

Whence  they  that  are  skilled  in  Opticks  will 
safily  underlland,  that  the  breadth  of  the  lead 
circular  fpace  into  which  Objed-glaffes  of  Te- 
'efcopes  can  colled  all  forts  of  parallel  Rays,  is 
about  the  27vth  part  of  half  the  Aperture  of  the 
Glafs,  or  ffth  part  of  the  whole  Aperture ;  and 
that  the  Fociis  of  the  molt  refrangible  Rays  is 

nearer 


[  74  ] 


nearer  to  the  Objed-glafs  than  the  Focus  of  the 
leaft  refrangible  ones,  by  about  the  274th  part 
of  the  diftance  between  the  Objeft-glafs  and  the 
Focus  of  the  mean  refrangible  ones. 

And  if  Rays  of  all  forts ,  flowing  from  any 
one  lucid  point  in  the  Axis  of  any  convex  Lens, 
be  made  by  the  Refradion  of  the  Lens  to  con- 
verge to  points  not  too  remote  from  the  Lens . 
the  Focus  of  the  moil  refrangible  Rays  fliall  be 
nearer  to  the  Lens  than  the  Focus  of  the  leaf, 
refrangible  ones,  by  a  diftance  which  is  to  the 
a74th  part  of  the  diitance  of  the  Focus  of  the 
mean  refrangible  Rays  from  the  Lens  as  the  di- 
ftance between  that  Focus  and  the  lucid  point 
from  whence  the  Rays  flow  is  to  the  diitance 
between  that  lucid  point  and  the  Lens  very 
nearly. 

Now  to  examine  whether  the  difference  be- 
tween the  Refra(^tions  which  the  moft  refrangi- 
ble and  the  leafl:  refrangible  Rays  flowing  from 
the  fame  point  fuffer  in  the  Object-glaffes  of 
Telefcopes  and  fuch  like  Glaffes,  be  fo  great  as 
is  here  defcribed,  I  contrived  the  following  Ex- 
periment. 

Exper.  16.  The  Lens  which  I  ufed  in  the  fe- 
cond  and  eighth  Experiments,  being  placed  fix 
Feet  and  an  Inch  diltant  from  any  Objeft,  col- 
lected the  Species  of  that  Object  by  the  mean 
refrangible  Rays  at  the  diitance  of  fix  Feet  and 
an  Inch  from  the  Lens  on  the  other  ilde.  And 
therefore  by  the  foregoing  Rule  it  ought  to  col- 
lect the  Species  of  that  Objed  by  the  leait  re- 
frangible Rays  at  the  diitance  of  fix  Feet  and 
37  Inches  from  the  Lens ,  and  by  the  molt  re- 
frangible 


[75] 


frangible  ones  at  the  diitance  of  five  Feet  and 
107  Inches  from  it:    So  that  between  the  two 
places  where  theie  leall  and  moil  refrangible 
Rays  colled  the  Species,  there  may  be  the  di- 
llance  of  about  si  Inches.     For  by  that  Rule, 
as  fix  Feet  and  an  hich  (the  diitance  of  the  Lens 
from  the  lucid  Obiecft )   is  to  twelve  Feet  and 
two  Inches  (the  diilance  of  the  lucid  Obje6t 
from  the  Focus  of  the  mean  refrangible  Rays) 
that  is,  as  one  is  to  two,  lb  is  the  2<74th  part 
of  iix  Feet  and  an  Inch   (the  diilance  between 
the  Lens  and  the  fame  Focus)   to  the  diilance 
between  the  Focus  of  the  moil  refrangible  Rays 
and  the  Focus  of  the  leail   refrangible  ones, 
which  is  therefore  5"-^  Inches,  that  is  very  near- 
ly 5|  Inches.    Now  to  know  whether  this  mea- 
fure  was  true,  I  repeated  the  fecond  and  eighth 
Experiment  with  coloured  Light ,   which  was 
lei's  compounded  than  that  I  there  made  ufe 
of:    For  I  now  feparated  the   heterogeneous 
Rays  from  one  another  by  the  method  I  de- 
fcribed  in  the  eleventh  Experiment,    ib  as  to 
make  a  coloured  Spe6lrum  about  twelve  or  fif- 
teen times  longer  than  broad.     This  Speftrum 
I  call  on  a  printed  Book,  and  placing  the  above- 
mentioned  Lens  at  the  diilance  of  iix  Feet  and 
an  Inch  from  this  Spedlrum  to  colled  the  Spe- 
cies of  the  illuminated  Letters  at  the  fame,  di- 
ilance on  the  other  fide,  I  found  that  the  Spe- 
cies of  the  Letters  illuminated  with  blue  were 
nearer  to  the  Lens  than  thofe  illuminated  with 
deep  red  by  about  three  Inches  or  three  and  a 
quarter :  but  the  Species  of  the  Letters  illumi- 
nated with  indigo  and  violet  appeared  fo  con- 

fufed 


[in 


fufed  and  indiflinft,  that  I  could  not  read  them : 
Whereupon  viewing  the  Prifm,  I  found  it  was 
full  of  Veins  running  from  one  end  of  the  Glafs 
to  the  other ;  fo  that  the  Refradion  could  not 
be  regular.  I  took  another  Prifm  therefore 
which  was  free  from  Veins,  and  inltead  of  the 
Letters  I  ufed  two  or  three  parallel  black  Lines 
a  little  broader  than  the  ftroakes  of  the  Let- 
ters, and  calling  the  Colours  upon  thefe  Lines 
in  fuch  manner  that  the  Lines  ran  along  the 
Colours  from  one  end  of  the  Spedrum  to  the 
other,  I  found  that  the  Focus  where  the  indigo, 
or  confine  of  this  Colour  and  violet  cafl  the 
Species  of  the  black  Lines  molt  diitindly,  to 
be  about  four  Inches  or  4-^  nearer  to  the  Lens 
than  the  Focus  where  the  deepeit  red  call  the 
Species  of  the  fame  black  Lines  mod  diflin6l- 
ly.  The  violet  was  fo  faint  and  dark,  that  I 
could  not  difcern  the  Species  of  the  Lines  di- 
flindlly  by  that  Colour;  and  therefore  confi- 
dering  that  the  Prifm  was  m,ade  of  a  dark  co- 
loured Glafs  inchning  to  green,  I  took  another 
Prifm  of  clear  white  Glais ;  but  the  Spedrum 
of  Colours  which  this  Prifm  made  had  long 
white  {beams  of  faint  Light  fliooting  out  from 
both  ends  of  the  Colours,  which  made  me  con- 
clude that  fomething  was  amifs ;  and  viewing 
the  Prifm ,  I  found  two  or  three  little  bubbles 
in  the  Glafs  which  refraded  the  Light  irregu- 
larly. Wherefore  I  covered  that  part  of  the  Glafs 
with  black  Paper,  and  letting  the  Light  pafs 
through  another  part  of  it  which  was  free  from 
fuch  bubbles,  the  Spedrum  of  Colours  became 
free  from  thofe  irregular  Strei^ms  of  Light,  and 

was 


[77] 

was  now  fuch  as  I  defired.  But  flill  I  found 
the  violet  fo  dark  and  faint,  that  I  could  fcarce 
fee  the  Species  of  the  Lines  by  the  violet,  and 
not  at  all  by  the  deepeit  part  of  it ,  which  was 
next  the  end  of  the  Spedrum.  I  fufpeded 
therefore  that  this  faint  and  dark  Colour  might 
be  allayed  by  that  fcattcring  Light  which  was 
refraded,  and  refleded  irregularly,  partly  by 
fomc  very  fmall  bubbles  in  the  Glalies,  and 
partly  by  the  inequaUties  of  their  PoUlh :  which 
Light,  tho'  it  was  but  little,  yet  it  being  of  a 
white  Colour,  might  fuiHce  to  affcd  the  Senfe 
fo  flrongly  as  to  dillurb  the  Phsenomena  of  that 
weak  and  dark  Colour  the  violet ,  and  there- 
fore I  tried,  as  in  the  nth,  13th  and  14th  Lx- 
periments,  whether  the  Light  of  this  Colour 
did  not  coniift  of  a  fcnfible  mixture  of  heteroge- 
neous Rays,  but  found  it  did  not.  Nor  did  the 
Refradio'ns  caufe  any  other  fenfible  Colour  than 
violet  to  emerge  out  of  this  Light,  as  they 
would  have  done  out  of  white  Light,  and  by 
confequence  out  of  this  violet  Light  had  it  been 
fenfibly  compounded  with  white  Light.  And 
therefore  I  concluded ,  that  the  reafon  why  I 
could- not  fee  the  Species  of  the  Lines  diltind- 
ly  by  this  Colour,  was  only  the  darknefs  of  this 
Colour  and  thinnefs  of  its  Light,  and  its  di- 
Hance  from  the  Axis  of  the  Lens ;  I  divided 
therefore  thofe  parallel  black  Lines  into  equal 
parts,  by  which  I  might  readily  know  the  di- 
Itances  of  the  Colours  in  the  Spedrum  from 
one  another,  and  noted  the  diitances  of  the 
Lens  from  the  Foci  of  fuch  Colours  as  caft  the 
Species  of  the  Lines  diliindly,  and  then  confi- 

dcred 


[78] 


dered  whether  the  difference  of  thofe  diftances 
bear  fuch  proportion  to  $-}  Inches,  the  greateft 
difference  of  the  diilances  which  the  Foci  of 
the  deepefl  red  and  violet  ought  to  have  from 
the  Lens ,  as  the  diltance  of  the  obferved  Co- 
lours from  one  another  in  the  Spectrum  bear  to 
the  greateft  diiiance  of  the  deepefl  red  and 
violet  meafured  in  the  reftilinear  fides  of  the 
Spe61rum,  that  is,  to  the  length  of  thofe  Sides 
or  Excels  of  the  length  of  the  Spedrum  above 
its  breadth.  And  my  Obfervations  were  as  fol- 
lows. 

When  I  obferved  and  compared  the  deepeft 
fenfible  red,  and  the  Colour  m  the  Confine  of 
green  and  blue ,  which  at  the  redilincar  Sides 
of  the  Spectrum  was  diltant  from  it  half  the 
length  of  thofe  Sides,  the  Focus  where  the  Con- 
fine of  green  and  blue  caft  the  Species  of  the 
Lines  diitindly  on  the  Paper,  was  nearer  to  the 
Lens  than  the  Focus  where  the  red  caft  thofe 
Lines  diftinftly  on  it  by  about  x4  or  2-|  Inches. 
For  fometimes  the  Meafures  were  a  little  great- 
er, fometimes  a  little  lefs,  but  feldom  varied 
from  one  another  above  -f  of  an  Inch.  For  it 
was  very  difficult  to  define  the  places  'of  the 
Foci,  without  fome  little  Errors.  Now  if  the 
Colours  diftant  half  the  length  of  the  Image, 
(meafured  at  its  reftiUnear  Sides)  give  24  or  24 
difference  of  the  diftances  of  their  Foci  from 
the  Lens ,  then  the  Colours  diftant  the  whole 
length  oug'r.t  to  give  5  or  5-4  Inches  difference 
of  thofe  diftances. 

But  here  it's  to  be  noted ,  that  I  could  not 
fee  the  red  to  the  full  end  of  the  Spedrum, 

but 


[  19  ] 

but  only  to  the  center  of  the  Semicircle  which 
bounded  that  end ,  or  a  httle  farther ;  and 
therefore  I  compared  this  red  not  with  that 
Colour  which  was  exadly  in  the  middle  of  the 
Spectrum,  or  Confine  of  green  and  blue,  but 
\\\i\\  that  which  verged  a  little  more  to  the  blue 
than  to  the  green:  And  as  I  reckoned  the 
whole  length  of  the  Colours  not  to  be  the  whole 
length  of  the  Spectrum ,  but  the  length  of  its 
rectilinear  Sides,  fo  completing  the  lemicircu- 
lar  Ends  into  Circles,  when  either  of  the  ob- 
ferved  Colours  fell  within  thofc  Circles,  I  mea- 
furcd  the  dillance  of  that  Colour  from  the  fe- 
micircular  end  of  the  Spedrum,  and  fubduci:- 
ing  half  this  difu\nce  from  the  meafured  di- 
llance of  the  two  Colours,  I  took  the  remain- 
der for  their  corre(^ted  dillance ;  and  in  tliefc 
Obfervations.fet  down  this  corrected  dillance 
for  the  difference  of  the  dillances  of  their  Fpoi 
from  the  Lens.  For  as  the  length  of  the  recti- 
hnear  Sides  of  theSpedrum  would  be  the  whole 
length  of  all  the  Colours,  were  the  Circles  of 
which  (as  we  ihe\^ed)  that  Spe61rum  confills 
contrafted  and  reduced  to  phylical  Points,  fo 
in  that  cafe  this  corre(!:l:ed  dillance  would  be  the 
real  dillance  of  the  two  oblerved  Colours, 

When  therefore  1  flirther  oblerved  the  deep- 
ell  fenfible  red,  and  that  blue  whofe  corrected 
dillance  from  it  was  tt  parts  of  the  length  of 
the  rectilinear  Sides  of  the  Spe61:rum,  the  dif- 
ference of  the  diltances  of  their  Foci  from  the 
Lens  was  about  3-^  inches,  and  as  7  to  ix  fo  is 
3v  to  5f 

When 


[8o] 


When  I  obferved  the  deepefl  fenfible  red, 
and  that  indigo  whofe  corrected  diftance  was 
TT  or  -J  of  the  length  of  the  redihnear  Sides  of 
the  Spe6lrum,  the  difference  of  the  diitances  of 
their  Foci  from  the  Lens,  was  about  3y  Inches, 
and  as  z  to  3  fo  is  3?  to  54. 

When  I  obferved  the  deepefl;  fenfible  red , 
and  that  deep  indigo  whofe  corrected  dillance 
from  one  another  was  -%  or  4  of  the  length  of 
the  redilinear  Sides  of  the  Spedrum ,  the  dif- 
ference of  the  dillances  of  their  Foci  from  the 
Lens  was  about  4  Inches ;  and  as  3  to  4  fo  is  4 
to  si- 

When  I  obferved  the  deepefl  fenfible  red, 
and  that  part  of  the  violet  next  the  indigo, 
whofe  correded  diflance  from  the  red  was  41 
or  -I-  of  the  length  of  the  rec^filinear  Sides  of  the 
Spedrum,  the  difference  of  the  diflances  of 
their  Foci  from  the  Lens  w^as  about  44  Inches, 
and  as  5  to  6,  fo  is  44  to  54.  For  fometimes 
when  the  Lens  was  advantagioufly  placed,  fo 
that  its  Axis  refpe6ted  the  blue,  and  all  things 
elfe  were  well  ordered,  and  the  Sun  flione  clear, 
and  I  held  my  Eye  very  near  to  the  Paper  on 
which  the  Lens  cafl  the  Species  of  the  Lines,  I 
could  fee  pretty  diflindly  the  Species  of  thofe 
Lines  by  that  part  of  the  violet  which  was  next 
the  indigo;  and  fometimes  I  could  fee  them 
by  above  half  the  violet.  For  in  making  thefe 
Experiments  I  had  obferved ,  that  the  Species 
of  thofe  Colours  only  appear  diflind  which  were 
in  or  near  the  Axis  of  the  Lens :  So  that  if  the 
blue  or  indigo  were  in  the  Axis,  I  could  fee 
their  Species  diflindly ;  and  then  the  red  ap- 
peared 


[8,] 

peared  much  lefs  diiiinft  than  before.  Where- 
fore I  contrived  to  make  the  Spectrum  of  Co- 
lours ihorter  than  before,  fo  that  both  its  ends 
might  be  nearer  to  the  Axis  of  the  Lens.  And 
now  its  length  U'as  about  i4  Inches  and  breadth 
about  4  or  -^  of  an  Inch.  Al(o  inilead  of  the 
black  Lines  on  which  the  Spe(!:l:rum  was  call,  I 
made  one  black  Line  broader  than  thoie,  that 
I  might  fee  its  Species  more  eafily;  and  this 
Line  I  divided  by  Ihort  crofs  Lines  into  equal 
parts,  for  meafuring  the  dillances  of  the  obler- 
ved  Colours.  And  now  I  could  fometimes  fee 
the  Species  of  this  Line  with  its  divilions  al- 
mofl  as  far  as  the  center  of  the  femicircular 
violet  end  of  the  Spedrum ,  and  made  thefe 
farther  Obfervations. 

When  I  ob'crvcd  the  deepclt  fenfibleredjand 
that  part  of  the  viol^et  whole  corrected  diitance 
from  it  was  about  4  parts  of  the  rectilinear  Sides 
of  the  Spectrum  the  diticrence  of  the  dillances 
of  the  Foci  of  thole  Colours  from  the  Lens, 
was  one  time  44,  another  time  44?  another  time 
4t  Inches ,  and  as  8  to  9,  fo  are  47,  44,  4-7,  to 
5*75  5't?  5*^  refpedively. 

When  I  obl'crved  the  deeped  fenfible  red, 
and  deepelt  fenlible  violet ,  (the  corrected  di- 
llance  of  which  Colours  when  all  things  were 
ordered  to  the  belt  advantage ,  and  the  Sun 
fhone  very  clear,  was  about  44  or  44  parts  of 
the  length  of  the  redilinear  Sides  of  the  co^ 
loured  Spedrum)  I  found  the  dinerence  of  the 
dillances  of  their  Foci  from  the  Lens  fometimes 
44  fometimes  5-4 ,  and  for  the  moil  part  5-  In- 

G  ♦    cheg 


[82] 


ches  or  thereabouts:  and  as  ii  to  l^  of  15-  to 
165  fo  is  five  Inches  to  54-01'  5I  Inches. 

And  by  this  progreflion  of  Experiments  I  fa- 
tisfied  my  felf ,  that  had  the  Light  at  the  very 
ends  of  the  Spedrum  been  ibong  enough  to 
make  the  Species  of  the  black  Lines  appear 
plainly  on  the  Paper,  the  Focus  of  the  deepell 
violet  would  have  been  found  nearer  to  the 
Lens,  than  the  Focus  of  the  deepell  red,  by  a- 
bout  Si  Inches  at  leaft.  And  this  is  a  farther 
evidence ,  that  the  Sines  of  Incidence  and  Re- 
fradion  of  the  feveral  forts  of  Rays,  hold  the 
fame  proportion  to  one  another  in  the  fmallell 
Refradtions  which  they  do  in  the  greateit. 

My  progi'efs  in  making  this  nice  and  trouble- 
fome  Experiment  I  have  fet  down  more  at  large, 
that  they  that  fliall  try  it  after  me  may  be  aware 
of  the  circumfpedtion  requifite  to  make  it  fuc- 
ceed  well.  And  if  they  cannot  make  it  fuc- 
ceed  fo  well  as  I  did ,  they  may  notwithlland- 
ing  colledl  by  the  proportion  of  the  diilance  of 
the  Colours  of  the  Spedlrum,  to  the  ditierence 
of  the  diflances  of  their  Foci  from  the  Lens, 
what  would  be  the  fuccefs  in  the  more  diftant 
Colours  by  a  better  trial.  And  yet  if  they  ufe 
a  broader  Lens  than  I  did,  and  hx  it  to  a  long 
flraight  Staff  by  means  of  which  it  may  be  rea- 
dily and  truly  diredted  to  the  Colour  whofe  Fo- 
cus is  defired,  I  queflion  not  but  the  Experi- 
ment will  fucceed  better  with  them  than  it  did 
with  me.  For  I  diredled  the  Axis  as  nearly  as  I 
could  to  the  middle  of  the  Colours,  and  then 
the  faint  ends  of  the  Spedtrum  being  remote 
from  the  Axis,  caft  their  Species  lefs  diftindlly 

on 


[83] 


on  the  Pnper  than  they  would  have  done  had 
the  Axis  been  iueceflively  direded  to  them. 

Now  by  what  has  been  iaid,  it's  certain  that 
the  Rays  which  differ  in  Refrangibility  do  not 
converge  to  the  lame  Focus,  but  if  they  flow 
from  a  lucid  point,  as  fl\r  from  the  Lens  on  one 
fide  as  their  Foci  are  on  the  other,  the  Focus 
of  the  moll  refrangible  Ravs  fliall  be  nearer  to 
the  Lens  than  that  of  the  leall  refrangible,  by 
above  the  fourteenth  part  of  the  whole  dillance : 
and  if  they  flow  from  a  lucid  point,  fo  very  re- 
mote from  the  Lens  that  before  their  Incidence 
they  may  be  accounted  parallel,  the  Focus  of 
the  moli:  refrangible  Rays  ihall  be  nearer  to  t.ie 
Lens  than  the  Focus  of  the  lealt  refrangible* 
by  about  the  27th  or  xuth  part  of  their  whole 
dillance  from  it.  And  the  diameter  of  the  Cir- 
cle in  the  middle  fpace  between  thofe  two  Fo- 
ci which  they  illuminate  when  they  fall  there 
on  any  Plane,  perpendicular  to  the  Axis  (which 
Circle  is  the  leall  into  which  they  can  all  be  ga- 
thered )  is  about  the  yfth  part  of  the  diameter 
of  the  Aperture  of  the  Glafs.  So  that  'tis  a  won- 
der that  Telefcopes  reprefent  Objects  fo  diilin6t 
as  they  do.  But  were  all  the  Rays  of  Light  e- 
qually  refrangible,  the  Error  ariling  only  from 
the  fphericalnefs  of  the  Figures  of  Gkilles  would 
be  many  hundred  rimes  lefs.  For  if  the  Objecl:- 
glafs  of  a  Telefcopc  be  Plano-convex,  and  the 
Plane  fide  be  turned  towards  theObjc(3:,  and 
the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  whereof  this  Glafs 
is  a  fegment,  be  called  D,  and  the  femidiame- 
ter  of  the  Aperture  of  the  Glafs  be  called  S, 
and  the  Sine  of  Incidence  out  of  Glafs  into  Air, 

G  X  be 


[  84  ] 


be  to  the  Sine  of  Refradion  as  I  to  R :  the  Rays 
which  come  parallel  to  the  Axis  of  the  Glals, 
fhall  in  the  place  where  the  Image  of  the  Objeft 
is  moll  diftinftly  made,  be  fcattered  all  over  a 

little  Circle  whofe  diameter  is  7--  x  '■  '  '  ,  very 

I  cj        O  quad.  •' 

nearly,  as  I  gather  by  computing  the  Errors  of 
the  Rays  by  the  method  of  infinite  Series,  and 
rejeding  the  Terras  whofe  Quantities  are  in- 
confiderable.  As  for  inilance ,  if  the  Sine  of 
Incidence  I,  be  to  the  Sine  of  Refraction  R,  as 
20  to  31,  and  if  D  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere 
to  which  the  convex  fide  of  theGlafs  is  ground, 
be  100  Feet  or  ixoo  Inches,  and  S  the  femidia- 
meter  of  the  Aperture  be  two  Inches,  the  dia- 
meter of  the  little  Circle  (that  is  ^-^—)  will 

,  :?I   XM   X  8  ,  961  .  r  T  1 

be  —-^ — • (or :: — • )  parts  or  an  Inch. 

2CXiO  XI2OO  X  1200    ^         72000000^* 

But  the  diameter  of  the  little  Circle  through 
which  thefe  Rays  are  fcattered  by  unequal  Re- 
frangibility,  will  be  about  the  5'5'th  part  of  the 
Aperture  of  the  Objedt-glafs  which  here  is  four 
Inches.  And  therefore  the  Error  ariling  from 
the  fpherical  Figure  oT  the  Glals,  is  to  the  Er- 
ror arifing  from  the  different  Rcfrangibility  of 

the  Rays,  as^l^^  to  ^-  that  is  as  i  to  ^h9  '^ 

and  therefore  being  in  comparifon  fo  very  lit- 
tle, deferves  not  to  be  confidered. 

But  you  will  fay,  if  the  Errors  caufed  by  the 
different  Refrangibility  be  fo  very  great ,  how 
comes  it  to  pais  that  Objects  appear  through 
Telefcopes  fo  diftind:  as  they  do  ?  I  anfwer,  'tis 

^  becaufe 


[85] 


becaufe  the  erring  Rays  are  not  fcartered  uni- 
formly over  all  that  circular  fpace,  but  colleft- 
ed  intinitcly  more  denfely  in  the  center  than  in 
any  other  part  of  the  Circle,   and  in  the  way 
from  the  center  to  the   circumference  grow 
continually  rarer  and  rarer,  fo  as  at  the  circum- 
ference to  become  infinitely  rare ;  and  by  rea- 
fon  of  their  rarity  are  not  llrong  enough  to  be 
vifibie ,  unlefs  in  the  center  and  very  near  it. 
Let  ADE  [in  Fig.  27.]  reprelent  one  of  thofc 
Circles  defcribed  with  the  Center  C  and  Semi- 
diameter  AC,  and  let  BFGbea  fmallcrCircle 
concentrick  to  the  former,  cutting  wivh  its  cir-  . 
cumference  the  Diameter  A  C  in  3,  and  bilecft 
AC  in  N,  and  by  my  reckoning  thcDenfity  of 
the  Light  in  any  place  B  will  be  to  its  Denfity 
in  N,  as  AB  to  BC ;  and  the  whole  Light  With- 
in the  lefTer  Circle  B  FG,  will  be  to  the  whole 
Light  within  the  gi-eater  AED,  astheP^xcefs 
of  the  Square  of  AC  above  the  Square  of  A  B, 
is  to  the  Square  of  AC.     As  if  BC  be  the  fifth 
part  of  AC,  the  Light  will  be  four  times  den- 
ier in  B  than  in  N,  and  the  whole  Light  within 
the  lefs  Circle,  will  be  to  the  whole  Light  with- 
in the  greater,  as  nine  to  twenty  five.  *  Whence 
it*s  evident  that  the  Light  within  the  lefs  Cir- 
cle, mult  ftrike  the  Senfe  much  more  ftrongly, 
than  that  faint  and  dilated  Light  round  about 
between  it  and  the  circumference  of  the  grea- 
ter. 

But  it's  farther  to  be  noted,  that  the  moft  lu- 
minous of  the  prifmatick  Colours  are  the  yel- 
low and  orange.  Thefe  affed  the  Senfes  more 
ilrongly  than  all  the  relt  together,  and  next  to 

G  3  thefe 


[S6] 


thefe  in  flrength  are  the  red  and  green.  The 
blue  compared  with  thefe  is  a  faint  and  dark 
Colour,  and  the  indigo  and  violet  are  much 
darker  and  fainter,  fo  that  thefe  compared  with 
the  ftronger  Colours  are  little  to  be  regarded. 
The  Images  of  Objefts  are  therefore  to  be  pla- 
ced, not  in  the  Focus  of  the  mean  refrangible 
Rays  which  are  in  the  confine  of  green  and 
blue,  but  in  the  Focus  of  thofe  Rays  which  are 
in  the  middle  of  the  orange  and  yellow ;  there 
where  the  Colour  is  mod  luminous  and  fulgent, 
that  is  in  "the  brighteft  yellow,  that  yellow  which 
inclines  more  to  orange  than  to  green.  And 
by  the  Refradion  of  thefe  Rays  (whofe  Sines  of 
Incidence  and  Refradionin  Glafs  are  as  17  and 
11)  the  Refraction  of  Glafs  and  Cryilal  for  op- 
tical Ufes  is  to  be  meafurcd.  Let  us  therefore 
place  the  Image  of  the  Objed  in  the  Focus  of 
thefe  Rays,  and  all  the  yellow  and  orange  wall 
fall  within  a  Circle,  whofe  diameter  is  about 
the  25'oth  part  of  the  diameter  of  the  Aperture 
of  the  Glafs.  And  if  you  add  the  brighter  half 
of  the  red,  (that  half  which  is  next  the  orange) 
and  the  brighter  half  of  the  green,  (that  half 
which  is  next  the  yellow)  about  three  fifth 
parts  of  the  Light  of  thefe  two  Colours  will 
fall  within  the  fame  Circle,  and  two  hfth  parts 
will  fall  without  it  round  about ;  and  that  w^hich 
falls  without  will  be  ipread  through  almolt  as 
much  more  fpace  as  that  which  falls  within, 
and  fo  in  the  grofs  be  alrnofl  three  times  rarer. 
Of  the  other  half  of  the  red  and  green,  (that  is 
oi'  the  deep  dark  red  and  willow  green)  about 
one  quarter  will  fall  within  this  Circle,  and 

three 


[  87  ] 


three  quarters  without,  and  that  which  £\lls 
without  will  be  fpread  through  about  four  or 
five  times  more  fpace  than  that  which  falls  with- 
in ;  and  fo  in  the  grofs  be  rarer ,  and  if  com- 
pared with  the  whole  Light  within  it,  will  be 
about  25-  times  rarer  than  all  that  taken  in  the 
grofs;  or  rather  more  than  30  or  40  times  ra- 
rer, becaufe  the  deep  red  in  the  end  of  the 
Spedrum  of  Colours  made  by  a  Priim  is  very 
thin  and  rare ,  and  the  willow  green  is  fome- 
thing  rarer  than  the  orange  and  yellow.  The 
Light  of  thefe  Colours  therefore  being  fo  very 
much  rarer  than  that  within  the  Circle,  will 
fcarce  affeft  the  Senfe,  efpecially  fmce  the  deep 
red  and  willow  green  of  this  Light,  are  much 
darker  Colours  than  the  relf.  And  for  the  lame 
reafon  the  blue  and  violet  being  much  darker 
Colours  than  thefe,  and  much  more  rarified, 
may  be  negledcd.  For  the  denfe  and  bright 
Light  of  the  Circle,  will  obfcure  the  rare  and 
weak  Light  of  thefe  dark  Colours  round  about 
it,  and  render  them  almoil  infenfible.  The 
fenfible  Image  of  a  lucid  point  is  therefore 
fcarce  broader  than  a  Circle  whofe  diameter  is 
the  250th  part  of  the  diameter  of  the  Aperture 
of  the  Objeft-glafs  of  a  good  Telefcope,  or  not 
much  broader,  if  you  except  a  faint  and  dark  mif- 
ty  Light  round  about  it,  which  a  Speculator  will 
fcarce  regard.  And  therefore  in  a  Telefcope 
whofe  aperture  is  four  Inches,  and  length  an 
hundred  Feet,  it  exceeds  not  2!'  45-''',  or  3".  And 
in  a  Telefcope  whofe  aperture  is  two  Inches, 
and  length  20  or  30  Feet ,  it  may  be  5''  or  6" 
and  fcarce  above.    And  this  anfwers  well  to 

G  4  expe^ 


[88] 


experience :  For  fome  Aflronomers  have  found 
the  Diameters  of  the  lix'd  Stars,  in  Telefcopes 
of  between  20  and  60  Feet  in  length,  to  be  a- 
bout  s"  or  ^"f  or  at  moil  %"  or  10"  in  diame- 
ter. But  if  the  Eye-Glafs  be  tincled  faintly 
with  the  fmoke  of  a  Lamp  or  Torch,  to  ob- 
fcure  the  Light  of  the  Star,  the  fainter  Light 
in  the  circumference  of  the  Star  ceafes  to  be 
vifible,  and  the  Star  (if  the  Glafs  be  fuliicient- 
ly  foiled  with  fmoke)  appears  fomething  more 
like  a  mathematical  Point.  And  for  the  fame 
reafon,  the  enormous  part  of  the  Light  in  the 
circumference  of  every  lucid  Point  ought  to 
be  lefs  difcernible  in  ihorter  Telefcopes  than  in 
longer,  becaufe  the  fhorter  tranfmit  lefs  Light 
to  the  Eye. 

Now  that  the  fix'd  Stars,  by  reafon  of  their 
immenfe  diftance,  appear  hke  Points,  unlefs  fo 
far  as  their  Light  is  dilated  by  Refraction,  may 
appear  from  hence ;  that  when  the  Moon  paf- 
fes  over  them  and  eclipfes  them,  their  Light 
vaniflies,  not  gradually  like  that  of  the  Planets, 
but  all  at  once ;  and  in  the  end  of  the  Eclipfe 
it  returns  into  Sight  all  at  once,  or  certainly  in 
lefs  time  than  the  fecond  of  a  Minute ;  the  Re- 
fradion  of  the  Moon's  Atmofphere  a  little  pro- 
tradiing  the  time  in  which  the  Light  of  the  Star 
firif  vaniihes,  and  afterwards  returns  into  Sight. 

Now  if  we  fuppofe  the  fenfible  Image  of  a  lu- 
cid Point,  to  be  even  25*0  times  narrower  than 
the  aperture  of  the  Glafs :  yet  this  Image  would 
be  flill  much  greater  than  if  it  were  only  from 
the  fpherical  Figure  of  the  Glafs.  For  were 
it  not  for  the  different  RcfrangibiJ^ty  of  the 

>      Rays, 


[89] 


Rays,   its  breadth  in  an  loo  Foot  Telefcope 

whofe  aperture  is  4  Inches  would  be  but   A^^- 
■T  -~  720CC000 

parts  of  an  Inch,  as  is  manifefl  by  the  foregoing 
computation.  And  therefore  in  this  cafe  the 
greatell  Errors  ariiing  from  the  fpherical  Figure 
of  the  Glafs,  would  be  to  the  greatell  fenlible 
Errors  arifmg  from  the  different  Refrangibility 

of  the  Rays  as  -— ^ to  -^  at  mod,  that  is  on- 

ly  as  I  to  ixoo.  And  this  ful^cicntlyfliews  that 
it  i:,  not  the  fpherical  figures  of  Glallls  but  the 
diucrent  Refrangibility  of  the  Rays  which  hin- 
ders the  perfection  of  Telefcopes. 

There  is  another  Argument  by  which  it  may 
appear  that  the  different  Refrangibility  of  Rays, 
is  the  true  caufe  of  the  imperfection  of  Tele- 
fcopes. For  the  Errors  of  the  Rays  arifing 
from  the  fpherical  Figures  of  Objeft-glalTes,  are 
as  the  Cubes  of  the  Apertures  of  the  Objed- 
glafies ;  and  thence  to  make  Telefcopes  of  va- 
rious lengths  5  magnify  with  equal  diilinftnefs, 
the  Apertures  of  the  Objed-glafTes,  and  the 
Charges  or  magnifying  Powers,  ought  to  be  as 
the  Cubes  of  the  fquare  Roots  of  their  lengths ; 
which  doth  not  anfwer  to  experience.  But  the 
Errors  of  the  Rays  arifing  from  the  different 
Refrangibility,  are  as  the  Apertures  of  the  Ob- 
jed-glaffes,  and  thence  to  make  Telefcopes  of 
various  lengths,  magnify  with  equal  diiHnchiefs, 
their  Apertures  and  Charges  ought  to  be  as  the 
fquare  Roots  of  their  lengths ;  and  this  anfwers 
to  experience,  as  is  well  known.  For  inttance, 
a  Telefcope  of  64  Feet  in  length,  with  an  Aper- 
■'  ture 


I^o] 


ture  of  1-}  Inches,  magnifies  about  iio  times, 
with  as  much  diltindnefs  as  one  of  a  Foot  in 
length,  with  -}  of  an  Inch  aperture,  magnifies 
15  times. 

Now  were  it  not  for  this  different  Refrangi- 
bility  of  Rays,  Telefcopes  might  be  brought  to 
a  greater  perfection  than  we  have  yet  defcrib'd, 
by  compofmg  the  Objed-Glafs  of  two  GlalTes 
with  Water  between  them.  Let  ADFC  [in  F/g. 
28.]  reprefenttheObjeft-glafscompofedoftwo 
Glaffes  ABED  and  BEFC,  alike  convex  on  the 
outlidcs  AGD  and  CHF,  and  aUke  concave 
on  the  infides  BME,  BNE,  with  Water  in 
the  concavity  BMEN.  Let  the  Sine  of  Inci- 
dence out  of  Glafs  into  Air  be  as  I  to  R,  and 
out  of  Water  into  iVir  as  K  to  R,  and  by  con- 
fequence  out  of  Glafs  into  Water,  as  I  to  K  : 
and  let  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  to  which  th» 
convex  fides  AGD  and  CHF  are  ground  be 
D,  and  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  to  which 
the  concave  fides  BME  and  BNE  are  ground 
be  to  D,  as  the  Cube  Root  of  K  K — K I  to  the 
Cube  Root  of  RK — RI:  and  the  Refradions^ 
on  the  concave  fides  of  the  Glafles ,  will  very 
much  corre<^t  the  Errors  of  the  Refraftions  on 
the  convex  fides ,  fo  far  as  they  arife  from  the 
fphericalnefs  of  the  Figure.  And  by  this  means 
might  Telefcopes  be  brought  to  fufficient  per- 
fedion,  were  it  not  for  the  different  Refrangi- 
bility  of  feveral  forts  of  Rays.  But  by  reafon 
of  this  different  Refrangibility,  I  do  not  yet  fee 
any  other  means  of  improving  Telefcopes  by 
Refradions  alone  than  that  of  increafing  their 
lengths,  for  which  end  the  late  Contrivance  of 


[91] 

Hngenius  feems  well  accommodated.  For  ve- 
ry long  Tubes  arc  cumberlbme,  and  fcarcc  to 
be  readily  managed ,  and  by  reafon  of  their 
length  are  very  apt  to  bend,  and  ihake  by  bend- 
ing lb  as  to  caule  a  continual  trembling  in  the 
Objects,  whereby  it  becomes  difficult  to  fee 
tiiem  diilindly:  whereas  by  his  contrivance  the 
Glalles  are  readily  manageable,  and  the  Object- 
glafs  being  fix'd  upon  a  llrong  upright  Pole  be- 
comes more  Heady. 

Seeing  therefore  the  Improvement  of  Tele- 
fcopes  of  given  lengths  by  Refractions  is  defpe- 
rate ;  I  contrived  heretofore  a  Perfpe(^tive  by 
Reflexion ,  ufmg  inflead  of  an  Objed-glafs  a 
concave  Metal.  The  diameter  of  the  Sphere 
to  which  the  Metal  was  ground  concave  was  a- 
bout  if  Engliih  Inches,  and  by  conlcquence 
the  length  of  the  Inlhument  about  iix  Inches 
and  a  quarter.  The  Eye-glal's  was  Plano-con- 
vex, and  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  to  which 
the  convex  fide  was  ground  was  about  4  of  an 
Inch ,  or  a  little  lefs ,  and  by  confequence  it 
magnified  between  30  and  40  times.  By  ano- 
ther way  of  meafuring  I  found  that  it  magnified 
about  35"  times.  The  concave  Metal  bore  an 
Aperture  of  an  Inch  and  a  third  part ;  but  the 
Aperture  was  limited  not  by  an  opake  Circle, 
covering  the  Limb  of  the  Metal  round  about, 
but  by  an  opake  Circle  placed  between  the  Eye- 
glafs  and  the  Eye,  and  perforated  in  the  mid- 
dle with  a  little  round  hole  for  the  Rays  to  pafs 
through  to  the  Eye.  For  this  Circle  by  being 
placed  here,  Itopp'd  much  of  the  erroneous 
Light  5  which  otherwife  would  have  dilbjrbed 

the 


[92] 


the  Vifion.  By  comparing  it  with  a  pretty  good 
PerfpecHve  of  four  Feet  in  length,  made  with 
a  concave  Eye-glafs,  I  could  read  at  a  greater 
diftance  with  my  own  Infh-ument  than  with  the 
Glafs.  Y6t  Objeds  appeared  much  darker  in 
it  than  in  the  Glafs,  and  that  partly  becaufe 
more  Light  was  loil  by  Reflexion  in  the  Metal, 
than  by  Refraction  in  the  Glafs,  and  partly  be- 
caufe my  Inilrument  was  overcharged.  Had  it 
magnified  but  ^o  or  25-  times  it  would  have 
made  the  Objeft  appear  more  brisk  and  plea- 
fant.  Two  of  thel'e  I  made  about  16  Years  a- 
go,  and  have  one  of  them  ilill  by  me  by  which 
I  can  prove  the  truth  of  what  I  write.  Yet  it 
is  not  fo  good  as  at  the  firll.  For  the  concave 
has  been  divers  times  tarniihcd  and  cleared  a- 
gain,by  rubbing  it  with  very  foft  Leather.  W  hen 
I  made  thefe,  an  Artift  in  London  undertook  to 
imitate  it ;  but  ufmg  another  way  of  polifliing 
them  than  I  did ,  he  fell  much  fliort  of  what  I 
had  attained  to,  as  I  afterwards  underllood  by 
difcourfmg  the  under  Workman  he  had  em- 
ployed. The  Poliih  I  ufed  was  in  this  man- 
ner. I  had  two  round  Copper  Plates  each 
fix  Inches  in  diameter,  the  one  convex  the  o- 
ther  concave,  ground  very  true  to  one  another. 
On  the  convex  I  ground  the  Objeft-Metal  or 
Concave  which  was  to  be  poliili'd,  till  it  had 
taken  the  Figure  of  the  Convex  and  was  ready 
for  a  PoHlh.  Then  I  pitched  over  the  convex 
very  thinly,  by  dropping  melted  Pitch  upon  it 
and  warming  it  to  keep  the  Pitch  foft,  whilft 
I  ground  it  with  the  concave  Copper  wetted 
to  make  it  fpread  eavenly  all  over  the  convex. 

Thus 


Thus  by  working  it  well  I  made  it  as  thin  as  a 
Groat,  and  after  the  convex  was  cold  I  ground 
it  again  to  give  it  as  true  a  Figure  as  1  could. 
Then  I  took  Putty  which  I  had  made  very  fine 
by  ^^"afl^ing  it  from  all  its  groiler  Particles,  and 
laying  a  little  of  this  upon  the  Pitch,  I  ground 
it  upon  the  Pitch  with  the  concave  Copper  till 
it  had  done  making  a  noife ;  and  then  upon  the 
Pitch  I  ground  the  Object-Metal  with  a  brisk 
motion ,  for  about  two  or  three  Minutes  of 
time,  leaning  hard  upon  it.  Then  I  put  frelli 
Putty  upon  tjie  Pitch  and  ground  it  again  till  it 
had  done  making  a  noiic,and  aUerwarci;^  ground 
the  Objed-Metal  upon  it  as  before.  And  this 
Work  I  repeated  till  the  Metal  was  poliihed, 
grinding  it  the  lall  time  with  all  my  Ibength 
for  a  good  while  together,  and  frequently 
breathing  upon  the  Pitch  to  keep  ic  moilt  with- 
out laying  on  any  more  freih  Putty.  The  Ob- 
jed-?vletal  v>  as  two  Inches  broad  and  about  one 
third  part  of  an  Inch  thick,  to  keep  it  from 
bending.  I  had  two  of  thefe  Metals,  and  when 
I  had  polillied  them  both  I  tried  which  was 
bell,  and  ground  the  other  again  to  fee  if  I  could 
make  it  better  than  that  which  I  kept.  And 
thus  by  many  Trials  I  learn'd  the  way  of  po- 
lifhing,  till  I  made  thofe  two  receding  Peripe- 
dives  I  {pake  of  above.  For  this  Art  of  po- 
Hilling  will  be  better  learn  d  by  repeated  Pra- 
ctice than  by  myDefcription.  Before  I  ground 
the  Object-McLal  on  the  Pitch,  1  always  ground 
the  Putty  on  it  with  the  concave  Copper  till  it 
had  done  making  a  noife ,  becaufe  ii  the  Parti- 
cles of  the  Putty  were  not  by  this  means  made 

to 


[n] 


to  flick  faft  in  the  Pitch,  they  would  by  rolling 
up  and  down  grate  and  fret  the  Objed-Metal 
and  fill  it  full  of  little  holes. 

But  becaufe  Metal  is  more  difficult  to  poliili 
than  Glafs,  and  is  afterwards  very  apt  to  be 
fpoilcd  b}'  tarnilhing,  and  refleds  not  fo  much 
Light  as  Glafs  quick-filver'd  over  does :  I  would 
propound  to  ufe  inltead  of  the  Metal,  a  Glafs 
ground  concave  on  the  forefide,  and  as  much 
convex  on  the  back-fide,  and  quick-filver'd  o- 
ver  on  the  convex  iide.  The  Glafs  muft  be  e- 
very  where  of  the  fame  thicknefs  exadly.  O- 
therwife  it  will  make  Objects  look  colour'd  and 
indillinft.  By  fuch  a  Glals  I  tried  about  five  or 
fix  Years  ago  to  make  a  receding  Telcfcope  of 
four  Feet  in  length  to  magnify  about  15-0  times, 
and  I  fatisfied  my  felf  that  there  wants  nothing 
but  a  good  Artill  to  bring  the  Defign  to  perfe- 
dion.  For  the  GMs  being  wrought  by  one  of 
our  London  Artills  after  fuch  a  manner  as  they 
grind  Glafles  for  Telefcopes,  tho'  it  feemed  as 
well  wrought  as  the  Objeclil-glaires  ufe  to  be,  yet 
when  it  was  quick-filver'd,  the  Reflexion  dif- 
covered  innumerable  Inequalities  all  over  the 
Glafs.  And  by  reafon  of  thefe  hiequaUties,  Ob- 
jeds  appeared  indiilinCt  in  this  hiilrument.  For 
the  Errors  of  retteded  Rays  caufed  by  any  In- 
equality of  the  Glafs,  are  about  fix  times  great- 
er than  the  Errors  of  refrafted  Rays  cauicd  by 
the  Hke  Inequalities.  Yet  by  this  Experiment 
I  fatisfied  my  felf  that  the  Reflexion  on  the 
concave  fide  of  the  Glafs,  which  I  feared  would 
difturb  the  Vifion,  did  no  fenfible  prejudice  to 
it,  and  by  conlequence  that  nothing  is  wanting 

to 


[95] 


to  peifecl  thcfe  Tclefcopes,  but  good  Work- 
men who  can  grind  and  polifli  GlalFes  truly 
fphericaL  An  Object-glafs  of  a  fourteen  Foot 
Telcfcopej  made  by  an  Artificer  at  London^  I 
once  mended  coniiderably,  by  grinding  it  on 
Pitch  with  Putty,  and  leaning  very  eafily  on  it 
in  the  grinding,  ielt  the  Putty  ihould  fcratch  it. 
Whether  this  way  may  not  do  well  enough  for 
pohihing  thefe  relieving  Glaires,  I  have  not  yet 
tried.  But  he  that  fhall  try  either  this  or  any 
other  way  of  polilhing  which  he  may  think  bet- 
ter, may  do  well  to  make  his  Glalles  ready  for 
polilhing  by  grinding  them  without  that  vio- 
lence, wherewith  our  London  Workmen  prcfs 
their  Glalles  in  grinding.  For  by  I'uch  violent 
preflure,  Glalles  arc  apt  to  bend  a  little  in  the 
grinding,  and  inch  bending  will  certainly  fpoii 
their  Figure.  To  recommend  therefore  the 
confidcration  of  thefe  reiiccting  Glalles,  to  fuch 
Artills  as  are  curious  in  figuring  Glailes,  I  iliall 
delcribe  this  optical  Inltrument  in  the  follow- 
ing Propolition. 

T ROT.  vn.  Prob.  n. 

To  fl.wrten  Telefto^es, 

LET  ABDC  {inF'ig.  29.]  reprefent  a  Glafs 
fpherically  concave  on  the  forefide  AB, 
ana  as  much  convex  on  the  backfide  CD,  fo 
that  it  be  every  where  of  an  equal  thicknefs. 
Let  it  notjae  thicker  on  One  fide  than  on  the 
other,  left  it  make  Objeds  appear  colour'd  and 

^  indi- 


[9^ 


indiflindl,  and  let  it  be  very  truly  wrought  and 
quick-filver'd  over  on  the  backlide  ;  and  f^:t  in 
the  Tube  V  X  Y  Z  which  mult  be  very  black 
within.  Let  EFG  reprctent  a  Prifm  of  Glals 
or  Cryrtal  placed  near  the  other  end  of  the 
Tube,  in  the  middle  of  it,  by  means  of  a  han- 
dle of  Brafs  or  Iron  FGK,  to  the  end  of  which 
made  flat  it  is  cemented.  Let  this  Prifm  be 
rectangular  atE,  and  let  the  other  two  Angles 
at  F  and  G  be  accurately  equal  to  each  otner, 
.  and  by  confequence  equal  to  half  right  ones, 
and  let  the  plane  fides  F  E  and  G  E  be  fquare, 
and  by  confequence  the  third  fide  F  G  a  rectan- 
gular Parallelogram,  whofe  length  is  to  its 
breadth  m  a  fubdupUcate  proportion  of  two  to 
one.  Let  it  be  fo  placed  in  the  Tube,  that 
the  A^^is  of  the  Speculum  may  pals  through  the 
middle  of  the  fquare  fide  EF  perpendicularly, 
and  by  confequence  through  the  middle  of  the 
fide  F  G  at  an  Angle  of  45-  Degrees,  and  let  the 
fide  E  F  be  turned  towards  the  Speculum.,  and 
the  diftance  of  this  Prifm  from  the  Speculum 
be  fuch  that  the  Rays  of  the  Light  PQ,  RS,  ^c. 
•which  are  incident  upon  the  Speculum  in  Lines 
parallel  to  the  Axis  thereof,  may  enter  thePrilm 
at  the  fide  EF,  and  be  reflected  by  the  fide 
FG,  and  thence  go  out  of  it  through  the  fide 
GE,  to  the  point  T  which  mutt  be  the  com- 
mon Focus  of  the  Speculum  ABDC,  and  of  a 
Plano-convex Eye-glafs  H,  through  which  thofe 
Rays  mult  pafs  to  the  Eye.  And  let  the  Rays 
at  their  coming  out  of  the  Glals  pafs  through 
a  fmall  round  hole,  or  aperture  made  in  a  lit- 
tle plate  of  Lead,  Brafs,  or  Silver,  wherewith 

the 


[^7] 


the  Glafs  is  to  be  covered,  which  hole  mud  be 
no  bigger  than  is  necellary  for  Light  enough 
to  pals  through.  For  ib  it  will  render  the  Ob- 
ject dillin(^i:,  the  Plate  in  which  'tis  made  inter- 
cepting all  the  erroneous  part  of  the  Light 
which  comes  from  the  verges  of  the  Speculum 
A  B.  Such  an  Inltrument  well  made ,  if  it  be 
fix  Foot  long,  (reckoning  the  length  from  the 
Speculum  to  the  Priim,  and  thence  to  the  I'o^ 
cus  T)  will  bear  an  aperture  of  fix  Inches  at  the 
Speculum,  and  magnify  between  two  and  three 
hundred  times.  But  the  hole  H  here  limits 
the  aperture  with  more  advantage,  than  if  the 
aperture  was  placed  at  the  Speculum.  If  the 
Inlh-ument  be  made  longer  or  Ihorter,  the  aper- 
ture mult  be  in  proportion  as  the  Cube  of  the 
fquare-iquare  Root  of  the  length,  and  the  mag- 
nifying as  the  aperture.  But  it's  convenient  that 
the  Speculum  be  an  Inch  or  two  broader  than 
the  aperture  at  the  leall,  and  that  the  Glafs  of 
the  bpeculum  be  thick,  that  it  bend  not  in  the 
working.  ThePrilm  EFG  muft  be  no  bigger 
than  is  necellary,  and  its  back  fide  F  G  mult 
not  be  quick-Tilver'd  over.  For  without  quick- 
filver  it  will  relied  all  the  Light  incident  on  it 
from  the  Speculum. 

In  this  Inlb'ument  the  Objed:  will  be  invert- 
ed ,  but  may  be  ereded  by  making  the  fquare 
fides  E F  and  EG  of  the  Prifm  EFG  not  plane 
but  fpherically  convex,  that  the  Rays  may  crofs 
as  well  before  they  come  at  it  as  afterwards 
between  it  and  the  Eye-glafs.  If  it  be  defired 
that  the  Inllrument  bear  a  larger  aperture,  that 

H  may 


1 58 1 


may  be  alfo  done  by  compofingvthe"  Speciilum 
of  two  Glailes  with  Water  between  them. 

If  the  Theory  of  making  Telefcopes  could  at 
length  be  fully  brought  into  praftice,  yet  there 
would  be  certain  Bounds  beyond  which  Tele- 
fcopes could  not  perform.  For  the  Air  through 
which;  w„e  look  upon  the  Stars,  is  in  a  perpe- 
tual Tremor ;  as  may  be  feen  by  the  tremulous 
Motion  of  Shadows  caft  from  high  Towers, 
and  by  the  twinkling  of  the  fix'd  Stars.  But 
thefe  Stars  do  not  t\\  inkle  when  viewed  through 
Telefcopes  which  have  large  apertures.  For 
the  Rays  of  Light  which  pafs  through  divers 
parts  of  the  aperture,  tremble  each  of  them  a- 
part,  and  by  means  of  their  various  and  fome- 
times  contrary  Tremors ,  fall  at  one  and  the 
fame  time  upon  different  points  in  the  bottom 
of  the  Eye,  and  their  trembling  Motions  are  too 
quick  and  confufed  to  be  perceived  feverally. 
And  all  thefe  illuminated  Points  conflitute  one 
broad  lucid  Point ,  compofed  of  thofe  many 
trembhng  Points  confufedly  and  infenfibly  mix- 
ed with  one  another  by*very  fliort  and  fwift 
Tremors,  and  thereby  caufe  the  Star  to  appear 
broader  than  it  is,  and  without  any  trembling 
of  the  whole.  Long  Telefcopes  may  caufe  Ob- 
jeds  to  appear  brighter  and  larger  than  fhort 
ones  can  do ,  but  they  cannot  be  fo  formed  as 
to  take  away  that  confufion  of  the  Rays  which 
arifes  from  the  Tremors  of  the  Atmofphere.- 
The  only  remedy  is  a  mod  ferene  and  quiet  Air, 
fuch  as  may  perhaps  be  found  on  the  tops  of 
the  higheft  Mountains  above  the  groffer  Clouds. 

THE 


^, 


Bookl.Ri-tlBatcI. 


kl.Paitl.BateJL 


-^ 


Book  I.Rrtl.Plafe  m. 


J^tg  16 


w 


BoollPaitI.Hatel\'  ;e 

a 


o 


^ 


THE 

FIRST  BOOK 

OPTICKS. 

PART   II. 

TROT,  I.    Theor.  I. 

The  ThanoTiiena  of  Colours  in  refraBed  or  re^ 
fleBed  Light  are  not  can  fed  by  new  Modijl- 
cations  of  the  Light  varioujly  imPrefs'dy  ac^ 
cording  to  the  -various  Terminations  of  the 
Light  and  Shadozv, 

The  Proof  by  Experiments. 

Exper.  iv^^^fjOR  if  ±e  Sun  fhine  into  a 
very  dark  Chamber  through 
an  oblong  hole  F,  VmFig.  i.] 
whale  breadth  is  the  fixth  or 
eighth  part  of  an  Inch,  or  fomething  lefs ;  and 
his  beam  F  H  do  afterwards  pafs  Ml  through  a 

H  X  very 


[   loo  ] 

vei7  large  Prifm  ABC,  diftant  about  xo  Feet 
from  the  hole,  and  parallel  to  it,  and  then  (with 
its  white  part)  through  an  oblong  hole  H,  whofe 
breadth  is  about  the  fortieth  or  fixtieth  part  of 
an  Inch,  and  which  is  made  in  a  black  opake 
Body  G  I,  and  placed  at  the  diflance  of  two  or 
three  Feet  from  the  Prifm,  in  a  parallel  Situa- 
tion both  to  the  Prifm  and  to  the  former  hole, 
and  if  this  w^hite  Light  thus  trafmitted  through 
the  hole  H,  fall  afterwards  upon  a  white  Paper 
/  r,  placed  after  that  hole  H,  at  the  dilfance  of 
three. or  four  Feet  from  it,  and  there  paint  the 
ufual  Colours  of  the  Prifm,  fuppofe  red  at  t^ 
yellow  at  j,  green  at  r,  blue  at  ^,  and  violet 
at/;  you  may  with  an  Iron  Wire,  or  any  fuch 
like  flender  opake  Body,  whofe  breadth  is  a- 
bout  the  tenth  part  of  an  Inch,  by  intercepting 
the  Rays  at  k^  /,  w,  7tox  o,  takeaway  any  one 
of  the  Colours  at  ty  /,  r,  q  or/,  whilll:  the  other 
Colours  remain  upon  the  Paper  as  before  ;   or 
with  an  Obftacle  fomething  bigger  you  may 
take  away  any  two,  or  three,  or  four  Colours 
together,  the  reil  remaining :   So  that  any  one 
of  the  Colours  as  well  as  violet  may  become 
outmpft  in  the  Confine  of  the  Shadow  towards 
/,  and  any  one  of  them  as  well  as  red  may  be- 
come outmofl  in  the  Confine  of  the  Shadow 
towards  t,  and  any  one  of  them  may  alfo  bor- 
der upon  the  Shadow  made  within  the  Colours 
by  the  Obilacle  R  intercepting  fome  interme- 
diate part  of  the  Light ;  and,  laftly,  any  one  of 
them  by  being  left  alone  may  border  upon  the 
Shadow  on  either  hand.    All  the  Colours  have 
themfeives  indifferently  to  any  Confines  of  Sha- 
dow, 


[  loi  ] 

dow,  and  therefore  the  differences  of  thefe  Co- 
lours from  one  another,  do  not  arife  from  the 
different  Confines  of  Shadow,  whereby  Light 
is  variouily  moditied ,  as  has  hitherto  been  the 
Opinion  of  Philofophers.  In  trying  thefe  things 
'tis  to  be  obferved,  that  by  how  much  the  holes 
F  and  H  are  narrower,  and  the  Intervals  be- 
tween them,  and  the  Prifm  greater,  and  the 
Chamber  darker,  by  fo  much  the  better  doth 
the  Experiment  fucceed ;  provided  the  Light 
be  not  fo  far  diminiflied,  but  that  the  Colours 
2Lt  ptbe  fufficiently  vifible.  To  procure  a  Prifm 
of  folid  Glafs  large  enough  for  this  Experiment 
will  be  difficult,  and  therefore  a  prifmatick 
Veircl  mull  be  made  of  polifli'd  Glafs  Plates  ce- 
mented together,  and  filled  with  fait  Water  or 
clear  Oil. 

Exper.  z.  The  Sun's  Light  let  into  a  dark 
Chamber  through  the  round  hole  F,  [in  Fig.^^ 
half  an  Inch  wide,  paifed  firll  through  the  Prifm 
ABC  placed  at  the  hole,  and  then  through  a 
Lens  P  T  fomcthing  more  than  four  Inches 
broad ,  and  about  eight  Feet  dillant  from  the 
Prifm ,  and  thence  .converged  to  O  the  Focus 
of  the  Lens  diltant  from  it  about  three  Feet, 
and  there  fell  upon  a  white  Paper  DE.  If  that 
Paper  was  perpendicular  to  that  Light  incident 
upon  it,  as  'tis  reprefcnted  in  the  polture  DE, 
all  the  Colours  upon  it  at  O  appeared  white. 
But  if  the  Paper  being  turned  about  an  Axis 
parallel  to  the  Prifm,  became  very  much  incli- 
ned to  the  Light  as  'tis  reprefented  in  the  Po- 
fitions  de  and  h\  the  fame  Light  in  the  one 
cafe  appeared  yellow  and  red,  in  the  other  blue. 

H  3  Here 


[   102  ] 


Here  one  and  the  fame  part  of  the  Light  in 
one  and  the  fame  place,  according  to  the  va- 
rious Inchnations  of  the  Paper,  appeared  in  one 
cafe  white,  in  another  yellow  or  red,  in  a  third 
blue,  whilit  the  Confine  of  Light  and  Shadow, 
and  the  Refractions  of  the  Priim  in  all  thefe  ca- 
fes remained  the  fame. 

Exper.  3.  Such  another  Experiment  maybe 
more  eafily  tried  as  follows.  Let  a  broad  beam 
of  the  Sun's  Light  coming  into  a  dark  Cham- 
ber through  a  hole  in  the  Window-fliut  be  re- 
fracted by  a  large  Prifm  ABC,  [in  Fig.  3.] 
whofe  refrading  Angle  C  is  more  than  60  De- 
grees, and  io  foon  as  it  comes  out  of  the  Prifm 
let  it  fall  upon  the  white  Paper  DE  glewed  up- 
on a  ftiii'  Plane ;  and  this  Light,  when  the  Pa- 
per is  perpendicular  to  it,  as  'tis  reprefented  in 
DE,  will  appear  perfedly  white  upon  the  Pa- 
per, but  when  the  Paper  is  very  much  inclin'd 
to  it  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  keep  always  paral- 
lel to  the  Axis  of  the  Prifm,  the  whitenefs  of 
the  whole  Light  upon  the  Paper  will  according 
to  the  inclination  of  the  Paper  this  way  or  that 
way,  change  either  into  yellow  and  red,  as  in 
the  polture  de^  or  into  blue  and  violet,  as  in 
the  poilure  ^g.  And  if  the  Light  before  it  fall 
upon  the  Paper  be  twice  refraded  the  fame 
way  by  two  parallel  Prifms,  thefe  Colours  will 
become  the  more  confpicuous.  Here  all  the 
middle  parts  of  the  broad  beam  of  white  Light 
which  fell  upon  the  Paper,  did  without  any 
Confine  of  Shadow  to  modify  it ,  become  co- 
lour'd  all  over  with  one  uniform  Colour ,  the 
Colour  being  always  the  fame  in  the  middle  of 

the 


[  103 

the  Paper  as  at  the  edges,  and  this  Colour  chan- 
ged according  to  the  various  ObUquity  of  the 
reiicding  Paper,  without  any  change  in  the  Re- 
fractions or  Shadow,  or  in  the  Light  which  fell 
upon  the  Paper.  And  therefore  theie  Colours 
are  to  be  derived  from  fome  other  Caufe  than 
the  new  Modifications  of  Light  by  Refraftions 
and  Shadows. 

If  it  be  asked.  What  then  is  their  Caufe  ?  I 
anfwer,  That  the  Paper  in  the  pofture  de,  be- 
ing more  oblique  to  the  more  refrangible  Rays 
than  to  the  leis  refrangible  ones,  is  more  flrong- 
ly  illuminated  by  the  latter  than  by  the  former, 
and  tliereforc  the  lefs  refrangible  Rays  are  pre- 
dominant in  the  refleded  Light.  And  where- 
ever  they  are  predominant  in  any  Light  they 
tinge  it  with  red  or  yellow,  as  may  in  fome  mea- 
fure  appear  by  the  Hrlt  Propolition  of  the  tirft 
Book,  and  will  more  fully  appear  hereafter. 
And  the  contrary  happens  in  the  pofture  of  the 
Paper  h^  the  more  refrangible  Rays  being  then 
predominant  which  always  tinge  Light  with 
blues  and  violets. 

Ex  per.  4.  The  Colours  of  Bubbles  with  which 
Children  play  are  various,  and  change  their  Si- 
tuation varioufly,  without  any  refped  to  any 
Confine  of  Shadow.  If  fuch  a  Bubble  be  co- 
ver'd  with  a  concave  Glafs,  to  keep  it  from  be- 
ing agitated  by  any  Wind  or  Motion  of  the  Air, 
the  Colours  will  llowly  and  regularly  change 
their  Situation,  even  whilit  the  Eye,  and  the 
Bubble,  and  all  Bodies  which  emit  any  Light, 
or  call  any  Shadow,  remain  unmoved.  And 
therefore  their  Colours  arife  from  fome  regular 

H  4  caufe 


[  I04  ] 

Caufe  which  depends  not  on  any  Confine  of 
Shadow.  What  this  Caufe  is  will  be  fliewed  in 
the  next  Book. 

To  thefe  Experiments  may  be  added  the 
tenth  Experiment  of  the  firit  Book,  where  the 
Sun's  Light  in  a  dark  Room  being  traje61ed 
through  the  parallel  Superhcies  of  two  Prifms 
tied  together  in  the  form  of  a  Parallelopipede, 
became  totally  of  one  uniform  yellow  or  red 
Colour,    at  its  emerging  out  of  the  Prifms. 
Here,  in  the  production  of  thefe  Colours,  the 
Confine  of  Shadow  can  have  nothing  to  da. 
For  the  Light  changes  from  white  to  yellow, 
orange  and  red  fucceirively,  without  any  alte- 
ration of  the  Conhne  of  Shadow :  And  at  both 
edges  of  the  emerging  Light  where  the  con- 
trary Confines  of  Shadow  ought  to  produce 
different  Efteds,   the  Colour  is  one  and  the 
fame,  whether  it  be  white,  yellow,  orange  or 
red:  And  in  the  middle  of  the  emerging  Light, 
where  there  is  no  Confine  of  Shadow  at  all,  the 
Colour  is  the  very  fame  as  at  the  edges,  the 
whole  Light  at  its  very  firlt  Emergence  being 
of  one  uniform  Colour,  whether  white,  yellow, 
orange  or  red,  and  going  on  thence  perpetual- 
ly without  any  change  of  Colour,  fuch  as  the 
Confine  of  Shadow  is  vulgarly  fuppofed  to  work 
in  refraded  Light  after  its  Emergence.    Nei- 
ther can  thefe  Colours  arife  from  any  new  Mo- 
difications of  the  Light  by  Refractions,  becaufe 
they  change  fucceflively  from  white  to  yellow, 
orange  and  red ,  while  the  Refradions  remain 
the  fame,  and  alfo  becaufe  the  Refradions  are 
made  contrary  ways  by  parallel  Superficies  which 

deitroy 


[105] 

deflroy  one  anothers  Effccls.  They  arife  not 
therefore  from  any  Moditications  of  Light  made 
by  Refractions  and  Shadows,  but  have  fome  o- 
ther  cauic.  What  that  Caufe  is  we  ihewed  a- 
bove  in  this  tenth  Experiment,  and  need  not 
here  repeat  it. 

There  is- yet  another  material  circumllance 
of  this  Experiment.  For  this  emerging  Light 
being  by  a  third  Prifm  HIK  [in  Fig.  21.  Tart  i.] 
refracted  towards  the  Paper  FT,  and  there  paint- 
ing the  ufual  Colours  of  the  Prifm,  red,  yellow, 
green,  blue,  violet:  If  thele Colours  arofe  from 
the  Refradions  of  that  Prifm  modifying  the 
Light,  they  would  not  be  in  the  Light  before 
its  Incidence  on  that  Prifm.  And  yet  in  that 
Experiment  we  found  that  when  by  turning 
the  two  tiril:  Prifms  about  their  common  Axis 
all  the  Colours  were  made  to  vaniih  but  the 
red;  the  Light  which  makes  that  red  being 
left  alone,  appeared  of  the  very  fame  red  Co- 
lour before  its  Incidence  on  the  thii-d  Prifm. 
And  in  general  we  find  by  other  Experiments ' 
that  when  the  Rays  which  ditl^er  in  Refrangibi- 
lity  are  feparared  from  one  another,  and  any 
one  fort  of  them  is  confidered  apart,  the  Co- 
lour of  the  Light  which  they  compofe  cannot 
be  changed  by  any  Refraction  or  Reflexion 
vv'hatever,  as  it  ought  to  be  were  Colours  no- 
thing elfe  than  Modifications  of  Light  caufed 
by  Refractions,  and  Reflexions,  and  Shadows. 
This  unchangeablenefs  of  Colour  I  am  now  to 
defcribe  in  the  following  Propofition. 

"PROT. 


[  10^  ] 


:.;  TROT.  II.    The  OR.  IL 

j^ll'ho'mogeneai  Light  has  its  proper  Colour  an- 
fwertJig  to  its  '\D'egrce  of  Refrangtbility^  and 

■  that  Colour  cannot  be  changed  by  Reflexions 
and  Refractions. 

IN  the  Experiments  of  the  fourth  Propofition 
of  the  hrft  Book,  when  Ihad  feparated  the 
heterogeneous  Rays  from  one  another,  theSpe- 
^um  / 1  formed  by  the  feparated  Ra^^s,  did 
in  the  progrefs  from  its  end  / ,  on  which  the 
moll  refrangible  Rays  fell,  unto  its  other  end  ^, 
on  which  the  leall  refrangible  Rays  fell,  appear 
tinged  with  this  feries  of  Colours,  violet,  indi- 
go, blue,  green,  yellow,  orange,  red,  together 
with  all  their  intermediate  degrees  in  a  conti- 
nual Succeilion  perpetually  varying.  So  that 
there  appeared  as  many  degrees  of  Colour^,,  as 
there  were  forts  of  Rays  differing  in  Refrangi- 
bility. 

Exper.  f.  Now  that  thefe  Colours  could  not 
be  changed  byRefracHon,  I  knew  by  refrading 
with  a  Prifm  fomerimes  one  very  little  part  of 
this  Light,  fometimes  another  very  little  part, 
as  is  defcribed  in  the  twelfth  Experiment  of 
the  firft  Book.  For  by  this  Refraction  the  Co- 
lour of  the  Light  was  never  changed  m  the  leali. 
If  any  part  of  the  red  Light  was  refra(^ted,  it 
remained  totally  of  the  fame  red  Colour  as  be- 
fore. No  orange,  no  yellow,  no  green  or  blue, 
no  other  new  Colour  was  produced  by  that 
Refradion.  Neither  did  the  Colour  any  ways 
change  by  repeated  Refradions,  but  continued 

always 


[  I07  ] 

dways  the  fame  red  entirely  as  at  firft.  The 
like  conltancy  and  immutability  I  found  alfo  in 
the  blue,  green,  and  other  Colours.  So  alio  it' 
I  looked  through  a  Prii'm  upon  any  Body  illu^ 
minated  with  any  part  ol'  this  homogeneal  Light, 
as  in  the  fourteenth  Experiment  of  the  firil  Book 
is  defcribed ;  I  could  not  perceive  any  new  Co- 
lour generated  this  way.  All  Bodies  illumina- 
ted with  compound  Light  appear  through  Prilms 
confuied  (as  was  laid  above)  and  tinged  w4th 
various  new  Colours,  but  thole  illuminated  with 
homogeneal  Light  appeared  through  Prilms 
neither  lefs  diilincl,  nor  otherwife  colour'd , 
than  when  viewed  with  the  naked  Eyes.  Their 
Colours  were  not  in  the  lealt  changed  by  the 
Refraction  of  the  intcrpofed  Prii'm.  I  fpeak 
here  of  a  feniiblG  change  of  Colour:  Eor  the 
Light  which  I  here  call  homogeneal,  being  not 
ablolutely  homogeneal ,  there  ought  to  arife 
lb  me  little  change  of  Colour  from  its  hetero- 
geneity. But  if  that  heterogeneity  was  fo  lit- 
tle as  it  might  be  ma'de  by  the  faid  Experiments 
of  the  fourth  Propofition,  that  change  was  not 
fenliblc,  and  therefore  in  E.xperiments,  where 
Senle  is  Judge,  ought  to  be  accounted  none 
at  all. 

Exper.  6.  And  as  thefe  Colours  were  not 
changeable  byRefradions,  fo  neither  were  they 
by  Reflexions.  For  all  white,  grey,  red,  yel- 
low, green,  blue,  violet  Bodies,  as  Paper,  Alhes, 
red  Lead,  Orpiment,  Indico,  Bife,  Gold,  Sil- 
ver, Copper,  Grafs,  blue  Flowers,  Violets, 
Bubbles  of  Water  tinged  with  various  Colours^ 
Peacock's  Feathers,   the  Tincture  of  Lignum 

Nepbri- 


[io8] 


Nepkriticttm^  and  fuch  like,  in  red  homogeneal 
Light  appeared  totally  red,  in  blue  Light  to- 
tally blue,  in  green  Light  totally  green,  and  lb 
of  other  Colours.  In  the  homogeneal  Light 
of  any  Colour  they  all  appeared  totally  of  that 
fame  Colour,  with  this  only  ditference,  that 
fome  of  them  refleded  that  Light  more  Itrong- 
ly,  others  more  faintly.  I  never  yet  found  any 
Body  which  by  reflefting  homogeneal  Light 
could  fenfibly  change  its  Colour. 

From  all  which  it  is  manifeft,  that  if  the  Sun's 
Light  confifted  of  but  one  fort  of  Rays,  there 
would  be  but  one  Colour  in  the  whole  World, 
nor  would  it  be  polTible  to  produce  any  new 
Colour  by  Reflexions  and  Refraftions,  and  by 
confequence  that  the  variety  of  Colours  de- 
pends upon  the  compofition  of  Light. 

7>EF1NITI0K 

TH  E  homogeneal  Light  and  Rays  which 
appear  red ,  or  rather  make  Objeds  ap- 
pear fo,  I  call  Rubriiic  or  Red-making ;  thofe 
which  make  Objeds  appear  yellow,  green,  blue 
and  violet,  I  call  Yellow-making,  Green-ma- 
king, Blue-making,  Violet-making,  and  fo  of 
the  reft.  And  if  at  any  time  I  fpeak  of  Light 
and  Rays  as  coloured  or  endued  with  Colours, 
I  would  be  underftood  to  fpeak  not  philofo- 
phically  and  properly,  but  groffly,  and  accor- 
dingly to  fuch  Conceptions  as  vulgar  People  in 
feeing  all  thefe  Experiments  would  be  apt  to 
frame.  For  the  Rays  to  fpeak  properly  are  not 
coloured.    In  them  there  is  nothing  elfe  than  a 

certain 


[  109  ] 

certain  power  and  dilpoiition  to  flir  up  a  Sen- 
fation  of  this  or  that  Colour.  For  as  Sound  in 
a  Bell  or  mufical  String,  or  other  founding  Bo- 
dy, is  nothing  but  a  trembling  Motion,  and  in 
the  Air  nothing  but  that  Motion  propagated 
from  the  Objed:,  and  in  the  Senforium  'tis  a 
Senfe  of  that  Motion  under  the  form  of  Sound ; 
fo  Colours  in  the  Objed  are  nothing  but  a  Dif- 
polition  to  refled  this  or  that  fort  of  Rays  more 
copioully  than  the. reft;  in  the  Rays  they  are 
nothing  but  their  Difpofitions  to  propagate  this 
or  that  Motion  into  the  Senforium,  and  in  the 
Senforium  they  are  Senfations  of  thofe  Motions 
under  the  forms  of  Colours. 


TROT.  m.    Prob.  I. 

To  define  the  Refrangibility  of  the  feveral  forts 
of  homogeneal  Light  avfjuering  to  the  feve- 
ral  Colours. 

FO R  determining  this  Problem  I  made  the 
following  Experiment. 
Exper.  7.  When  I  had  caufed  the  rectili- 
near fides  AF,  GM,  [in  Fig.  4.]  of  the  Spe- 
6lrum  of  Colours  made  by  the  Prifm  to  be  di- 
ftindly  defined ,  as  in  the  fifth  Experiment  of 
the  firil  Part  is  defcribed,  there  were  found  in 
it  all  the  homogeneal  Colours  in  the  fame  or- 
der and  fituation  one  among  another  as  in  the 
Spedrum  of  fimple  Light,  defcribed  in  the 
fourth  Propofition  of  tliat  Part.  For  the  Cir- 
cles of  which  the  Spedrum  of  compound  Light 

PT 


[i.o] 

PT  is  compofed,  and  which  in  the  middle  parts 
of  the  Spedrum  interfere  and  are  intermix'd 
with  one  another,  are  not  intermix'd  in  their 
outmolt  parts  where  they  touch  thofe  redili- 
near  fides  A  F  and  G  M.  And  therefore  in 
thofe  redilinear  fides  when  diflindly  defined, 
there  is  no  new  Colour  generated  by  Refra- 
ction. I  obferved  alfo,  that  if  any  where  be- 
tween the  two  outmoft  Circles  T  M  F  and 
PGA  a  right  Line,  as  y'^\  was  crofs  to  the 
Spe61rum,  fo  as  at  both  ends  to  fall  perpendi- 
cularly upon  its  redilinear  iides,  there  appear- 
ed one  and  the  fame  Colour  and  degree  of  Co- 
lour from  one  end  of  this  Line  to  the  other.  I 
delineated  therefore  in  a  Paper  the  perimeter 
of  the  Spedrum  FA P GMT,  and  in  trying 
the  third  Experiment  of  the  firft  Book,  I  held 
the  Paper  fo  that  the  Speflrum  might  fall  upon 
this  delineated  Figure,  and  agree  with  it  exact- 
ly, whilflanAtFiltant  whofeEyes  for  diftinguifh- 
ing  Colours  were  more  critical  than  mine,  did 
by  right  Lifies  *,/3,  y^,  e^,  ^c.  drawn  crofs  the 
Speftrum ,  note  the  Confines  of  the  Colours, 
that  is  of  the  red  M  ^  /3  F,  of  the  orange  oLy^Bf 
of  the  yellow  yi(^,  of  the  green  g-/?  ^  5  of  the 
blue  yjt)c&,  of  the  indico  iAi^k,  and  of  the  vio- 
let A  G  A  jLt.  And  this  Operation  being  divers 
tinies  repeated  both  in  the  fame  and  in  feveral 
Papers ,  I  found  that  the  Obfervations  agreed 
well  enough  with  one  another,  and  that  the 
rectilinear  fides  MG  and  FA  were  by  the  faid 
crofs  Lines  divided  after  the  manner  of  a  mu- 
fical  Chord.  Let  GM  be  produced  to  X,  that 
MX  may  be  equal  to  GMj   and  conceive 

GX 


[  III  ] 

GX,  aX,  iX,  ^X,  eX,  yX,  uX,  MX,  to  be 

in  proportion  to  one  another,  as  the  numbers, 
i»  4j  h  4>  h'U-^y-^y  and  lb  to  reprefent  th^ 
Chords  of  the  Key,  and  of  a  Tone,  a  third  Mi- 
no]-,  a  fourth,  a  fifth,  a  lixth  Major,  a  feventh 
and  an  eighth  above  that  Key :  And  the  Inter- 
vals Met,  oLy,yey  f>j,  >? t,  <A,  and  aG,  wiU  bc 
the  Spaces  which  the  feveral  Colours  (rcdj  o- 
range,  yellow,  green,  blue,  indigo,  violet) 
take  up. 

Now  thefe  Intervals  or  Spaces  fubtending  the 
differences  of  the  Refradions  of  the  Rays  go- 
ing to  the  limits  of  thofe  Colours,  thas  is,  to 
the  Points  M,  <*,  y,  6,  ??,  i.  A,  G,  may  without 
any  fenfible  Error  be  accounted  proportional 
to  the  differences  of  the  Sines  of  Kefradion  of 
thofe  Rays  having  one  common  Sine  of  Inci- 
dence, and  therefore  lince  the  common  Sine  of 
Incidence  of  the  moft  and  leait  refrangible  Rays 
out  of  Glafs  into  Air  was  (by  a  method  defcri- 
bed  above)  found  in.  proportion  to  their  Sines 
ef  Refraftion,  as  5-0  to  yy  and  78,  divide  the 
difference  between  the  Sines  of  Refradion  77 
and  y^y  as  the  Line  G  M  is  divided  by  thofe 
Intervals,  you  will  have  77^  774,  77t,  77iy1'l^^ 
77i-'>  7f7i'>  78,  the  Sines  of  Refradion  of  thof^ 
Rays  out  of  Glafs  into  Air,  their  common  Sine 
of  Incidence  being  5-0.  So  then  the  Sines  of 
the  Incidences  of  all  the  red-making  Rays  out 
of  Glafs  into  Air,  were  to  the  Sines  of  their  Re- 
fi'adions ,  not  greater  than  5-0  to  77,  nor  lefs 
than  5*0  to  7j-^y  but  they  varied  from  one  ano^ 
ther  according  to  all  intermediate  proportions. 
And  the  Sines  of  the  Incidences  of  the  green- 


making 


[H2] 

making  Rays  were  to  the  Sines  of  their  Refra^ 
dions  in  all  proportions  from  that  of  fo  to  777, 
unto  that  of  50  to -j-j'^.  And  by  the  like  lin:iits 
iibovementioned  were  the  Refradions  of  the 
Rays  belonging  to  the  reft  of  the  Colours  de- 
lined,  the  Sines  of  the  red-making  Rays  extend- 
ing from  yy  to  yj^^  thofe  of  the  orange-making 
from  yy^  to  yy\,,  thofe  of  the  yellow-making 
from  yy^i  to  yy^^  thofe  of  the  green-making 
from  yy~  to  yy^^  thofe  of  the  blue-making  from 
yiy^  to  777,  thofe  of  the  indigo-making  from 
.77-  to  yy^^  and  thofe  of  the  violet  from  yy-^ 
to  78. 

Thefe  are  the  Laws  of  the  Refradions  made 
out  of  Glafs  into  Air,  and  thencp  by  the  third 
Axiom  of  the  firlt  part  of  this  Book,  the  Laws 
of  the  Refractions  made  out  of  Air  into  Glafs 
are  eafily  derived. 

Exper.  8.  I  found  moreover  that  when  Light 
goes  out  of  Air  through  feveral  contiguous  re- 
frading  Mediums  as  through  Water  and  Glafs, 
and  thence  goes  out  again  into  Air ,  whether 
the  refrading  Superficies  be  parallel  or  inclin'd 
to  one  another,  that  Light  as  often  as  by  con- 
trary Refractions  'tis  lb  correded,  that  emer- 
geth  in  Lines  parallel  to  thofe  in  which  it  was 
incident,  continues  ever  after  to  be  white.  But 
if  the  emergent  Rays  be  inclined  to  the  inci- 
dent, the  whitenefs  of  the  emerging  Light  will 
by  degi'ees  in  paffing  on  from  the  place  ofE- 
mergence,  become  tinged  in  its  edges  with 
Colours.  This  I  tryed  by  refrading  Light  with 
Prifms  of  Glafs  placed  within  a  prifmatickV^f- 
fel  of  Water.  No W:  thofe  Colours  argue  a  di- 
verging 


[  "3  ] 


Verging  and  f^aration  of  the  heterogeneous 
Rays  from  one  another  by  m^ans  of  their  une-^ 
qual  Refraftions,  as  in  what  follows  will  more 
fully  appear.  And,  on  the  contrary,  the  per- 
manent whiteneis  argues,  that  in  like  hiciden- 
ces  of  the  Rays  there  is  no  fuch  feparation  of 
the  emerging  Kays,  and  by  confequence  no  in- 
equaUty  of  their  whole  Refradions.  Whence 
I  feem  to  gather  the  two  following  Theorems. 

I.  The  ExcefTes  of  the  Sines  of  Refradioii 
of  feveral  forts  of  Rays  above  their  common 
Sine  of  Incidence  when  the  Refraftions  are 
made  out  of  divers  denfer  Mediums  immedi- 
ately into  one  and  the  fame  rarer  Medium,  fup- 
pofe  of  Air,  are  to  one  another  in  a  given  Pro- 
portion. 

X.  The  Proportion  of  the  Sine  of  Incidence 
to  the  Sine  of  Refradion  of  one  and  the  fame 
fort  of  Rays  out  of  one  Medium  into  another^ 
is  compofed  of  the  Proportion  of  the  Sine  of 
Incidence  to  the  Sine  of  Refradion  out  of  the 
firft  Medium  into  any  third  Medium,  and  of  the 
Proportion  of  the  Sine  of  Incidence  to  the  Sine 
of  Refradion  out  of  that  third  Medium  into 
the  fecond  Medium. 

By  the  firlt  Theorem  the  Refractions  of  the 
Rays  of  every  fort  made  out  of  any  Medium  in- 
to Air  are  known  by  having  the  Refradion  of 
the  Rays  of  any  one  fort.  As  for  in  (la  nee,  if 
the  Refractions  of  the  Rays  of  every  fort  out 
of  Rain-water  into  Air  be  defired,  let  the  com- 
mon Sine  of  Incidence  out  of  Glafs  into  Air  be 

I  ^  fub« 


fubdudkd  from  the  Sines  of  Refradion,  and 
the  Excefles  will  be  27 >  ^74,  2,74,  274,  274, 
27-f,  27^,  28.  Suppofe  now  that  the  Sine  of 
Incidence  of  the  leaft  refrangible  Rays  be  to 
their  Sine  of  Refradion  out  of  Rain-water  in- 
to Air  as  5  to  4,  and  fay  as  i  the  difference  of 
thofe  Sines  is  to  3  the  Sine  of  Incidence,  fo  is 
27  the  leaft  of  the  ExcelTes  above-mentioned 
to  a  fourth  number  81  ;  and  81  will  be  the 
common  Sine  of  Incidence  out  of  Rain-water 
into  Air,  to  which  Sine  if  you  add  all  the  a- 
bovcmentioned  ExcelTes  you  will  have  the  de- 
fired  Sines  of  the  Refractions  108,  io84>  1084, 

1084,    1084-5    loS-i,    108:7,    109. 

By  the  latter  Theorem  the  Refradion  out  of 
one  Medium  into  another  is  gathered  as  often 
as  you  have  the  RefraClions  out  of  them  both 
into  any  third  Medium.  As  if  the  Sine  of  In- 
cidence of  any  Ray  out  of  Glafs  into  Air  be  to 
its  Sine  of  Refraction,  as  20  to  31,  and  the  Sine 
of  Incidence  of  the  fame  Ray  out  of  Air  into 
Water,  be  to  its  Sine  of  Rerradion  as  4  to  3 ; 
the  Sine  of  Incidence  of  that  Ray  out  of  Glafs 
into  Water  will  be  to  its  Sine  of  Refradion  as 
20  to  31  and  4  to  3  jointly,  that  is,  as  the  Fa- 
dum  of  20  and  4  to  the  Fadlum  of  3 1  and  3  > 
or  as  80  to  93. 

And  thefe  Theorems  beir^g  admitted  into  Op- 
ticks,  there  would  be  icope  enough  of  hand- 
ling that  Science  voluminoully  after  a  new  man- 
ner ;  not  only  by  teaching  thofe  things  which 
tend  to  the  perfeClion  of  Vifion ,  but  alfo  by 
determining  mathematically  all  kinds  of  Phae- 
nomena  of  Colours  which  could  be  produced 
,  s  by 


["5] 

by  Refia6tions.  For  to  do  this,  there  is  nO" 
thing  elle  requifite  than  to  find  out  the  Separa- 
tions of  heterogeneous  Rays,  arkd  their  various 
Mixtures  and  Proportions  in  ever}^  IVlixture. 
By  this  way  of  arguing  I  invented  ahnoft  all  the 
Phaenomena  defcribed  in  thefe  Books,  befide 
fome  others  lefs  necelfary  to  the  Argument; 
and  by  the  fuccefTes  I  met  with  in  the  Trials,  I 
dare  promife,  that  to  him  who  ihall  argue  tru- 
ly, and  then  try  all  things  with  good  Glafles 
and  fufBcient  Circumfpedion,  the  expefted  E- 
vent  will  not  be  wanting.  But  he  is  iirft  to 
know  what  Colours  will  ariie  from  any  others 
mix'd  in  any  afligned  Proportion. 

TROT.  IV.    Theor.  m. 

Colours  may  be  produced  by  Compojitton  which 
/hall  be  like  to  the  Colours  of  homogeneal  Light 
as  to  the  Appearance  of  Colour^  but  not  as  to 
the  Immutability  of  Colour  and  Conjiitution 
of  Light,  And  thofe  Colours  by  ho'w  much 
they  are  ?nore  compoMidedby  fo  much  are  they 
lefs  full  and  intenfcy  and  by  too  much  Compo- 
fition  they  may  be  diluted  a7id  weaken' d  till 
they  ceafey  and  the  Mixture  becomes  white  or 
grey.  There  may  be  alfo  Colours  produced  by 
Compo/itiony  which  are  not  fully  like  any  of 
the  Colours  of  homogeneal  Light, 

FOR  a  Mixture  of  homogeneal  red  and  yel- 
low compounds  an  orange,  like  in  appea- 
rance of  Colour  to  that  orange  which  in  the 

I  2.  feries 


[  "O 


feries  of  unmixed  prifmatick  Colours  lies  be- 
tween them ;  but  the  Light  of  one  orange  is 
homogeneal  as  to  Refrangibility ,  that  of  the 
oth^r  is  heterogeneal,   and  the  Colour  of  the 
one,  if  viewed  through  a  Prifm ,  remains  un- 
changed, that  of  the  other  is  changed  and  re- 
folved  into  its  component  Colours  red  and  yel- 
low.    And  after  the  fame  manner  other  neigh- 
bouring homogeneal  Colours  may  compound 
new  Colours,  like  the  intermediate  homoge- 
neal ones,  as  yellow  and  green,  the  Colour  be- 
tween them  both,  and  afterwards,  if  blue  be  ad- 
ded, tlicre  will  be  made  a  green  the  midde  Co- 
lour of  the  three  which  enter  the  Compofition. 
For  the  yellow  and  blue  on  either  hand,  if  they 
are  equal  in  quantity  they  draw  the  intermedi- 
ate green  equally  towards  themfelves  in  Com- 
pofition, and  fo  keep  it  as  it  were  in  T^quilibrio, 
that  it  verge  not  more  to  the  yellow  on  the  one 
hand,  than  to  the  blue  on  the  other,  but  by 
their  mix'd  Anions  remain  Itill  a  middle  Colour. 
To  this  mix'd  green  there  may  be  farther  ad- 
ded fome  red  and  violet,  and  yet  the  green 
will  not  prefently  ceafe  but  only  grow  lefs  full 
and  vivid,  and  by  increafmg  the  red  and  vio- 
let it  will  grow  more  and  more  dilute,  until  by 
the  prevalence  of  the  added  Colours  it  be  over- 
come and  turned  into  whitenefs,  or  fome  other 
Colour.     So  if  to  the  Colour  of  any  homoge- 
neal Light,  the  Sun's  white  Light  compofed  of 
all  forts  of  Rays  be  added,  that  Colour  will  not 
vaniili  or  change  its  Species  but  be  diluted , 
and  by  adding  more  and  more  white  it  will  be 
diluted  more  and  more  perpetually.    Laiftly,  if 

', -  -     -      ^^^ 


red  and  violet  be  mingled, 


lere  will  be  gene- 


rated according  to  their  various  Proportions 
various  Purples,  fuch  as  are  not  like  in  appear- 
ance to  the  Colour  of  any  homogeneal  Light, 
and  of  thefe  Purples  mix'd  with  yellow  and 
blue  may  be  made  other  new  Colours. 

TROT.  V.    Theor.  IV. 

Whitenefs  and  all  grey  Colours  bet'vjecn  "juhite 
and  blacky  may  be  compounded  of  Colour s^  and 
the  whitenefs  of  the  Suns  Light  is  compound- 
ed of  all  the  primary  Colours  mix'd  in  a  due 
Trofortion. 

The  Proof  by  Experiments. 

Exper.  9.  T~^HE  Sun  ihining  into  a  dark 
1  Chamber  through  a  little  round 
hole  in  the  VV^indow-fhut,  and  his  Light  being 
there  refraded  by  a  Prifm  to  call  his  coloured 
Image PT  [in Fig.  5;.]  upon  the  oppofite  Wall:  I 
held  a  white  Paper  \^  to  that  Image  in  fuch  man- 
ner that  it  might  be  illuminated  by  the  coloured 
Light  refleded  from  thence,  and  yet  not  inter- 
cept any  part  of  that  Light  in  its  paflage  from 
the  Prifm  to  the  Spe£lrum.  And  I  found  that 
when  the  Paper  was  held  nearer  to  any  Colour 
thaa  to  the  rell,  it  appeared  of  that  Colour  to 
which  it  approached  nearefi: ;  but  when  it  was 
equally  or  almoil  equally  diflant  from  all  the 
Colours ,  fo  that  it  might  be  equally  illumina- 
ted by  them  all  it  appeared  white.  And  in  this 
kit  fituation  of  the  Paper,  if  fome  Colours  were 

I  3  intcr-^ 


k 


[n8] 

intercepted,  the  Paper  loft  its  white  Colour,  and 
appeared  of  the  Colour  of  the  reft  of  the  Light 
which  was  not  intercepted.  So  then  the  Pa- 
per was  illuminated  with  Lights  of  various  Co- 
lours, namely,  red,  yellovv,  green,  blue  and 
violet,  and  every  part  of  the  Light  retained  its 
proper  Colour,  until  it  was  incident  on  the  Pa- 
per, and  became  reflefted  thence  to  the  Eye; 
fo  that  if  it  had  been  either  alone  (the  reft  of 
the  Light  being  intercepted )  or  if  it  had  a- 
boundcd  moft  and  been  predominant  in  the 
Light  reflected  from  the  Paper,  it  would  have 
tinged  the  Paper  with  its  own  Colour ;  and  yet 
being  mixed  with  the  reft  of  the  Colours  in  a 
due  proportion,  it  made  the  Paper  look  white, 
and  therefore  by  a  Compofttion  with  the  reft 
produced  that  Colour.  The  fevcral  parts  of 
the  coloured  Light  reflefted  from  the  Spectrum, 
whilft  they  are  propagated  from  thence  through 
the  Air,  do  perpetually  retain  their  proper  Co- 
lours, becaufe  wherever  they  fall  upon  the  Eyes 
of  any  Spedator,  they  make  the  feveral  parts  of 
the  Spedrum  to  appear  under  their  proper  Co- 
lours. Tliey  retain  therefore  their  proper  Co- 
lours when  they  fall  upon  the  Paper  V,  and  fo 
by  the  confufion  and  perfedt  mixture  of  thofe 
Colours  compound  the  whitenefs  of  the  Light 
lefleded  from  thence. 

Exper.  lo.  Let  that  Spe(^rum  or  folar  Image 
PT  [in  F'tg.  6.]  fall  now  upon  the  Lens  MN 
above  four  Inches  broad,  and  about  fix  Feet  di- 
ftant  from  the  Prifm  ABC,  and  fo  fi glared  that 
it  may  caufe  the  coloured  Light  which  diverg- 
fx\\  frOiB  th^  Prifm  to  converge  and  meet  again 

4t 


at  its  Focus  G,  about  fix  or  eight  Feet  diflant 
from  the  Lens,  and  there  to  fall  perpendicular- 
ly  upon  a  white  Paper  D  E.  And  if  you  move 
this  Paper  to  and  fro ,  you  will  perceive  that 
near  the  Lens,  as  at  de^  the  whole  folar  Image 
(fuppofe  2X.  ft)  will  appear  upon  it  intenfely 
coloured  after  the  manner  above-expkiincd,  and 
that  by  receding  from  the  Lens  thole  Colours 
will  perpetually  come  towards  one  another,  and 
by  mixing  more  and  more  dilute  one  another 
continually,  until  at  length  the  Paper  come  to 
the  Focus  G,  where  by  a  pcrfed  mixture  they 
will  wholly  vanifli  and  be  converted  into  white- 
nefs,  the  whole  Light  appearing  now  upon  the 
Paper  like  a  httle  white  Circle.  And  after- 
wards by  receding  futher  from  the  Lens,  the 
Rays  which  before  converged  will  now  crofs 
one  another  in  the  Focus  G,  and  diverge  from 
thence ,  and  thereby  make  the  Colours  to  ap- 
pear again ,  but  yet  in  a  contrary  order ;  fup- 
pofe at  hj  where  the  red  t  is  now  above  which 
before  was  below ,  and  the  violet  /  is  below 
which  before  was  above. 

Let  us  now  flop  the  Paper  at  the  Focus  G 
where  the  Light  appears  totally  white  and  cir- 
cular, and  let  us  confidcr  its  \\hitcnefs.  I  fay, 
that  this  is  compofed  of  the  converging  Colours. 
For  if  any  of  thofe  Colours  be  intercepted  at 
the  Lens,  the  whitencfs  will  ccafe  and  degene- 
rate into  that  Colour  which  avifeth  from  the 
compofition  of  the  other  Colours  \^ich  are  not 
intercepted.  And  then  if  the  intercepted  Co- 
lours be  let  pafs  and  fall  upon  that  compound 
Colour,  they  mix  with  it,  and  by  their  mixture 

I  4  reitore 


[    120  ] 

reflore  the  wKitenefs.  So  if  the  violet,  blue 
and  green  be  intercepted ,  the  remaining  yel- 
low, orange  and  red  will  compound  upon  the 
Paper  an  orange,  and  then  if  the  intercepted 
Colours  be  let  pafs  they  will  fall  upon. this  com- 
pounded orange,  and  together  with  it  decom- 
pound a  white.  So  alfo  if  the  red  and  violet 
be  intercepted,  the  remaining  yellow,  green 
and  blue,  will  compound  a  green  upon  the  Pa- 
per, and  then  the  red  and  violet  being  let  pafs 
will  fall  upon  this  green ,  and  together  with  it 
decompound  a  white.  And  that  in  this  Com- 
pofition  of  white  the  feveral  Rays  do  not  fuffer 
any  Change  in  their  colorific  qualities  by  ading 
upon  one  another,  but  are  only  mixed,  and  by 
a  mixture  of  their  Colours  produce  white,  may 
farther  appear  by  thefe  Arguments. 

If  the  Paper  be  placed  beyond  the  Focus  G, 
fuppofe  at  0  £,  and  then  the  red  Colour  at  the 
Lens  be  alternately  intercepted,  and  let  pafs  a- 
gain,  the  violet  Colour  on  the  Paper  will  not 
fuffer  any  Change  thereb)^  as  it  ought  to  do  if 
the  feveral  forts  of  Rays  aisled  upon  one  ano- 
ther in  the  Focus  G,  where  they  crofs.  Nei- 
ther wjjl  the  red  upon  the  Paper  be  changed 
by  any  alternate  flopping,  and  letting  pafs  the 
violet  which  crolleth  it. 

And  if  the  Paper  be  placed  at  the  Focus  G, 
and  the  white  round  Image  at  G  be  viewed 
through  the  Prifm  HIK,  and  by  the  Refraclion 
of  thatPriftn  be  tranflated  to  the  place  rvy  and 
there'  appear  tinged  with  various  Colours,  name- 
ly, the  violet  at  v  and  red  at  r,  and  others  be- 
tween ,  and  then  the  red  Colour  at  the  Lens 

be 


[   121   ] 

be  often  ftopp'd  and  let  pafs  by  turns,  the  red 
at  r  will  accordingly  diflippear  and  return  as 
often,  but  the  violet  at  v  will  not  thereby  fuf- 
fer  any  change.  And  fo  by  Hopping  and  letting 
pafs  alternately  the  blue  at  the  Lens,  the  blue 
at  y  will  accordingly  difappear  and  return,  with- 
out any  change  made  in  the  red  at  r.  The  red 
therefore  depends  on  one  fort  of  Rays,  and 
the  blue  on  another  fort,  which  in  the  Focus  G 
where  they  are  commix'd  do  not  a^l  on  one 
another.  And  the^e  is  the  fame  reafon  of  the 
other  Colours. 

I  confidered  farther,  that  when  the  mod  re- 
frangible Rays  P/,  and  the  leaft  refrangible 
ones  Tt,  are  by  converging  inclined  to  one  a- 
nother,  the  Paper,  if  held  very  oblique  to  thofe 
Rays  in  the  Focus  G,  might  reflec^t  one  fort  of 
them  more  copioully  than  the  other  fort,  and 
by  that  means  the  reflected  Light  would  be 
tinged  in  that  Focus  with  the  Colour  of  the  pre-^ 
dominant  Rays,  provided  thofe  Rays  feveraliy' 
retained  their  Colours  or  colorific  Qualities  in 
the  Compofition  of  white  made  by  them  in  that 
Focus.  But  if  they  did  not  retain  them  in  that 
white,  but  became  all  of  them  feverally  endued 
there  with  a  difpofition  to  Itrike  the  Senfe  with 
the  perception  of  white,  then  they  could  never 
lofe  their  whitenefs  by  fuch  Reflexions.  I  in- 
clined therefore  the  Paper  to  the  Rays  very  ob- 
liquely, as  in  the  fecond  Experiment  of  this 
Book,  that  the  mofl  refrangible  Rays  might  be 
more  copioufly  refleded  than  the  rell,  and  the 
whitenefs  at  length  changed  fucceflively  into 
blue,  indigo  and  violet.    Then  I  inclined  it 

the 


[  122  ] 

the  contrary  way,  that  the  leafl  refrangible  Rays 
might  be  more  copious  in  the  retle&d  Light 
than  the  reil.,  and  the  whitenefs  turned  fuc- 
cellively  to  yellow,  orange  and  red. 

Laflly,  I  made  an  Inftrument  X  Y  in  fafhion 
of  a  Comb,  whofe  Teeth  being  in  number  fix- 
teen  were  about  an  Inch  and  an  half  broad,  and 
the  Intervals  of  the  Teeth  about  two  Inches 
wide.    Then   by  interpofmg  fucceflivety  the 
Teeth  of  this  Inftrument  near  the  Lens,  I  in- 
tercepted part  of  the  Colours  by  the  interpofed 
Tooth,  whilft  the  reft  of  them  went  on  through 
the  interval  of  the  Teeth  to  the  Paper  D  E,  and 
there  ipainted  a  round  folar  Image.    But  the 
Paper  I  had  firft  placed  fo,  that  the  Image  might 
appear  white  as  often  as  the  Comb  was  taken 
away ;  and  then  the  Comb  being  as  was  faid  in- 
terpofed, that  whitenefs  by  realbn  of  the  inter- 
cepted part  of  the  Colours  at  the  Lens  did  al- 
ways change  into  the  Colour  compounded  of 
thofe  Colours  which  were  not  intercepted,  and 
that  Colour  was  by  the  motion  of  the  Comb 
perpetually  varied  fo,  that  in  the  palling  of  every 
Tooth  over  the  Lens  all  thefe  Colours ,  red , 
yellow,  green,  blue  and  purple,  did  always  fuc- 
ceed  one  another.     I  caufed  therefore  all  the 
Teeth  to  pais  fucceffively  over  the  Lens,  and 
when  the  Motion  was  flow ,  there  appeared  a 
perpetual  fucceftion  of  the  Colours  upon  the 
Paper :  But  if  I  fo  much  accelerated  the  Mo- 
tion, that  the  Colours  by  reafon  of  their  quick 
fucceiTion  could  not  be  diitinguiflied  from  one 
another ,  the  appearance  of  the  fmgle  Colours 
ceafed.    There  was  no  red,  no  yellow,  no 

green. 


[  123  ] 

green,  no  blue,  nor  purple  to  be  feen  any  lon- 
ger, but  from  a  confufion  of  them  all  there  a- 
rofe  one  uniform  white  Colour.  Of  the  Light 
which  now  by  the  mixture  of  all  the  Colours  ap- 
peared white,  there  w^as  no  part  really  white. 
One  part  was  red,  another  yellow,  a  third  green, 
a  fourth  blue,  a  fifth  purple,  and  every  part  re- 
tains its  proper  Colour  till  it  llrike  the  Senfori- 
um.  If  the  Impreflions  follow  one  another 
flowl}',  fo  that  they  may  be  fev^erally  perceived, 
there  is  made  a  diilint^i:  Senfation  of  all  the  Co- 
lours one  after  another  in  a  continual  fuccef- 
fion.  But  if  the  Impreflions  follow  one  ano- 
ther fo  quickly  that  they  cannot  be  feverally 
perceived,  there  arifcth  out  of  them  all  one 
common  Senfation,  which  is  neither  of  this 
Colour  alone  nor  of  that  alone,  but  hath  it  felf 
indifferently  to  'em  all ,  and  this  is  a  Senfation 
of  whitenefs.  By  the  quickneis  of  the  Succef- 
iions  the  Imprellions  of  the  feveral  Colours  are 
confounded  in  the  Senforium,  and  out  of  that 
confufion  arifcth  a  mix'd  Senfation.  If  a  burn- 
ing Coal  be  nimbly  moved  round  in  a  Circle 
with  Gyrations  continually  repeated,  the  whole 
Circle  will  appear  like  Fire  ;  the  reafon  of 
w  hich  is,  that  the  Senfation  of  the  Coal  in  the 
feveral  places  of  that  Circle  remains  imprefs'd 
on  the  Senforium ,  until  the  Coal  return  again 
to  the  fame  place.  And  fo  in  a  quick  confecu- 
tion  of  the  Colours  the  ImprelTion  of  every  Co- 
lour remains  in  the  Senforium,  until  a  revolu- 
tion of  all  the  Colours  be  compleated,  and  that 
fir il Colour  return  again.  The  Impreflions  there- 
fore of  all  the  fucceiRve  Colours  are  at  once  in 

the 


[  124] 

the  Senforium ,  and  jointly  iHr  up  a  Senfation. , 
of  them  all ;  and  fo  it  is  manifeit  by  this  Expe- 
riment ,  that  the  commix'd  Imprellions  of  all 
the  Colours  do  llir  up  and  beget  a  Senlation  of 
white,  that  is,  that  whitenefs  is  compounded 
of  all  the  Colours. 

And  if  the  Comb  be  now  taken  away,  that 
all  the  Colours  may  at  once  pafs  from  the  Lens 
to  the  Paper,  and  be  there  intermixed,  and  to- 
gether retlecled  thence  to  the  Spedators  Eyes ; 
their  Impreflions  on  the  Senforium  being  now 
more  fubtilly  and  perfectly  commixed  there, 
ought  much  more  to  ftir  up  a  Senfation  of 
whitenefs. 

You  may  inflead  of  the  Lens  ufe  two  Prifms 
HIK  and  LMN,  which  by  refrading  the  co- 
loured Light  the  contrary  way  to  that  of  the 
iirll  Refradion,  may  make  the  diverging  Rays 
converge  and  meet  again  in  G,  as  you  fee  re- 
prefcnted  in  the  fcventh  Figure.  For  where 
tiiey  meet  and  mix  they  will  compole  a  white 
Light,  as  when  a  Lens  is  ufed. 

Exper.  II.  Let  the  Sun's  coloured  hnage  PT 
[in  F//[.  8.]  fill  upon  the  Vv'all  o.  a  dark  Cham- 
ber, as  in  the  third  Experiment  of  the  firlt  Book, 
and  let  the  fanje  be  vicu^ed  through  a  Priim 
abc^  held  parallel  to  the  Prifni  A  B  C,  by  whofe 
Refraclion  that  hn;^ge  was  made,  and  let  it  now 
appear  lower  than  before,  fuppofe  in  the  place 
Sever  againfl  the  red  Colour T.  And  if  you 
go  near  to  the  Image  P  T,  the  Spedrum  S  will 
appear  oblong  and  coloured  like  thehiiagePT; 
Ixit  if  you  recede  from  it,  the  Colours  of  the 
Spedrum  S  will  be  contradcd  more  and  more, 

and 


I  125  ] 

and  at  length  vanifh,  that  Spedrum  S  becoming 
perfedly  round  and  white ;  and  if  you  recede 
yet  farther,  the  Colours  will  emerge  again,  bur 
in  a  contrary  order.  Now  that  Spectrum  S  ap- 
pears white  in  that  cafe  when  the  Rays  of  le- 
vcral  forts  which  converge  from  the  fevcrai 
pans  of  the  Image  PT,  to  the  Prifm  al^c,  are 
lb  refra(^ted  unequally  by  it,  that  in  their  paf- 
fage  from  the  Prifm  to  the  Eye  they  may  di- 
verge from  one  and  the  fame  point  of  the  Spe- 
ctrum S,  and  fo  fall  afterwards  upon  one  and 
the  fame  point  in  the  bottom  of  the  Eye,  and 
there  be  mingled. 

And  farther,  if  the  Comb  be  here  made  ufe 
of,  by  whofe  Teeth  the  Colours  at  the  Image 
PT  may  be  fuccellively  intercepted;  the  Spe- 
<!:trum  S  when  the  Comb  is  moved  flowly  will 
be  perpetually  tinged  w  ith  fucceflive  Colours : 
But  when  by  accelerating  the  motion  of  the 
Comb,  the  fucccllion  of  the  Colours  is  fo  quick 
that  they  cannot  be  feverally  leen,  that  Spe- 
drum  S,  by  a  confufed  and  mix'd  Senfation  of 
them  all,  will  appear  white. 

Exper.  12.  The  Sun  fliining  through  a  large 
Prifm  ABC  [in  Fig.  ^.  ]  upon  a  Comb  X  Y, 
placed  immediately  behind  the  Prifm,  his  Light 
which  palled  tlu'ough  the  Interllices  of  the 
Teeth  fell  upon  a  white  Paper  D  E.  The 
breadths  of  the  Teeth  were  equal  to  their  In- 
terllices, and  feven  Teeth  together  with  -their 
Interllices  took  up  an  Inch  in  breadth.  Now 
when  the  Paper  was  about  two  or  three  Inches 
diltant  from  the  Comb,  the  Light  which  paf- 
fed  through  its  ieveral  Interllices  painted  {q 

many 


[126] 


many  ranges  of  Colours,  kl,  mn,  of^  ar,  &c, 
which  were  parallel  to  one  another  and  conti- 
guous, and  without  any  mixtui'e  of  white.  And 
thefe  ranges  of  Colours ,  if  the  Comb  was  mo- 
ved continually  up  and  down  with  a  reciprocal 
motion,  afcended  and  defcended  in  the  Paper , 
and  when  the  motion  of  the  Comb  was  fo  quick, 
that  the  Colours  could  not  be  diftinguilhed 
from  one  another,  the  whole  Paper  by  their 
confufion  and  mixture  in  the  Senforium  appear- 
ed white. 

Let  the  Comb  now  reft,  and  let  the  Paper 
be  removed  farther  from  the  Prifm ,  and  the 
fevcral  ranges  of  Colours  will  be  dilated  and 
expanded  into  one  another  more  and  more, 
and  by  mixing  their  Colours  will  dilute  one  a- 
nother ,  and  at  length ,  when  the  diftance  of 
the  Paper  from  the  Comb  is  about  a  Foot,  or  a 
little  more  (fuppofe  in  the  place  x  D  x  E)  they 
will  fo  far  dilute  one  another  as  to  become 
white. 

With  any  obftacle  let  all  the  Light  be  now 
ftopp'd  which  paifes  through  any  one  interval 
of  the  Teeth,  fo  that  the  range  of  Colours  which 
comes  from  thence  may  be  taken  away,  and 
you  will  fee  the  Light  of  the  reft  of  the  ranges 
to  be  expanded  into  the  place  of  the  range  ta- 
ken away,  and  there  to  be  coloured.  Let  the 
intercepted  range  pafs  on  as  before,  and  its 
Colours  falling  upon  the  Colours  of  the  other 
ranges,  and  mixing  with  them,  will  reftore  the 
whitenefs. 

Let  the  Paper  xD  iE  be  now  very  much  in- 
cline4  to  the  Rays,  fo  that  the  moft  refrangible 

Rays 


[  127  ] 

Rays  may  be  more  copioufly  refleded  than  the 
reft,  and  the  white  Colour  of  the  Paper  through 
the  Excefs  of  thofe  Rays  will  be  changed  into 
blue  and  violet.  Let  the  Paper  be  as  much  in- 
clined the  contrary  way,  that  the  leaft  refran- 
gible Rays  may  be  now  more  copioully  refle61- 
ed  than  thereft,  and  by  their  Excefs  the  white- 
nefs  will  be  changed  into  yellow  and  red.  The 
feveral  Rays  therefore  in  that  white  Light  do 
retain  their  colorific  quahties,  by  which  thofe 
of  any  fort,  when-ever  they  become  more  co- 
pious than  the  reit,  do  by  their  Excefs  and  Pre- 
dominance caufe  their  proper  Colour  to  ap- 
pear. 

And  by  the  fame  way  of  arguing,  applied  to 
the  third  Experiment  of  this  Book,  it  may  be 
concluded ,  that  the  white  Colour  of  all  refra- 
ded  Light  at  its  very  firft  Emergence,  where 
it  appears  as  white  as  before  its  Incidence,  is 
compounded  of  various  Colours. 

Exper.  13.  In  the  foregoing  Experiment  the 
feveral  intervals  of  the  Teeth  of  the  Comb  do 
the  office  of  fo  many  Prifms,  every  interval  pro- 
ducing the  Phajnomenon  of  one  Pril'm.  Whence 
mftead  of  thofe  intei-vals  ufing  feveral  Prifms, 
I  try'd  to  compound  whitenefs  by  mixing  their 
Colours,  and  did  it  by  uling  only  three  Prifms, 
as  alfo  by  ufmg  only  two  as  follows.  Let  two 
Prifms  ABC  and  abc^  \mF'tg.\o.'\  whofe  re- 
frading  Angles  B  and  b  are  equal,  be  fo  placed 
parallel  to  one  another,  that  the  refrading  An- 
gle B  of  the  one  may  touch  the  Angle  c  at  the 
Bafe  of  the  other ,  and  their  Planes  C  B  and 
cby  at  which  the  Rays  emerge,  may  lie  in  Di- 
rectum, 


[128] 

rectum.  Then  let  the  Light  trajeded  through 
them  fall  upon  the  Paper  MN,  diitant  about  8 
or  li  Inches  from  the  Prifms.  And  the  Co- 
lours generated  by  the  interior  limits  B  and  ^ 
of  the  two  Prifms,  will  be  mingled  at  P  T,  and 
there  compound  white.  For  if  either  Prifm 
be  taken  away,  the  Colours  made  by  the  other 
will  appear  in  that  place  PT,  and  when  the 
Prifm  is  reftored  to  its  place  again,  fo  that  its 
Colours  may  there  fall  upon  the  Colours  of  the 
other,  the  mixture  of  them  both  will  reflore 
the  whitenefs. 

This  Experiment  fucceeds  alfo,  as  I  have  tri- 
ed, when  the  Angle  h  of  the  lower  Prifm,  is  a 
little  greater  than  the  Angle  B  of  the  upper, 
and  between  the  interior  Angles  B  and  r,  there 
intercedes  fome  fpace  Br,  as  is  reprefented  in 
the  Figure,  and  the  refrading  Planes  B  C  and 
b  r,  are  neither  in  diredum,  nor  parallel  to  one 
another.  For  there  is  nothing  more  requifite 
to  the  fuccefs  of  this  Experiment,  than  that 
the  Rays  of  all  forts  may  be  uniformly  mixed 
upon  the  Paper  in  the  place  P  T.  If  the  molt 
refrangible  Rays  coming  from  the  'fuperior 
Prifm  take  up  all  the  fpace  from  M  to  P,  the 
Rays  of  the  fame  fort  which  come  from  the  in- 
ferior Prifm  ought  to  begin  at  P,  and  take  up 
all  the  red  of  the  fpace  from  thence  towards 
N.  If  the  leait  refrangible  Rays  coming  from 
the  fuperior  Prifm  take  up  the  fpace  MT,  the 
Rays  of  the  fame  kind  which  come  from  the^o- 
the'r  Prifm  ought  to  begin  at  T,  and  take  up 
the  remaining  fpace  TN.  If  one  fort  of  the 
Rays  which  have  intermediate  degrees  of  Re- 

frangibility. 


[   129  ] 


frangibility,  and  come  from  the  fupcrior.Prifm 
be  extended  through  the  fpace  MQ,  and  an- 
other Ibrt  of  thofe  Rays  through  the  fpace  MR, 
and  a  third  fort  of  them  through  the  ipacc  MS> 
the  fame  forts  of  Rays  coming  from  the  lower 
Prifm,  ought  to  illuminate  the  remaining  fpaces 
QN,  RN,  SN,  refpedively.  And  the  fame 
is  to  be  undei'ltood  of  all  the  other  forts  of 
Rays.  For  thus  the  Rays  of  every  fort  will  be 
fcattered  liniformly  and  eavenly  thro'  the  whole 
fpace  MN,  and  fo  being  every  where  mix'd  in 
the  fame  proportion,  they  mud  every  where 
produce  the  fame  Colour.  And  therefore  fmce 
by  this  mixture  they  produce  white  in  the  ex- 
terior fpaces  MP  and  TN,  they  mull  alfo  pro- 
duce wiiite  in  the  interior  fpace  PT.  This  is 
the  reafon  of  the  compoiition  by  which  white- 
nefs  was  produced  in  this  Experiment,  and  by 
what  other  way  foever  I  made  the  like  compo- 
fition  the  refult  was  whitenefs. 

Laitly,  If  with  the  Teeth  of  a  Comb  of  a  due 
fize,  the  coloured  Lights  of  the  two  Prifms 
which  M  upon  the  fpace  PT  be  alternately 
intercepted,  that  fpace  PT,  when  the  motion 
of  the  Comb  is  How,  will  always  appear  co- 
loured ,  but  by  accelerating  the  motion  of  the 
Comb  fo  much,  that  the  fuccellive  Colours 
cJmnot  be  diilinguilhed  from  one  another,  ic 
will  appear  white. 

Exper.  14.  Hitherto  I  have  produced  Vv^hite- 
nefs  by  mixing  the  Colours  of  Prii'ms.  If  now 
the  Colours  of  natural  Bodies  are  to  be  min- 
gled ,  let  Water  a  little  thicken'd  with  Soap  be 
agitated  to  raife  a  Froth,  and  after  that  Froth 

K  has 


[i3o] 

has  flood  a  little,  there  will  appear  to  one  that 
fhall  view  it  intently  various  Colours  every  where 
in  the  Surfaces  of  the  feveral  Bubbles ;  but  to 
one  that  iliall  go  fo  far  off  that  he  cannot  di- 
llinguifli  the  Colours  Irom  one  another ,  the 
vvhole  Froth  will  grow  white  with  a  perfed 
whitenefs. 

ExPer.  15-.  Lailly,  in  attempting  to  com- 
pound a  white  by  mixing  the  coloured  Powders 
which  Painters  ufe,  I  confider'd  that  all  co- 
lour'd  Powders  do  fupprefs  and  flop  in  them  a 
very  confidcrable  part  of  the  Light  by  which 
they  are  illuminated.  For  they  become  colour'd 
by  refleding  the  Light  of  their  own  Colours 
more  copioufly,  and  that  of  all  other  Colours 
more  fparingly,  and  yet  they  do  not  refleft  the 
Light  of  their  own  Colours  fo  copioufly  as 
white  Bodies  do.  If  red  Lead ,  for  initance , 
and  a  white  Paper,  be  placed  in  the  red  Light 
of  the  colour'd  Spcdrum  made  in  a  dark  Cham- 
ber by  the  P^efradion  of  a  Prifm,  as  is  defcri- 
bed  in  the  third  Experiment  of  the  firfl  Book ; 
the  Paper  will  appear  more  lucid  than  the  red 
Lead ,  and  therefore  refleds  the  red-making 
Rays  more  copioufly  than  red  Lead  doth.  And 
if  they  be  held  in  the  Light  of  any  other  Co- 
lour, the  Light  refleded  by  the  Paper  will  ex- 
ceed the  Light  refleded  by  the  red  Lead  in  a 
much  greater  proportion.  And  the  like  hap- 
pens in  Powders  of  other  Colours.  And  there- 
fore by  mixing  fuch  Powders  we  are  not  to  ex- 
ped  a  flrong  and  full  white,  fuch  as  is  that  of 
Paper,  but  fome  dusky  obfcure  one,  fuch  as 
might  arife  from  a  mixture  of  light  and  dark- 

^  nefs. 


[nl] 


il&fs,  or  from  white  and  black,  that  is,  a  grey^ 
or  dun,  or  ruiTet  brown,  fuch  as  are  the  Co- 
lours of  a  Man's  Nail,  of  a  Moufe,  of  Alhes, 
of  ordinary  Stones,  of  Mortar,  of  Dull  and 
Dirt  in  High- ways,  and  the  like.  And  fuch  a 
dark  white  I  have  often  produced  by  mixing 
colour'd  Powders.  For  thus  one  part  of  red 
Lead,  and  five  parts  of  Viride  jEris,  compo- 
fed  a  dun  Colour  Hke  that  of  a  Moufe.  For 
thefe  two  Colours  were  feverally  fo  compound- 
ed of  others,  that  in  both  together  were  a  mix- 
ture of  all  Colours ;  and  there  was  lefs  red  Lead 
ufed  than  Viride  ^^ris ,  becaufe  of  the  fulnefs 
of  its  Colour.  Again,  one  part  of  red  Lead^ 
and  four  parts  of  blue  Bife ,  compofed  a  dun 
Colour  verging'a  little  to  purple,  and  by  ad- 
ding to  this  a  certain  mixture  of  Orpiment  and 
Viride  jEris  in  a  due  proportion,  the  mixture 
lolt  its  purple  tindure ,  and  became  perfedly 
dun.  Ikit  the  Experiment  fucceeded  belt  with- 
out Minium  thus.  To  Orpiment  I  added  by 
little  and  little  a  certain  full  bright  purple  ji 
which  Painters  ufe  until  the  Orpiment  ceafed 
to  be  yellow,  and  became  of  a  pale  red.  Then 
I  diluted  that  red  by  adding  a  httle  Viride  M^ 
risy  and  a  little  more  blue  Bife  than  Viride  M^ 
rus^  until  it  became  of  fuch  a  grey  or  pale  vi^^hite^ 
as  verged  to  no  one  of  the  Colours  more  than 
to  another.  For  thus  it  became  of  a  Colour  e- 
qual  in  whifenefs  to  thatof  A(hes  or  of  Wood 
newly  cut,  or  of  a  Man's  Skin.  The  Orpiment 
reflec^ted  more  Light  than  did  any  other  of  thd 
Powders,  and  therefore  conduced  rnore  td  th^ 
whitenefs  of  the  compounded  Colour  than  they. 


I  132  ] 

To  alTign  the  Proportions  accurately  may  be 
difficult,  by  reafon  of  the  different  goodnefs  of 
Powders  oF  the  fame  kind.  Accordingly  as  the 
Colour  of  any  Powder  is  more  or  lefs  full  and 
luminous,  it  ought  to  be  ufed  in  a  Icls  or  great- 
er proportion. 

Now  confidering  that  thefe  grey  and  dun  Co- 
lours may  be  alfo  produced  by  mixing  whites 
and  blacks,  and  by  confequence  ditier  from 
perfed  whites  not  in  fpecies  of  Colours  but  on- 
ly in  degree  of  Luminoufnefs ,  it  is  manifefl 
that  there  is  nothing  more  requifite  to  make 
them  perfedly  white  than  to  increafe  their  Light 
fufficicntly;  and,  oh  the  contrary,  ifbyincrea- 
{mg  their  Light  they  can  be  brought  to  perfcft 
vvhitenefs,  it  will  thence  alfo  follow,  that  they 
are  of  the  famiC  fpecies  of  Colour  with  the  bell 
whites,  and  differ  from  them  only  in  the  quan- 
tity of  Light.  And  this  I  tried  as  follows.  I  took 
the  third  of  the  abovemention'd  grey  Mixtures 
(that  which  was  compounded  of  Orpiment,  Pur- 
ple, Bifc,  and  Vtride  ^ru)  and  rubbed  it  thick- 
ly upon  the  Floor  of  my  Chamber,  where  the 
Sun  llione  upon  it  through  the  opened  Cafe- 
ment ;  and  by  it,  in  the  ihadow,  I  laid  a  piece 
of  white  Paper  of  the  fame  bignels.  Then  going 
from  them  to  the  diflanceof  iz  or  18  Feet,  lo 
that  I  could  not  difcern  the  uneavennefs  of  the 
Surface  of  the  Powder,  nor  the  little  Shadows 
let  fall  from  the  gritty  Particles  thereof;  the 
Powder  appeared  intenfely  white,  fo  as  to  tran- 
fcend  even  the  Paper  it  felf  in  whitenefs ,  efpe- 
cially  if  the  Paper  were  a  httle  fliaded  from  the 
Light  of  the  Clouds,  and  then  the  Paper  com- 
pared 


[  '33  ] 

pared  with  the  Powder  appeared  of  fuch  a  grey 
Colour  as  the  Powder  had  done  before.     But 
by  laying  the  Paper  where  the  Sun  iliines  thro* 
the  Glafs  of  the  Window,  or  by  lliutting  the 
Window  that  the  Sun  might  Ihine  through  the 
Glais  upon  the  Powder,  and  by  fuch  other  fit 
means  of  increafmg  or  decreafmg  the  Lights 
wherewith  the  Powder  and  Paper  were  illumi- 
nated, the  Light  wherewith  the  Powder  is  illu- 
minated may  be  made  itronger  in  fuch  a  due 
proportion  than  the  Light  whereuith  the  Paper 
is  illuminated,   that  they  fhall  both  appear  ex- 
adlly  alike  in  whitenefs.     For  when  I  was  try- 
ing this,  a  Friend  coming  to  vifit  me,  I  llopp'd 
him  at  the  Door,  and  before  I  told  him  what 
the  Colours  were,  or  what  I  was  doing ;  I  ask- 
ed him.  Which  of  the  two  Whites  were  the 
beft,  and  wherein  they  differed  ?    And  after  he 
had  at  that  diflance  viewed  them  well,  he  an- 
fwer'd.  That  they  were  both  good  Whites,  and 
that  he  could  not  fay  which    was   bell,    nor 
wherein  their  Colours  differed.     Now  if  you 
confider,  that  this  white  of  the  Powder  in  the 
Sun-fhine    was    compounded   of  the  Colours 
which  the  component  Powders    (Orpimcnt, 
Purple,  Bife ,  and  Vir'tde  Mr  is)    have  in  the 
fame  Sun-fliine,  you  muft  acknowledge  by  this 
Experiment,  as  well  as  by  the  former,  that  per- 
feft  whitenefs  may  be  compounded  of  Colours. 
From  what  has  been  faid  it  is  alfo  evident, 
that  the  whitenefs  of  the  Sun's  Light  is  com-^' 
pounded  of  all  the  Colours  Avhcrewith  the  fe- 
veral  forts  of  Rays  whereof  that  Light  confifls, 
when  by  their  feveral  Ref-ai^.gibiUtiestliey  are 

K  5  fepa- 


[i34] 

feparated  from  one  another,  do  tinge  Paper  or 
any  other  white  Body  whereon  they  fall.  For 
thofe  Colours  by  Trcp.  i.  are  unchangeable , 
and  whenever  all  thofe  Rays  with  thofe  their 
Colours  are  mix'd  again ,  they  reproduce  the 
fame  white  Light  as  before. . 


TROT.  VI.    Prob.  II. 

In  a  mixture  of  primary  Colours,  the  quantity 
and  quality  of  each  being  given,  to  know  the 
Colour  of  the  Compound, 

WITH  the  Center  O  [in  Fig.  ii.]  and  Ra- 
dius OD  defcribe  a  Circle  ADF,  and 
ditlinguiili  its  circumference  into  feven  parts 
DE,  EF,  FG,  GA,  AB,  BC,  CD,  propor- 
tional to  the  feven  mufical  Tones  or  Intervals 
of  the  eight  Sounds,  Sol,  la,  fa,  fol,  la,  mi,  fa^ 
fol,  contained  in  an  eight,  that  is,  proportional 
to  the  number  7,  t'^.-,  t^,  t>  iv>  tW  ^.  Let  the 
firit  part  DE  reprefent  a  red  Colour,  the  fe- 
cond  EF  orange,  the  third  FG  yellow,  the 
fourth  C  A  green,  the  fifth  AB  blue,  thefixth 
B  C  indigo,  and  the  feventh  C  D  violet.  And 
conceive  that  thefe  are  all  the  Colours  of  un^ 
compounded  Light  gradually  pafTmg  into  one 
another,  as  they  do  when  made  by  Prifms ;  the 
circumference  DEFGABCD,  reprefenting 
the  whofe  feries  of  Colours  from  one  end  of 
the  Sun's  colour 'd  Image  to  the  other ,  fo  that 
from  P  to  E  be  all  degrees  of  red,  at  E  the 
Xn^m  CqIqi}}:  between  red  and  grange,  from  E 

toF 


[  135] 


to  F  all  degrees  of  orange,  at  F  the  mean  be- 
tween orange  and  yellow,  from  F  to  G  all  de- 
grees of  yellow,  and  fo  on.  Let  f  be  the  cen- 
ter of  gravity  of  the  Arch  DE,  and  ^,  r,  j,  r, 
«,  A-,  the  centers  of  gravity  of  the  Arches  E  F, 
FG,  GA,  AB,  BC  and  C D  refpertively,  and 
about  thofe  centers  of  gravity  let  Circles  pro- 
portional to  the  number  of  Rays  of  each  Co- 
lour in  the  given  Mixture  be  defcrib'd  ;  that  is, 
the  Circle  /  proportional  to  the  number  of  the 
red-making  Rays  in  the  Mixture ,  the  Circle  q 
proportional  to  the  number  of  the  orange-ma- 
king Rays  in  the  Mixture,  and  io  of  the  reft. 
Find  the  common  center  of  gravit)'  of  all  rhofe 
Circles  />,  ^,  r,  j-,  /,  ?/,  x.  Let  tbat  center  be 
Z;  and  from  the  center  of  the  Circle  AD  F, 
through  Z  to  the  circumference,  drawing  the 
right  Line  O  Y,  the  place  of  the  Point  Y  in  the 
circumference  fhall  iliew  the  Colour  arifing 
from  the  compofition  of  all  the  Colours  in  the 
given  Mixture,  and  the  Line  O  Z  Ihall  be  pro- 
portional to  the  fulnefs  or  intenfcncfs  of  the 
Colour,  that  is,  to  its  diilance  from  vvhitenefs. 
As  if  Y  fall  in  the  middle  between  F  and  G, 
the  compounded  Colour  Ihall  be  the  beft  yel- 
low; ^{  Y  verge  from  the  middle  towards  F 
or  G,  the  compound  Colour  Ihall  accordingly 
be  a  yellow,  verging  towards  orange  or  green. 
If  Z  fall  upon  the  circumference  the  Colour 
fhall  be  intenfe  and  florid  in  the  higheii:  degree ; 
if  it  fall  in  the  mid  way  between  the  circum- 
ference and  center,  it  fliall  be  but  half  fo 
intenfe,  that  is,  it  fhall  be  fuch  a  Colour  as 
would  be  made  by  diluting;  the  intenfeft  yellow 

K  4  with 


vvith  an  equal  quantity  of  whitenefs;  and  if  it 
fall  upon  the  -center  O,  the  Colour  fliall  have 
lofl  all  its  intenfenefs,  and  become  a  white.  But 
it  is  to  be  noted,  That  if  the  point  Z  fall  in  or 
near  the  line  O  D ,  the  main  ingredients  being 
the  red  and  violet,  the  Colour  compounded 
fliall  not  be  any  of  the  prifmatick  Colours,  but 
a  purple,  inclining  to  red  or  violet,  according- 
ly as  the  point  Z  lieth  on  the  fide  of  the  line 
D  O  towards  E  or  towards  C ,  and  in  general 
the  compounded  violet  is  more  bright  and  more 
fiery  than  the  uncompounded.  Alfo  if  only  two 
of  the  primary  Colours  which  in  the  circle  are 
oppofitc  to  one  another  be  mixed  in  an  equal 
proportion,  the  point  Z  fliall  fall  upon  the  cen- 
ter O,  and  yet  the  Colour  compounded  of 
thofe  two  fliall  not  be  perfectly  white,  but  fome 
faint  anonymous  Colour.  For  I  could  never 
yet  by  mixing  only  two  primary  Colours  pro- 
duce a  perfe(^t  white.  Whether  it  may  be  com- 
pounded of  a  mixture  of  three  taken  at  equal 
dillances  in  the  circumference  I  do  not  know, 
but  of  four  or  five  I  do  not  much  queltion  but 
it  may.  But  thefe  are  Curiofities  of  little  or  no 
moment  to  the  underftanding  the  Phaenomena 
of  Nature.  For  in  all  whites  produced  by  Na- 
ture, there  ufes  to  be  a  mixture  of  alf  forts  of 
Rays,  and  by  corrfequence  a  compofition  of  all 
Colours. 

To  give  an  inflance  of  this  Rule  ;  fuppofe  a 
Colour  is  compounded  of  thefe  homogencal 
Colours,  of  violet  one  part,  of  indigo  one  part, 
of  blue  two  parts,  of  green  three  parts,  of  yel- 
low five  parts,  of  orange  fix  parts,  and  of  red 

ten 


[i37] 

ten  parts.  Proportional  to  thefe  parts  defcribe 
the  Circles  x,  v,  r,  j",  r,  c/,  p,  refpedivelv,  that 
is,  lb  that  if  the  Circle  x  be  one,  the  Circle  ^' 
may  be  one,  the  Circle  t  two,  the  Circle  s  three, 
and  the  Circles  r,  ^  and  /,  five,  fix  and  ten. 
Then  I  tind  Z  the  common  center  of  gravity  of 
theie  Circles,  and  through  Z  drawing  the  Line 
O  Y,  the  Point  Y  falls  upon  the  circumference 
between  E  and  F,  Ibme  thing  nearer  to  E  than 
to  F,  and  thence  I  conclude ,  that  the  Colpur 
compoundto  of  thefe  Ingredients  will  be  an  o- 
range,  ver'};ing  a  little  more  ro  red  than  to  yel- 
low. Alfo  T  tmd  that  O  Z  is  a  little  lefs  than 
one  half  of  O  Y,  and  thence  I  conclude,  that 
this  orange  iiath  a  little  lefs  than  half  the  ful- 
ncfs  or  intenft  nefs  of  an  uncompounded  o- 
range ;  that  is  to  iay,  that  it  is  fuch  an  orange 
as  may  be  made  by  mixmg  an  homogeneal  o- 
range  with  a  good  while  in  the  proportion  of 
the  Line  O  Z  to  the  Line  Z  Y,  this  Proportion 
being  not  of  the  quantities  of  mixed  orange  and 
white  Powders,  but  of  the  quantities  of  the 
Lights  reflected  from  them. 

This  Rule  I  conceive  accurate  enough  for 
pradice,  though  not  mathematically  accurate ; 
and  the  truth  of  it  may  be  fufficiently  proved  to 
Senfe ,  by  Hopping  any  of  the  Colours  at  the 
Lens  in  the  tenth  Experiment  of  this  Book.  For 
the  relt  of  the  Colours  which  are  riot  llopp'd, 
but  pafs  on  to  the  Focus  of  the  Lens,  will  there 
compound  either  accurately  or  very  nearly  fuch 
a  Colour  as  by  this  Rule  ought  to  refult  from 
their  Mixture, 

"PROT. 


[i38] 


TROT.  Vn.    Theor.  V. 

jill  the  Colours  in  the  ^niverfe  which  are  made 
by  Lights  and  depend  not  on  the  Tower  of  1- 
maginattony  are  either  the  Colours  of  homoge- 
neal  Light Sy  or  compounded  of  thefe^  and  that 
•either  accurately  or  very  nearly^  according  to 
the  Rule  of  the  foregoing  Troblem. 

FOR  it  has  been  proved  (mTrop.i.  Tart.z.) 
that  the  changes  of  Colours  made  by  Re- 
fractions do  not  ariie  from  any  new  Moditica* 
tions  of  the  Rays  imprefs'd  by  thofe  Refractions, 
and  by  the  various  Terminations  of  Light  and 
Shadow,  as  has  been  the  conflant  and  general 
Opinion  of  Philofophers.  It  has  alfobeen  pro- 
ved that  the  feveral  Colours  of  the  homogeneal 
Rays  do  conlbntly  anfwer  to  their  degrees  of 
Refrangibility,  (Trop.i.  Tart  i.  and  Trof.i. 
Tart  1.)  and.  that  their  degrees  of  Refrangibi- 
lity cannot  be  changed  by  Refractions  and  Re* 
flexions,  (Trop.t.  Tart,  \.)  and  by  confequence 
that  thofe  their  Colours  are  likewife  immuta- 
ble. It  has  alfo  been  proved  diredtly  by  refra- 
cting and  reflecting  homogeneal  Lights  apart , 
that  their  Colours  cannot  be  changed,  (Trop.  i, 
Tart.-L.)  It  has  been  proved  alfo,  that  when 
the  feveral  forts  of  Rays  are  mixed,  and  in  crof- 
fmg  pafs  through  the  fame  fpace,  they  do  not 
aCt  on  one  another  fo  as  to  change  each  others 
colorific  qualities.  (Exper.  lo.  Tart.i.)  but  by 
mixing  their  ACtions  in  the  Senforium  beget  a 
Senfation  differing  from  what  either  would  do 
apart,  that  is  a  Senfation  of  a  mean  Colour  be- 
tween 


[  139  ] 


tween  their  proper  Colours;  and  particularly 
when  by  the  concourle  and  mixtures  of  all 
forts  of  Rays,  a  white  Colour  is  produced,  the 
white  is  a  mixture  of  all  the  Colours  which  the 
Rays  would  have  apart ,  (Trop.  $.  Tart  x.J 
The  Rays  in  that  mixture  do  not  lofe  or  alter 
their  feveral  colorific  qualities ,'  but  by  all  their 
various  kinds  of  Adions  mix'd  in  the  Senfori- 
um ,  beget  a  Senfation  of  a  middling  Colour 
between  all  their  Colours,  which  is  whitenefs. 
For  whitenefs  is  a  mean  between  all  Colours , 
having  it  felf  indifferently  to  them  all,'fo  as  with 
equal  facility  to  be  tinged  with  any  of  them. 
A  red  Powder  mixed  with  a  little  blue,  or  a 
blue  with  a  little  red  ,  doth  not  prefently  lofe 
its  Colour,  but  a  white  Powder  mix'd  with  any 
Colour  is  prefently  tinged  with  that  Colour, 
and  is  equally  capable  of  being  tinged  with  any 
Colour  whatever.  It  has  been  fliewed  alfo, 
that  as  the  Sun's  Light  is  mix'd  of  all  forts 
of  Rays ,  fo  its  whitenefs  is  a  mixture  of  the 
Colours  of  all  forts  of  Rays ;  thofe  Rays  having 
from  the  beginning  their  feveral  colorific  qua- 
lities as  well  as  their  feveral  Refrangibilities, 
and  retaining  them  perpetually  tftichanged  not- 
withllanding  any  Refractions  or  Reflexions  they 
may  at  any  time  fuffer,  and  that  whenever  any 
fort  of  the  Sun's  Rays  is  by  any  means  (as  by 
Reflexion  in  Exper.  9  and  10.  Tart  i.  or  by 
Refraction  as  happens  in  all  Refraftions )  fepa- 
rated  from  the  reft ,  they  then  manifef t  their 
proper  Colours.  Thefe  things  have  been  prov'd, 
ftnd  the  fum  of  all  this  amounts  to  the  Propofi- 
tion  here  to  be  proved,    For  if  the  Sun's  Light 

is 


[  ho] 


is  mix'd  of  feveral  forts  of  Rays,  each  of  which  ' 
have  originally  their  feveral  Refrangibilities  and 
colorific  Qualities ,  and  notwithlbnding  their 
Refradions  and  Reflexions ,  and  their  various 
Separations  or  Mixtures,  keep  thofe  their  ori- 
ginal Properties  perpetually  the  fame  without 
alteration;   then  all  the  Colours  in  the  World 
mull  be  fuch  as  conftantly  ought  to  arife  from 
the  original  colorific  qualities  of  the  Rays  where-  . 
of  the  Lights  confilt  by  which  thofe  Colours 
are  feen.     And  therefore  if  the  reafon  of  any 
Colour  whatever  be  required,  we  have  nothing 
elfe  to  do  than  to  conlider  how  the  Rays  in  the. 
Sun's  Light  have  by  Reflexions  or  Refraftions, 
or  other  caufes  been  parted  from  one  another, 
or  mixed  together ;   or  otherwife  to  find  out 
what  forts  of  Rays  are  in  the  Light  by  which 
that  Colour  is  made ,  and  in  what  proportion ; 
and  then  by  the  lall  Problem  to  learn  the  Co- 
lour which,  ought  to  arife  by  mixing  thofe  Rays 
(or  their  Colours)  in  that  proportion.     I  fpeak 
here  of  Colours  lb  far  as  thev  arife  fromLio;ht. 
For  they  appear  fometimes  by  other  Caufes,  as 
when  by  the  power  of  Phantafy  we  fee  Colours 
in  a  dream,   or  a  mad  Man  fees  things  before 
him  which  are  not  there ;  or  when  we  fee  Fire 
by  llriking  the  Eye,  or  fee  Colours  hke  theE^^e 
of  a  Peacock's  Feather,  by  prefiing  our  Eyes  in 
either  corner  whillt  we  look  the  other  way. 
Where  thefe  and  fuch  like  Caufes  interpofe  not, 
the  Colour  aU'ays  anfwers  to  the  fort  or  forts 
of  the  Rays  whereof  the  Light  confifls ,   as  I 
have  conlfantly  found  in  whatever  Phaenomena 
of  Colours  I  have  hitherto  been  able  to  exa- 

.  mine. 


[hi] 


mine.  I  fhall  in  the  following  Propofitions  give 
inlhnces  of  this  in  the  Phaenomena  of  chiefell 
note. 

TROT.VIU.    Prob.  m.     . 

By  the  dtfcovered  Properties  of  Light  to  ex" 
plain  the  Colours  made  by  T^rtjms. 

LET  ABC  \\riFig.  IX.]  reprcfcnt  a  Prifm 
refra6]:ing  the  Light  of  the  Sun,  which 
comes  into  a  dark  Chamber  through  a  hole  F<p 
almolt  as  broad  as  the  Prifm,  and  let  MN  re- 
prefent  a  white  Paper  on  which  the  refraded 
Light  is  caft,  and  fuppofe  the  moil  refrangible 
or  deepeil  violet-making  Rays  fall  upon  the 
Space  P  TT,  the  leaft  refrangible  or  deepelt  red- 
making  Rays  upon  the  Space  T7>  the  middle 
fort  between  the  indigo-making  and  blue-ma- 
king Rays  upon  the  Space  Q;^,  the  middle  fort 
of  the  green-making  Rays  upon  the  Space  R^, 
the  middle  fo^t  between  the  yellow-making  and- 
orange-makingRays  upon  the  Space  So-,  ando- 
ther  intermediate  forts  upon  intermediate  Spa- 
ces. For  fo  the  Spaces  upon  which  the  feveral 
forts  adequately  fall  will  by  rcafon  of  the  dif- 
ferent Retrangibility  of  thole  forts  be  one  lower 
than  another.  Now  if  the  Paper  M  N  be  fo 
near  the  Prifm  that  the  Spaces  P  T  and  ;r  7  do 
not  interfere  with  one  another,  the  diltance  be- 
tween them  Ttt  will  be  illuminated  by  all  the 
forts  of  Rays  in  that  proportion  to  one  another 
which  they  have  at  their  very  firfl  coming  out 

of 


[  H2  ] 

of  the  Prifm,  and  confequently  be  white.  But 
the  Spaces  P  T  and  77-7  on  either  hand,  will  not 
be  illuminated  by  them  all,  and  therefore  will 
appear  coloured.  And  particularly  at  P,  where 
the  outmolt  violet-making  Rays  fall  alone,  phe 
Colour  mud  be  the  deepelt  violet.  At  Q  where 
the  violet-making  and  indigo-making  Rays  are 
mixed ,  it  mult  be  a  violet  inclining  much  to 
indigo.  At  R  where  the  violet-making,  indi- 
go-making, blue-making,  and  one  half  of  the 
green-making  Rays  are  mixed,  their  Colours 
mult  (by  the  conltru6tion  of  the  fecond  Pro- 
blem) com.pound  a  middle  Colour  between  in- 
digo and  blue.  At  S  where  all  the  Rays  are 
mixed  except  the  red-making  and  orange-ma- 
king, their  Colours  ought  by  the  fame  Rule  to 
compound  a  faint  blue,  verging  more  to  greeii 
than  indigo.  And  in  the  progrefs  from  S  toT, 
this  blue  \^'ill  grow  more  and  more  faint  and 
dilute,  till  at  T,  where  all  the  Colours  begin  to 
be  mixed,  it  ends  in  whitenefs. 

So  again,  on  the  other  fide  of  the  white  at  r, 
where  the  leaft  refrangible  or  utmoft  red-ma- 
king Rays  are  alone,  the  Colour  mull  be  the 
deepelt  red.  At  0-  the  mixture  of  red  and  o- 
range  will  compound  a  red  inclining  to  orange. 
At  ^  the  mixture  of  red,  orange,  yellow,  and 
one  half  of  the  green  mult  compound  a  middle 
Colour  between  orange  and  yellow.  At  %  the 
mixture  of  all  Colours  but  violet  and  indigo  will 
compound  a  faint  yellow,  verging  more  to  green 
than  to  orange.  And  this  yellow  will  grow 
more  faint  and  dilute  continually  in  its  progrefs 

from 


[  143  J 

from  ;^  to  TT,  where  by  a  mixture  of  all  foiifs 
of  Rays  it  will  become  white. 

Thefe  Colours  ought  to  appear  were  the  Sun's 
Light  perfeftly  white :  But  becaufe  it  inclines 
to  yellow,  the  Excefs  of  the  yellow-making 
Rays  whereby  'tis  tinged  with  that  Colour,  be- 
ing mixed  with  the  faint  blue  between  S  and  T, 
will  draw  it  to  a  faint  green.  And  fo  the  Co- 
lours in  order  from  P  to  r  ought  to  be  violet, 
indigo,  blue,  very  faint  gfeen,  white,  faint  yel- 
low, orange,  red.  Thus  it  is  by  the  computa- 
tion :  And  they  that  pleafe  to  view  the  Colours 
made  by  a  Prifm  will  find  it  fo  in  Nature. 

Thefe  are  the  Colours  on  both  fides  the  white 
when  the  Paper  is  held  between  the  Prifm,  and 
the  Point  X  where  the  Colours  meet,  and  the 
interjacent  white  vaniihes.  For  if  the  Paper  be 
held  iHll  farther  off  from  the  Prifm,  the  moil: 
refrangible  and  lead  refrangible  Rays  will  be 
wanting  in  the  middle  of  the  Light,  and  the 
reft  of  the  Rays  which  are  found  there,  will  by 
mixture  produce  a  fuller  green  than  before.  Al- 
fo  the  yellow  and  blue  will  now  become  lefs 
compounded,  and  by  confcquence  more  intenfe 
than  before.  And  this  alfo  agrees  with  expe- 
rience. 

And  if  one  look  through  a  Prifm  upon  a 
white  Objed  encompafled  with  blacknefs  or 
darknefs,  the  reafon  of  the  Colours  arifmg^n 
the  edges  is  much  the  fame,  as  will  appear  to 
one  that  Ihall  a  little  confider  it.  If  a  black  Ob- 
u  jeft  be  encompailed  wdth  a  white  one,  the  Co- 
lours which  appear  through  the  Prifm  are  to  be 
derived  from  the  Light  of  the  white  one,  fpread- 

ing 


[  144  ] 

ingiffito  the  Regions  of  the  black,  and  there- 
fore they  appear  in  a  contrary  order  to  that^ 
when  a  white  Objed  is  furrounded  with  black. 
And  the  fame  is  to  be  underllood  when  anOb- 
jed  is  viewed ,  whofe  parts  are  Ibme  of  them 
lefs  luminous  than  others.  For  in  the  borders 
of  the  more  and  lefs  luminous  parts ,  Colours 
ought  always  by  the  fame  Principles  to  arife 
from  the  F,xcefs  of  the  Light  of  the  more  lu- 
minous ,  and  to  be  of  the  fame  kind  as  if  the 
darker  parts  were  black ,  but  yet  to  be  more 
faint  and  dilute. 

What  is  faid  of  Colours  made  byPrifms  may 
be  ealily  af)plied  to  (Colours  made  by  theGlafles 
of  Telefcopes  or  Microfcopes,  or  by  the  Hu- 
mours of  the  Eye.  For  if  the  Objed-glafs  of 
a  Telefcope  be  thicker  on  one  fide  than  on  the 
other,  or  if  one  half  of  the  Glafs,  or  one  half 
of  the  Pupil  of  the  Eye  be  cover'd  .with  any 
opake  fubltance:.  the  Objcd-glafs,  or  that  part 
of  it  or  of  the  F.ye  which  is  not  cover'd ,  may 
be  confider'd  as  a  Wedge  with  crooked  Sides, 
and  every  Wedge  of  Glafs  or  other  pellucid 
Subilance  has  the  efictt  of  a  Prifm  in  refrading 
the  Light  which  pailcs  through  it. 

How  the  Colours  in  the  ninth  and  tenth  Ex- 
periments of  the  iirlt  Part  arife  from  the  diffe- 
rent Reflexibility  of  Light,  is  evident  by  what 
was  there  laid.  But  it  is  obfervable  in  the  ninth 
Experiment,  that  whilit  the  Sun's  dired  Light 
is  yellow,  the  Excefs  of  the  blue-making  Rays 
in  the  retleded  beam  of  Light  MN,  fuffices 
only  to  bring  that  yellow  to  a  pale  white  incli- 
ning to  blue ,   and  not  to  tinge  it  with  a  mani- 

-    feilly 


[  H5  ] 

feftly  blue  Colour.  To  obtain  therefore  a  bet- 
ter blue,  I  ufcd  inltead  of  the  yellow  Light  of 
the  Sun  the  white  Light  of  the  Clouds,  by  va- 
rying a  little  the  Experiment,  as  follows. 

Ex^er.i6.  LetHFG  [ini^/V.  13.]  repre- 
fent  a  Prifm  in  the  open  Air,  ancf  S  the  Eye  of 
the  Spcdator,  viewing  the  Clouds  by  their 
Light  coming  into  the  Prifm  at  the  plane  lide 
FTGK,  and  reflected  in  it  by  its  bale  HEIG, 
and  thence  going  out  through  its  plane  fide 
H  E  E  K  to  the  Eye.  And  wlien  the  Priim  and 
Eye  are  conveniently  placed,  lb  that  the  Angles 
of  Incidence  and  Reflexion  at  the  Bafe  may  be 
about  40  Degrees,  the  Spedator  will  fee  a  BoW 
M  N  of  a  blue  Colour,  running  from  one  end  of 
the  Bafe  to  the  other,  with  the  concave  fide 
towards  him,  and  the  part  of  the  Bafe  IMJ^G 
beyond  this  J^ow  will  be  brighter  than  the  other 
part  EMNH  on  the  other  tide  of  it.  This  blue  Co- 
lour MN  being  made  by  nothing  elfe  than  by  re- 
flexion of  a  fpecular  Superficies,  feems  fo  odd  it 
Phainomenon,  and  fo  difficult  to  be  explain- 
ed by  the  vulgar  Hypothecs  of  Philofophers^ 
that  I  could  not  but  think  it  deferved  to  be  ta- 
ken notice  of.  Now  for  undeiilanding  the  rea- 
fon  of  it ,  ilippofe  the  Plane  ABC  to  cut  the" 
plane  Sides  and  Bafe  of  the  Prifm  perpendicu^ 
larly.  From  the  Eye  to  the  Line  B  C,  where-^ 
in  that  Plane  cuts  the  Bafe,  draw  the  Lines  S/ 
and  S  t^  in  the  Angles  S/  c  50  dcgr.  ^,  and  S  ^  ^ 
49  degr.  ~,  and  the  Point/  will  be  the  UmiC 
beyond  which  none  of  the  mod  refrangible! 
Rays  can  pafs  through  the  Bafe  of  the  Prifm^ 
And  be  refracted,  whofe  Incidence  is  fuch  that 

L  they 


[  H^ 


they  may  be  refle6led  to  the  Eye;  and  the 
Point  t  will  be  the  like  limit  for  the  leaft  re- 
frangible Rays,  that  is,  beyond  which  none  of 
them  can  pafs  through  the  Bale ,  whofe  Inci- 
dence is  fuch  that  by  Reflexion  they  may  come 
to  the  Eye. '  And  the  Point  r  taken  in  the  mid- 
dle way  between  /  and  t^  will  be  the  like  limit 
for  the  meanly  refrangible  Rays.  And  there- 
fore all  the  leaft  refrangible  Rays  which  fall  up- 
on the  Bafe  beyond  ^,  that  is,  between  t  and  B, 
and  can  come  from  thence  to  the  Eye  will  be 
refleded  thither :  But  on  this  fide  t ,  that  is, 
between  t  and  f ,  many  of  thefe  Rays  will  be 
tranfmitted  through  the  Bafe.  And  all  the  moil 
refrangible  Rays  which  fall  upon  the  Bafe  be- 
yond /,  that  is,  between  p  and  B ,  and  can  by 
reflexion  come  from  thence  to  the  Eye,  will  be 
reflefted  thither,  but  every  where  between/ 
and  r,  many  of  thefe  Rays  will  get  through  the 
Bale  and  be  refraded;  and  the  fame  is  to  be 
underitood  of  the  meanly  refrangible  Rays  on 
either  fide  of  the  Point  r.  Whence  it  follows, 
that  the  Bafe  of  the  Prifm  muft  every  where 
between  t  and  B,  by  a  total  reflexion  of  all  forts 
of  Rays  to  the  Eye,  look  white  and  bright. 
And  every  where  between  /  and  C ,  by  reafon 
of  the  tranfmiflion  of  many  Rays  of  every  fort, 
look  more  pale,  obfcure  and  dark.  But  at  r, 
and  in  other  places  between  /  and  ^,  where  all 
the  more  refrangible  Rays  are  reflcded  to  the 
Eye,  and  many  of  the  lefs  refrangible  are  tranf- 
mitted ,  the  Excefs  of  the  moil  refrangible  in 
the  refleded  Light  will  tinge  that  Light  with 
their  Colour,  which  is  violet  and  blue.    And 

this 


[  H7  ] 

this  happens  by  taking  the  Line  C  prfE  any 
where  between  the  ends  of  the  Prifm  H  (i 
and  E  I. 


TROT.  IX.     Prob.  IV. 

By  the  difcovered  Properties  of  Lhht  to  explain 
the  Colours  of  the  Rain-bow. 

THIS  Bow  never  appears  but  where  ic 
rains  in  the  Sun-fliine,  and  may  be  made 
artificially  by  fpouting  up  Water  which  may 
break  aloft ,  and  fcatter  into  drops ,  and  fall 
down  like  Rain.  For  the  Sun  fliining  upf)nthefe 
drops  certainly  caufes  the  Bow  to  appear  to  a 
Spedator  Handing  in  a  due  pofition  to  the  Raiil 
and  Sun.  And  hence  it  is  now  agreed  upon, 
that  this  Bow  is  made  by  rcfradion  of  the  Sun's 
Light  in  drops  of  falling  Rain.  This  was  un- 
derflood  by  fome  of  the  Ancients,  and  of  late 
more  fully  difcover'd  and  explain'd  by  the  fa- 
mous Antonius  de  TDominis  Archbilhop  of  Spa^ 
lato^  in  his  Book  T)e  Radiis  Visits  ^  Luc  is,  pub- 
lillied  by  his  Friend  Bartolm  at  Venice,  in  the 
Year  1611,  and  written  above  20  Years  before^ 
For  he  teaches  there  how  the  interior  Bow  is 
made  in  round  drops  of  Rain  by  two  Refra- 
ctions of  the  Sun's  Light,  and  one  Reflexion 
between  them,  and  the  exterior  by  two  Refra- 
ftions  and  two  forts  of  Reflexions  between 
them  in  each  drop  of  Water,  and  proves  his 
Explications  by  Experiments  made  with  a  Phial 
full  of  Water,  and  with  Globes  of  Glafs  filled 

L  X  with 


[  148  ] 

with  Water,  and  placed  in  the  Sun  to  make  the 
Colours  of  the  two  Bows  appear  in  them.  The 
fame  Explication  T)es-Cartes  hath  purfued  in 
his  Meteors ,  and  mended  that  of  the  exterior 
Bow.  But  whiUl  they  underllood  not  the  true 
origin  of  Colour's ,  it's  ncceilary  to  purfue  ic 
here  a  little  farther.  For  underilanding  there- 
fore how  the  Bou  is  made,  let  a  drop  of  Rain 
or  any  other  Ipherical  tranfparent  Body  be  repre- 
fented  by  the  Sphere  B  N  F  G,  [in  Fi^.  14.]  de- 
fcribed  with  the  center  C,  and  femi-diameter 
CN.  And  let  AN  be  one  of  the  Sun's  Rays 
incident  upon  it  atN,  and  thence  refra61ed  to 
F,  where  let  it  either  go  out  of  the  Sphere  by 
Refraftion  towards  \,  or  be  refleded  to  G ; 
and  at  G  let  it  either  go  out  by  Refraction  to  R, 
or  be  refleded  to  H ;  and  at  H  let  it  go  out  by 
Refra6lion  towards  S,  cutting  the  incident  Ray 
in  Y ;  produce  A  N  and  R  G,  till  they  meet  in 
X,  and  upon  A  X  and  N  F  let  fail  the  perpen- 
diculars CD  and  CE,  and  produce  CD  till  it 
fall  upon  the  circumference  at  L.  Parallel  to 
the  incident  Ray  AN  draw  the  diameter  BQ, 
and  let  the  Sine  of  Incidence  out  of  Air  into 
Water  be  to  the  Sine  of  Refraftion  as  I  to  R. 
Now  if  you  fuppofe  the  Point  of  Incidence  N 
to  move  from  the  Point  B ,  continually  till  it 
comx  to  L,  the  Arch  Q  F  will  firll  increafe  and 
then  decreafe,  and  fo  will  the  Angle  AXR 
which  the  Rays  A  N  and  G  R  contain ;  and  the 
Arch  QF  and  Angle  AXR  will  be  biggeft 
when  ND  is  to  CN  as  v'hTIrr  to  v^  3  RR,  in 
which  cafe  N  E  will  be  to  N  D  as  2  R  to  I.  Al- 
fo  the  Angle  AYS  which  the  Rays  AN  and  HS 

contain 


H9  ] 

contain  will  firfl  decrcafe ,  and  then  increafc 
and  grow  lead  when  ND  is  to  C  N  as -/nT-'RR 
to  v/  8  RR,  in  which  cafe  NE  will  be  to  ND 
as  3  R  to  I.  And  fo  the  Angle  which  the  next 
emergent  Ray  (that  is,  the  emergent  Ray  after 
three  Reflexions)  contains  with  the  incident 
Ray  AN  will  come  to  its  limit  when  ND  is  to 
CN  as  v/iTTrr  to  v/  15-  RR,  in  which  cafe  NE 
will  be  to  ND  as  4  R  to  I.  And  the  Angle  which 
the  Ray  next  after  that  emergent ,  that  is,  the 
Ray  emergent  after  fom' Reflexions,  contains 
with  the  incident  will  come  to  its  limit,  vvherf 
ND  is  to  CN  as  i/ii-rr  to  ^  24 RR,  in  which 
cafe  NE  will  be  to  ND  as  fR  to  I;  and  fo  on 
infinitely,  the  numbers  3,  8,  15-,  24,  ^c.  being 
gather'd  by  continual  addition  of  the  terms  of 
the  arithmetical  ProgrelTion  3,  5,  7,  9,  &c.  The 
truth  of  all  this  Mathematicians  will  eafily  ex- 
amine. 

Now  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that  as  when  the 
Sun  comes  to  his  Tropicks,  Days  incrcafe  and 
decreafe  but  a  very  little  for  a  great  while  to- 
gether ;  fo  when  by  increaiing  the  diftance  CD, 
thefe  Angles  come  to  their  limits,  they  vary 
their  quantity  but  very  little  for  fome  time  to- 
gether, and  therefore  a  far  greater  number  of 
the  Rays  which  fall  upon  all  the  Points  N  in  the 
Quadrant  BL,  iliall  emerge  in  the  Hmits  of 
thefe  Angles,  than  in  any  other  hiclinations. 
And  farther  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that  the  Rays 
wiiich  differ  in  Refrangibility  will  have  difie- 
rent  limits  of  their  Angles  of  Emergence,  and 
by  confequence  according  to  their  different  de- 
grees of  Refrangibility  emerge  moft  copioufly 

L  3  in 


[  i5o] 

in  different  Angles ,  and  being  feparated  from 
one  another  appear  each  in  their  proper  Co- 
lours. And  what  thofe  Angles  are  may  be  ea- 
fily  gather 'd  from  the  foregoing  Theorem  by 
computation. 

For  in  the  lead  refrangible  Rays  the  Sines  I 
and  R  (as  was  found  above)  are  io8  and  8i, 
and  thence  by  computation  the  greatefl  Angle 
A  X  R  will  be  found  41  Degrees  and  x  Minutes, 
and  the  leaft  Angle  AYS,  5-0  Degrees  and  5*7 
Minutes.  And  in  the  mofl  refrangible  Rays  the 
€ines  I  and  R  are  109  and  81 ,  and  thence  by 
computation  the  greatefl  Angle  A  X  R  will  be 
found  40  Degrees  and  17  Minutes,  and  the  leaft 
Angle  AYS  5-4 Degrees  and  7 Minutes. 

Suppofe  now  that  O  [in  Fig.  i^.]  is  the  Spe- 
ctator's Eye,  and  OP  a  Line  drawn  parallel  to 
the  Sun's  Rays,  and  let  POE,  POF,  POG, 
P  O  H,  be  Angles  of  40  Degr.  1 7  Min,  41  Degr. 
a  Min.  5-0  Degr.  5-7  Min.  and  5-4  Degr.  7  Min. 
refpedlively ,  and  thefe  Angles  turned  about 
their  common  Side  O  P,  fliall  with  their  other 
Sides  OE,  OF;  OG,  OH,  defcribe  the  Verges 
of  two  Rain-bows  AF  B  E  and  C  H  D  G.  For 
if  E,  F,  G,  H ,  be  drops  placed  any  where  in 
the  conical  Superficies  defcribed  by  OE,  OF, 
O G,  OH,  and  be  illuminated  by  the  Sun's  Rays 
SE,  SF,  SG,  SH;  the  Angle  SEO  being  e- 
qual  to  the  Angle  POE  or  40  Degr.  17  Min, 
fliall  be  the  greateft  Angle  in  which  the  moft 
refrangible  Rays  can  after  one  Reflexion  be  re- 
fraded  to  the  Eye,  and  therefore  all  the  drops 
in  the  Line  O  E  fhall  fend  the  mofl  refrangible 
Rays  mofl  popioufly  to  the  Eye?  md  thereby 

itrike 


[  151  ] 

flrike  the  Senfes  with  the  deepeft  violet  Colour 
in  that  Region.    And  in  like  manner  the  Angle 
SFO  being  equal  to  the  Angle  POF,  or  41 
Degr.  1  Min-  fhall  be  the  greatefl  in  which  the 
leall  refrangible  Rays  after  one  Reflexion  can 
emerge  out  of  the  drops,  and  therefore  thofe 
Rays  fhall  come  mod  copioufly  to  the  Eye  from 
the  drops  in  the  Line  OF,  and  flrike  the  Senfes 
with  the  deeped  red  Colour  in  that  Region. 
And  by  the  fame  Argument ,  the  Rays  which 
have  intermediate  degrees  of  Refrangibility  fliall 
come  moll  copioufly  from  drops  between  E  and 
F,  and  ilrike  the  Senfes  with  the  intermediate 
Colours  in  the  order  which  their  degress  of 
RefrangibiUty  require,   that  is  in  the  progrefs 
from  E  to  F,  or  from  the  infide  of  the  Bow  to 
the  outfide  in  this  order,  violet,  indigo,  blue, 
green,  yellow,  orange,  red.     But  the  violet,  by 
the  mixture  of  the  white  Light  of  the  Clouds, 
will  appear  faint  and  incline  to  purple. 

Again ,  the  Angle  S  G  O  being  equal  to  the 
Angle  POG,  or  50  Gr.  5-1  Min.  iliall  be  the  lead 
Angle  in  which  the  leall  refrangible  Rays  can 
after  two  Reflexions  emerge  out  of  the  drops, 
and  therefore  the  lead  refrangible  Rays  fliall 
come  mod  copioufly  to  the  Eye  from  the  drops 
in  the  Line  O  G,  and  drike  the  Senfc  with  the 
deeped  red  in  that  Region.  And  the  Angle 
SHO  being  equal  to  the  Angle  POH  or  54  Gr. 
7  Min.  fliall  be  the  lead  Angle  in  which  the  mod 
refrangible  Rays  after  two  Reflexions  can  e- 
merge  out  of  the  drops,  and  therefore  thofe 
Rays  Ihall  come  mod  copioufly  to  the  Eye  from 
the  drops  in  the  Line  OH,  and  drike  the  Senies 

L  4  with 


[  152  ] 

with  the  deeped  violet  in  that  Region.  And 
by  the  fame  Argument,  the  drops  in  the  Re- 
gions between  G  and  H  fhall  Itrike  the  Senfe 
with  the  intermediate  Colours  in  the  order 
which  their  degrees  of  Refrangibility  require, 
that  is,  in  the  progrefs  from  G  to  H,  or  from 
the  infide  of  the  Bow  to  the  outlide  in  this  or- 
der, red,  orange,  yellow,  green,  blue,  indigo, 
violet.  And  fmce  thefe  four  Lines  O  E,  O  F, 
OG,  OH,  may  be  fituated  any  where  in  the 
abovemention'd  conical  Superficies,  what  is  faid 
of  the  Drops  and  Colours  in  thefe  Lines  is  to 
be  underflood  of  the  Drops  and  Colours  every 
whepe  in  thofe  Superficies. 

Thus  iliall  there  be  made  two  Bows  of  Co^ 
lours,  an  interior  and  flronger,  by  one  Reflexion' 
in  the  drops,  and  an  exterior  and  fainter  by 
two ;  for  the  Light  becomes  fainter  by  every 
Reflexion.  And  their  Colours  lliall  lie  in  a  con^ 
trary  order  to  one  another ,  the  red  of  both 
Bows  bordering  upon  the  Space  GF  which  is 
between  the  Bows.  The  breadth  of  the  inte^ 
rior  Bow  EOF  meafured  crofs  the  Colours 
fhall  be  iDegr.  45Min.  and  the  breadth  of  the 
exterior  G  O  H  iliall  be  3  Degr.  loMin.  and  the 
diflance  between  them  GOF  iliall  be  8Gr.  15 
Min.  the  greateil  Semi-diameter  of  the  inner^ 
moft,  that  is,  the  Angle  P  O  F  being  41  Gr.  x 
Min.  an'd  the  leaft  Semi-diameter  of  the  outer- 
moftPOG,  being  foGr.  57  Min.  Thefe  are 
the  Meafures  of  the  Bows ,  as  they  would  be 
were  the  Sun  but  a  point ;  for  by  the  breadth 
of  his  Body  the  breath  of  the  Bows  will  be  in- 
cregfed  md  their  diitance  decreafed  by  half  a 

Degree^ 


[153] 

Degree,  and  fo  the  breadth  of  the  interior  Iris 
will  be  X  Degr.  ly  Min.  that  of  the  exterior  3 
Degr.  40  Min.  tlieir  diltance  8  Degr.  z^  Min. 
the  greatefl  Semi-diameter  of  the  interior  Bow 
4x  Degr.  17  Min.  and  the  lead  of  the  exterior 
50  Degr.  41  Min.  And  fuch  are  the  Dimenfions 
of  the  Bows  in  the  Heavens  found  to  be  very 
nearly,  .when  their  Colours  appear  Itronj^  and 
perfed.  For  once,  by  fuch  means  as  I  then 
had,  I  meafured  the  greatefl  Semi-diameter  of 
the  interior  Iris  about  42  Degrees,  the  breadth 
of  the  red,  yellow  and  green  in  that  Iris  63  or 
64  Minutes ,  befides  the  outmolt  faint  red  ob- 
fcured  by  the  brightnefs  of  the  Clouds ,  for 
which  we  may  allow  3  or  4  Minutes  more.  The 
breadth  of  the  blue  was  about  40  Minutes  more 
befides  the  violet,  which  was  fo  much  obfcu- 
red  by  the  brightnefs  of  the  Clouds,  that  I  could 
not  meafure  its  breadth.  But  fuppofing  the 
breadth  of  the  blue  and  violet  together  to  equal 
that  of  the  red,  yellow  and  green  together,  the 
whole  breadth  oF  this  h-is  will  be  about  z-\  De- 
grees, as  above.  The  lead  diltance  between 
this  Iris  and  the  exterior  Iris  was  about  8  De- 
grees and  30  Minutes.  The  exterior  his  was 
broader  than  the  interior,  but  fo  faint,  efpeci- 
ally  on  the  blue  iide,  that  I  could  not  meafure 
its  breadth  diilindly.  At  another  time  when 
both  Bows  appeared  more  diiUnft ,  I  meafured 
the  breadth  of  the  interior  Iris  2  Gr.  10',  and 
the  breadth  of  the  red,  yellow  and  green  in  the 
exterior  Iris,  was  to  the  breadth  of  the  fame 
Colours  in  the  interior  as  3  to  2, 

Tills 


[  154] 


,  This  Explication  of  the  Rain-bow  is  yet  far- 
ther confirmed  by  the  known  Experiment  (made 
by  Antomus  de  T>om'tnvs  and  'T)es-Cartes )   of 
hanging  up  any  where  in  the  Sun-fliine  a  Glafs 
Globe  tilled  with  Water,  and  viewing  it  in  fuch 
a  poflure  that  the  Rays  which  come  from  the 
Globe  to  the  Eye  may  contain  with  the  Sun's 
Rays  an  Angle  of  either  41  or  50  Degrees.  For 
if  the  Angle  be  about  4x  or  43  Degrees ,  the 
Spedator  (fuppofe  at  O)  fhall  fee  a  full  red 
Colour  in  that  fide  of  the  Globe  oppofed  to 
the  Sun  as  'tis  reprefented  at  F,  and  if  that  An- 
gle become  lefs  (fuppofe  by  deprefling  the  Globe 
to  E)  there  will  appear  other  Colours,  yellow, 
green  and  blue  fuccellively  in  the  fame  fide  of 
the  Globe.    But  if  the  Angle  be  made  about 
50  Degrees  (fuppofe  by  lifting  up  the  Globe  to 
G)  there  will  appear  a  red  Colour  in  that  fide 
of  the  Globe  towards  the  Sun,  and  if  the  An- 
gle be  made  greater  (luppofe  by  lifting  up  the 
Globe  to  H)   the  red  will  turn  fuccellively  to 
the  other  Colours,  yellow,   green  and  blue. 
The  fame  thing  I  have  tried  by  letting  a  Globe 
reft,  and  railing  or  deprelfing  the  Eye,   or  o- 
therwife  moving  it  to  make  the  Angle  of  a  jull: 
magnitude. 

I  have  heard  it  reprefented,  that  if  the  Light 
of  a  Candle  be  refracted  by  a  Prifm  to  the  Eye ; 
when  the  blue  Colour  falls  upon  the  Eye  the 
Spectator  fliall  fee  red  in  the  Prifm ,  and  when 
the  red  falls  upon  the  Eye  he  lliall  fee  blue ; 
and  if  this  were  certain ,  the  Colours  of  the 
Globe  and  Rain-bow  ought  to  appear  in  a  con- 
trary order  to  what'  we  tind.    But  the  Colours 

of 


of  the  Candle  being  very  faint,  the  miflake 
feems  to  arife  from  the  difficulty  of  diicernmg 
what  Colours  fall  on  the  Eye.  tor,  on  the  con- 
trary, I  have  fometimes  had  occafion  to  ob- 
ferve  in  the  Sun's  Light  refra^led  by  a  Prifm, 
that  the  Sped:ator  always  fees  that  Colour  in  the 
Prifm  which  falls  upon  his  Eye.  And  the  f\me 
I  have  found  true  alfo  in  Candle-light.  For 
when  the  Prifm  is  moved  flowly  from  the  Line 
which  is  drawn  direc^tly  from  the  Candle  to  the 
Eye,  the  red  appears  firll  in  the  Prifm  and  then 
the  blue ,  and  therefore  each  of  them  is  feen 
when  it  falls  upon  the  Eye.  For  the  red  paf- 
fes  over  the  Eye  firft,  and  then  the  blue. 

The  Light  which  comes  through  drops  of 
Rain  by  two  Refradions  without  any  Reflexion, 
ought  to  appear  Ibongelt  at  the  diilance  of  a- 
bout  ^6  Degrees  from  the  Sun ,  and  to  decay 
gradually  both  ways  as  the  diilance  from  him 
increafes  and  decreafes.  And  the  fame  is  to 
be  undcritood  of  Light  tranfmitted  through 
fpherical  Hail-llones.  And  if  the  Hail  be  a  lit- 
tle flatted,  as  it  often  is,  the  Light  tranfmitted 
may  grow  fo  Ih'ong  at  a  little  lefs  diilance  than 
that  of  26  Degrees,  as  to  form  a  Halo  about 
the  Sun  or  Moon ;  which  Halo,  as  often  as  the 
Hail-ftones  are  duly  figured  may  be  colour'd, 
and  then  it  mud  be  red  within  by  the  lead  re- 
frangible Rays,  and  blue  without  by  the  moll 
refrangible  ones ,  efpecially  if  the  Hail-ftones 
have  opake  Globules  of  Snow  in  their  center 
to  intercept  the  Light  within  the  Halo  (as  H/f- 
genius  has  obferv'd)  and  make  the  infide  there^ 
of  more  diftindly  defined  than  it  would  other- 
wife 


wife  be.  For  fuch  Hail-ftones,  though  fphe- 
rical,  by  terminating  the  Light  by  the  Snow , 
may  make  a  Halo  red  within  and  colourleis 
without,  and  darker  in  the  red  than  without^ 
as  Halos  ufe  to  be.  For  of  thofe  Rays  which 
pafs  clofe  by  the  Snow  the  Riibriform  will  be 
leafl  refrafted,  and  lb  come  to  the  Eye  in  the 
direflell  Lines. 

The  Light  which  pafTes  through  a  drop  of 
Rain  after  two  Refractions,  and  three  or  more 
Reflexions,  is  fcarce  llrong  enough  to  caule  a 
fenfible  Bow ;  but  in  thofe  Cylinders  of  Ice  by 
Vfliicli  Hiigejiius  explains  the  Tarbelia,  it  may 
perhaps  be  fenfible. 

TROT.  X.     Prob.  V. 

By  the  difcovered  Tropertics  of  Light  to  ex- 
flam  the  permanent  Colours  of  Natural  Bo- 
dies. 

THESE  Colours  arife  from  hence,  that 
fome  natural  Bodies  reflect  fome  forts  of 
Rays,  others  other  forts  more  copioufly  than 
the  red  Minium  refleds  the  leall  refrangible 
or  red-making  Rays  moll  copioufly,  and  thence 
appears  red.  Violets  reflect  the  moll  refrangi- 
ble, moft  copioufly,  and  thence  have  their  Co- 
lour, and  fo  of  other  Bodies.  Every  Body  re- 
ilefts  the  Rays  of  its  own  Colour  more  copi- 
oufly than  the  rell,  and  from  their  excefs  and 
predominance  in  the  refleded  Light  has  its 
Colour. 

Exper, 


[  157  ] 

Exper.  17.  For  if  in  the  homogeneal  Lights 
obtained  by  the  Iblution  of  the  Problem  pro- 
pofed  in  the  fourth  Propofition  of  the  firil  Part 
you  place  Bodies  of  feveral  Colours ,  you  will 
find,   as  I  have  done,   that> every  Body  looks 
moil  fplendid  and  luminous  in  the  Light  of  its 
own  Colour.    Cinnaber  in  the  homogeneal  red 
Light  is  molt  refplendent ,  in  the  green  Light 
it  is  manifelUy  lei's  refplendent,  and  in  the  blue 
Light  Hill  lefs.     Indigo  in  the  violet  blue  Light 
is  moll  refplendent,  and  its  fplendor  is  gradu- 
ally diminilh'd  as  it  is  removed  thence  by  de- 
grees through  the  green  and  yellow  Light  to 
the  red.     By  a  Leek  the  green  Light,  and  next 
that  the  blue  and  yellow  which  compound  green, 
are  more  Ibongly  receded  than  the  other  Co- 
lours red  and  violet,  and  fo  of  the  reft.     But  to 
make  thefe  Experiments  the  more  manifcil:,  fuch 
Bodies  ought  to  be  chofen  as  have  the  fulleil:  and 
molt  vivid  Colours,   and  two  of  thofe  Bodies 
are  to  be  compared  together.    Thus,  for  in- 
ftance,   if  Cinnaber  and ////^r^z-marine  blue,  or 
fome  other  full  blue  be  held  together  in  the 
homogeneal  Light,  they  will  both  appear  red, 
but  the  Cinnaber  will  appear  of  a  flrongly  lu- 
minous and  refplendent  red,  and  the  nltra-m^- 
rine  blue  of  a  faint  obfcure  and  dark  red ;  and 
if  they  be  held  together  in  the  blue  homogeneal 
Light  they  will  both  appear  blue,  but  iWq  ultra- 
marine  will  appear  of  a  llrongly  luminous  and 
refplendent  blue ,  and  the  Cinnaber  of.  a  faint 
and  dark  blue.     Which  puts  it  out  of  difpute^ 
that  the  Cinnaber  refleds  the  red  Light  much 
more  copioufly  than  the  ////^r^ marine  doth,  and 

the 


[158] 

the  ultra-rmxmt  refleds  the  blue  Light  much 
more  copiouily  than  the  Cinnaber  doth.  The 
fame  Experiment  may  be  tried  fuccefsfully  with 
red  Lead  and  Indigo,  or  with  any  other  two 
colour'd  Bodies,  if  due  allowance  be  made  for 
the  different  ftrength  or  weaknefs  of  their  Co- 
lour and  Light. 

And  as  the  rcafon  of  the  Colours  of  natural 
Bodies  is  evident  by  thefe  Experiments,  fo  it 
is  farther  confirmed  and  put  palt  difpute  by  the 
two  firft Experiments  of  the  firft  Part,  where- 
by 'twas  proved  in  fuch  Bodies  that  the  refled- 
ed  Lights  which  differ  in  Colours  do  differ  alfo 
in  degrees  of  RefrangibiUty.  For  thence  it's 
certain,  that  fome  Bodies  refled  the  more  re- 
frangible, others  the  lefs  refrangible  Rays  more 
copioufly. 

And  that  this  is  not  only  a  true  reafon  of 
thefe  Colours,  but  even  the  only  reafon  may  ap- 
pear farther  from  this  confideration ,  that  the 
Colour  of  homogeneal  Light  cannot  be  chan- 
ged by  the  Reflexion  of  natural  Bodies. 

For  if  Bodies  by  Reflexion  cannot  in  the  lead 
change  the  Colour  of  any  one  fort  of  Rays,  they 
cannot  appear  colour'd  by  any  other  means  than 
by  refleding  thofe  which  either  are  of  their 
own  Colour,  or  which  by  mixture  mud  pro- 
duce it. 

But  in  trying  Experiments  of  this  kind  care 
muft  be  had  that  the  Light  be  fufliciently  ho- 
mogeneal. For  if  Bodies  be  illuminated  by  the 
ordinary  prifmatick  Colours ,  they  will  appear 
neither  of  their  own  Day-light  Colours,  nor  of 
the  Colour  of  the  Light  caft  on  them ,  but  of 

fome 


[  159  ] 

fome  middle  Colour  between  both ,  as  I  have 
found  by  Experience.  Thus  red  Lead  (for  in- 
ftance)  illuminated  with  the  ordinary  prifma- 
tick  green  will  not  appear  either  red  or  green, 
but  orange  or  yellow ,  or  between  yellow  and 
green,  accordingly  as  the  green  Light  by  which 
'tis  illuminated  is  more  or  lefs  compounded. 
For  becaufe  red  Lead  appears  red  when  illu- 
minated with  white  Light,  wherein  all  forts  of 
Rays  are  equally  niix'd,  and  in  the  green  Light 
all  forts  of  Kays  are  not  equally  mix'd,  the  Ex- 
cefs  of  the  yellow-making,  green-making  and 
blue-making  Rays  in  the  incident  green  Light, 
will  caufe  thofe  Rays  to  abound  fo  much  in 
the  refledled  Light  as  to  draw  the  Colour  from 
red  towards  their  Colour.  And  becaufe  the 
red  Lead  refleds  the  red-making  Rays  mofl 
copioufly  in  proportion  to  their  number,  and 
next  after  them  the  orange-making  and  yellow- 
making  Rays  ;  thefe  Rays  in  the  reflected  Light 
will  be  more  in  proportion  to  the  Light  than 
they  were  in  the  incident  green  Light,  and  there- 
by will  draw  the  refleded  Light  from  green  to- 
wards their  Colour.  And  therefore  the  red 
Lead  will  appear  neither  red  nor  green,  but  of 
a  Colour  between  both. 

In  tranfparently  colour'd  Liquors  'tis  obfer- 
vable,  that  their  Colour  ufes  to  vary  with  their 
thicknefs.  Thus,  for  inltance,  a  red  Liquor  in 
a  conical  Glafs  held  between  the  Light  and  the 
Eye ,  looks  of  a  pale  and  dilute  yellow  at  the 
bottom  where  'tis  thin,  and  a  little  higher  where 
'tis  thicker  grows  orange ,  and  where  'tis  Itill 
thicker  becomes  red ,   and  w^here  'tis  thickell 

the 


[  1^0  ] 


the  red  is  deepeit  and  darkell.  For  it  is  to  be 
conceiv'd  that  fiich  a  Liquor  flops  the  indigo- 
making  and  violet-making  Rays  molt  eafily,  the 
blue-making  Rays  more  difficultly,  the  green- 
making  Rays  itill  more  difficultly,  and  the  red- 
making  moll  difficultly :  And  that  if  the  thick- 
nefs  of  the  Liquor  be  only  lb  much  as  fuffices 
to  Hop  a  competent  number  of  the  violet-ma- 
king and  indigo-making  Rays ,  without  dimi-^ 
milling  much  the  number  of  the  relt,  the  reft 
mult  {by  Tr op. 6.  Tart z.)  compound  a  pale 
yellow.  But  if  the  Liquor  be  fo  much  thicker 
as  to  itop  alfo  a  great  number  of  the  blue-ma^ 
king  Rays,  and  Ibme  of  the  green-making,  the 
relt  mull  compound  an  orange ;  and  where  it 
is  fo  thick  as  to  Hop  alio  a  great  number  of  the 
green-making  and  a  conliderable  number  of 
the  yellow-making,  the  relt  mult  begin  to  com- 
pound a  red,  and  this  red  mult  grow  deeper 
and  darker  as  the  yellow-making  and  orange- 
making  Rays  are  more  and  more  Itopp'd  by  in- 
creafmg  the  thicknefs  of  the  Liquor,  fo  that 
few  Rays  befides  the  red-making  can  get 
through. 

Of  this  kind  is  an  Experiment  lately  related 
to  me  by  Mr.  Halley^  who,  in  diving  deep  into 
the  Sea  in  a  diving  VelTel,  found  in  a  clear  Sun- 
lliineDay,  that  when  he  was  funk  many  Fathoms 
deep  into  the  Water,  the  upper  part  of  his  Hand 
on  which  the  Sun  Ihone  directly  through  the 
Water  and  through  a  fmall  Glafs  Window  in 
the  VelTel,  like  that  of  a  Damask  Rofe,  and  the 
Water  below  and  the  under  part  of  his  Hand 
illuminated  by  Light  reflefted  from  the  Water 

below 


below  look'd  green.  For  thence  it  may  be  ga« 
thcr'd,  that  the  Sea  Water  refledls  back  the 
violet  and  blue-making  Rays  molt  eafily,  and 
lets  the  red-making  Rays  pafs  moll  freely  and 
copioufly  to  great  depths.  For  thereby  the  Sun's 
dired  Light  at  all  great  depths,  by  reafon  of 
the  predominating  red-making  Rays,  muft  ap- 
pear red ;  and  the  greater  the  depth  is,  the  ful- 
ler and  inteni'er  mull  that  red  be.  And  at  fuch 
depths  as  the  violet-making  Rays  fcarce  pene- 
trate unto,  the  blue-making,  green-making  and 
yellow- making  Rays  being  relieved  from  be- 
low more  copioufly  than  the  red-making  ones, 
muft  compound  a  green. 

Now  if  there  be  two  Liquors  of  full  Colours, 
fuppofe  a  red  and  a  blue,  and  both  of  them  lb 
thick  as  fulKces  to  make  their  Colours  fuffici- 
ently  full ;  though  either  Liquor  be  fufficient- 
ly  tranfparent  ^part,  yet  will  you  not  be  able 
to  fee  through  both  together.  For  if  only  the 
red-making  Rays  pafs  through  one  Liquor,  and 
only  the  blue-making  through  the  other,  no  Rays 
can  pafs  through  both.  This  Mr.  Hook  tried 
cafually  with  Glafs  Wedges  filled  with  red  and 
blue  Liquors,  and  was  furprized  at  the  unex- 
peded  event ,  the  reafon  of  it  being  then  un- 
known ;  which  makes  me  trull  the  more  to  his 
Experiment,  though  I  have  not  tried  it  my  felf 
But  he  that  would  repeat  it,  mull  take  care  the 
Liquors  be  of  very  good  and  full  Colours. 

Now  whilft  Bodies  become  coloured  by  refle(^- 
ing  or  tranfmitting  this  or  that  fort  of  Rays  more 
copioufly  than  the  reft,  it  is  to  be  conceived 
that  they  flop  and  flifle  in  themfelves  the  Rays 

M  which 


[    1^2] 

which  they  do  not  refled  or  tranfmit.    For  if 
Gold  be  foliated  and  held  between  your  Eye  and 
the  Light,  the  Light  looks  of  a  greenilh  blue, 
and  therefore  malTy  Gold  lets  into  its  Body  the 
blue-making  Rays  to  be  reflefted  to  and  fro 
within  it  till  they  be  itopp'd  and  flifled ,  whilft 
it   reflefts  the  yellow-making  outwards,  and 
thereby  looks  yellow.    And  much  after  the 
fame  manner  that  Leaf  Gold  is  yellow  by  re- 
fle6ied,  and  blue  by  tranfmitted  Light,  and  maf- 
fy  Gold  is  yellow  in  all  Pofitions  of  the  Eye ; 
there  are  fome  Liquors,   as  the  Tindure  of 
L'tgnum  Nephritkum^  and  fome  forts  of  Glafs 
which  tranlmit  one  fort  of  Light  molt  copiouf- 
ly,  and  refleft  another  fort,  and  thereby  look 
bf  feveral  Colours,  according  to  the  pofition 
of  the  Eye  to  the  Light.    But  if  thefe  Liquors 
or  GlalFes  were  fo  thick  and  maffy  that  no  Light 
could  get  through  them,  I  quellion  not  but 
they  would  like  all  other  opake  Bodies  appear 
of  one  and  the  fame  Colour  in  all  Pofitions  of 
the  Eye,  though  this  I  cannot  yet  affirm  by  ex- 
perience.    For  all  coloured  Bodies,  fo  far  as  my 
Obfervation  reaches ,   may  be  feen  through  if 
made  fufficiently  thin,  and  therefore  are  in  fome 
meafure  tranfparent,  and  differ  only  in  degrees 
of  Tranfparency  from  tinged  tranfparent  Li- 
quors ;  thefe  Liquors,  as  well  as  thofe  Bodies, 
by  a  fufficient  thicknefs  becoming  opake.    A 
tranfparent  Body  which  looks  of  any  Colour  by 
tranfmitted  Light ,  may  alfo  look  of  the  fame 
Colour  by  reflefted  Light ,  the  Light  of  that 
Colour  being  refleded  by  the  farther  Surface 
of  the  Body,  or  by  the  Air  beyond  it.    And 

then 


then  the  reflected  Colour  will  be  diminiflieds, 
and  perhaps  ce-:\(G,  by  making  the  Body  very 
thick,  and  pitching  it  on  the  backfide  to  dimi- 
nifli  the  Reflexion  of  its  farther  Surface,  fo  that 
the  Light  refieded  from  the  tinging  Particles 
may  predominate.  In  fuch  cafes,  the  Colour 
of  the  retlefted  Light  will  be  apt  to  vary  from 
that  of  the  Light  tranfmitted.  But  whence  it 
is  that  tinged  Bodies  and  Liquors  refled  fome 
foit  of  Rays ,  and  intromit  or  tranfmit  other 
forts,  fhall  be  faid  in  the  next  Book.  In  this 
Propofition  I  content  my  felf  to  have  put  it  paft 
dil'pute,  that  Bodies  have  fuch  Properties^  and 
thence  appear  coloured. 


"PR  OT.  XL    Pros.  VI. 

By  mixhig  coloured  Lights  to  compound  a  beam 

of  Light  of  the  fame  Colour  and  Nature  with 

a  beam  of  the  Sun's  dire&  Lights  and  thereiit 

to  experience  the  Truth  of  the  foregoing  'Fro-^ 

^ofitions. 

LET.  ABC  ^^f  {\ViFig.r6.']  reprefent  a 
Prifm  by  which  the  Sun's  Light  let  into 
a  dark  Chamber  through  the  Hole  F,  may  be 
refracted  towards  the  Lens  MN,  and  paint  up- 
on it  at/,  ^, ;,  J  and  ?,  the  uiual  Colours  vio- 
let, blue,  green,  yellow  and  red,  and  let  the 
diverging  Rays  by  theReiracfion  of  this  Lens 
converge  again  towards X^  and  there,  by  the 
mixture  of  all  thoic  their  Colours,  compound  a 
white  according  to  what  was  ilievvn  above. 

M  %  Thefi 


Then  let  another  Prifm  D  E  G  deg^  parallel  to 
the  former,  be  placed  at  X,  to  refradl  that 
white  Light  upwards  towards  Y.  Let  the  re- 
fra^ling  Angles  of  the  Prifms,  and  their  diltances 
from  the  Lens  be  equal,  fo  that  the  Rays  which 
converged  from  the  Lens  towards  X,  and  with- 
out Refradion,  would  there  have  crofled  and 
diverged  again ,  may  by  the  Refraftion  of  the 
fecond  Prifm  be  reduced  into  Parallelifm  and 
diverge  no  more.  For  then  thofe  Rays  will  re- 
compofe  a  beam  of  white  Light  X  Y .  If  the 
refrading  Angle  of  either  Prifm  be  the  bigger, 
that  Prifm  muil  be  fo  much  the  nearer  to  the 
Lens.  You  will  know  when  the  Prifms  and  the 
Lens  are  well  fet  together,  by  obferving  if  the 
beam  of  Light  XY  which  comes  out  of  the  fe- 
cond Prifm  be  perfedly  white  to  the  very  edges 
of  the  Light,  and  at  all  diltances  from  the  Prifm 
continue  perfectly  and  totally  white  Hke  a  beam 
of  the  Sun's  Light.  For  till  this  happens ,  the 
pofition  of  the  Prifms  and  Lens  to  one  another 
mufl  be  correded,  and  then  if  by  the  help  of  a 
long  beam  of  Wood,  as  is  reprefented  in  the 
Figure,  or  by  a  Tube,  or  fome  other  fuch  In- 
ftrument  made  for  that  purpofe,  they  be  made 
fafl  in  that  fituation ,  you  may  try  all  the  fame 
Experiments  in  this  compounded  beam  of  Light 
X  Y,  which  have  been  made  in  the  Sun's  dired 
Light,  For  this  compounded  beam  of  Light 
has  the  fame  appearance,  and  is  endowed  with 
all  the  fame  Properties  with  a  dired  beam  of 
the  Sun's  Light,  fo  far  as  my  Obfervation  reaches. 
And  in  trying  Experiments  in  this  beam  you 
may  by  flopping  any  of  the  Colours  /,  ^,  r^  s 

and 


[  1^5  ] 

and  t^  at  the  Lens,  fee  how  the  Colours  pro- 
duced in  the  Experiments  are  no  other  than 
thofe  which  the  Rays  had  at  the  Lens  before 
they  enter  the  compofition  of  this  Beam :  And 
by  confequence  that  they  arife  not  from  any  new 
modifications  of  the  Light  by  Refradions  and 
Reflexions ,  but  from  the  various  Separations 
and  Mixtures  of  the  Rays  originally  endow'd 
with  their  colour-making  qualities. 

So,  for  inllance,  having  with  a  Lens  4-^  Inches 
broad,  and  two  Prifms  on  either  hand  6^  Feet 
diftant  from  the  Lens,  made  fuch  a  beam  of 
compounded  Light :  to  examin  the  reafon  of 
the  Colours  made  by  Prifms,  I  refracted  this 
compounded  beam  of  Light  X  Y  with  another 
Prifm  HIK  ^Z;,  and  thereby  caft  the  ufual  prif- 
matick  Colours  PQRSTupon  the  Paper  LV 
placed  behind.  And  then  by  flopping  any  of 
the  Colours/,^,  r,  j,  ^,  at  the  Lens,  I  found 
that  the  fame  Colour  would  vanifli  at  the  Pa- 
per. So  if  the  purple  /  was  flopp'd  at  the 
Lens ,  the  purple  P  upon  the  Paper  would  va- 
nifli, and  the  reft  of  the  Colours  would  remain 
unalter'd,  unlefs  perhaps  the  blue,  fo  far  as 
fome  purple  latent  in  it  at  the  Lens  might  be 
feparated  from  it  by  the  following  Refradlions. 
And  fo  by  intercepting  the  green  upon  the  Lens, 
the  green  R  upon  the  Paper  would  vanifh,  and 
fo  of  the  reft ;  which  plainly  fhews,  that  as  the 
white  beam  of  Light  X  Y  was  compounded  of 
feveral  Lights  varioufly  colour'd  at  the  Lens, 
fo  the  Colours  which  afterwards  emerge  out  of 
it  by  new  Refraftions  are  no  other  than  thofe 
of  which  its  whitenefs  was  compounded.    The 

M  3  Refra- 


I  166] 

Refradiofi  of  thePrifm  HIK  >^^  generates  the 
Colours  PQRST  upon  the  Paper,  not  by 
changing  the  colorific  qualities  of  the  Rays,  but 
by  feparating  the  Rays  which  had  the  very  fame 
colorific  qualities  before  they  enter'd  the  Com- 
pofition  of  the  refradied  beam  of  white  Light 
X  Y.  For  otherwife  the  Rays  which  were  of 
one  Colour  at  the  Lens  might  be  of  another 
upon  the  Paper,  contrary  to  what  we  find. 

So  again ,  to  examin  the  reafon  of  the  Cor 
lours  of  natural  Bodies,  I  placed  fuch  Bodies 
in  the  Beam  of  Light  X  Y,  and  found  that  they 
all  appeared  there  of  thole  their  own  Colours 
which  they  have  in  Day-light ,  and  that  thofe 
Colours  depend  upon  the  Rays  which  had  the 
fame  Colours  at  the  Lens  before  they  enter'd 
the  Compofition  of  that  beam.  Thus,  for  in- 
stance ,  Cinnaber  illuminated  by  this  beam  ap- 
pears of  the  fame  red  Colour  as  in  Day-light  5 
and  if  at  the  Lens  you  intercept  the  green-ma- 
king and  blue-making  Rays,  its  rednefs  will  be- 
come more  full  and  lively :  But  if  you  there  in- 
tercept the  red-making  Rays,  it  will  not  any 
longer  appear  red,  but  become  yellow  or  green, 
.  or  of  fome  other  Colour,  according  to  the  forts 
of  Rays  which  you  do  not  intercept.  So  Gold 
in  this  Light  X  Y  appears  of  the  fame  yellow 
Colour  as  in  Day-light,  but  by  intercepting  at 
the  Lens  a  due  quantity  of  the  yellow-making 
Rays  it  will  appear  white  hke  Silver  (as  I  have 
tried )  which  fhews  that  its  yellownefs  arifes 
from  the  Excefs  of  the  intercepted  Rays  tinging 
that  whitenefs  with  their  Colour  when  they  are 
let  pafs.    So  the  infufion  of  L'tgnum  Nephritic 

cum 


Book!  PaitirnatEl 


# 


X 


^8'-  5 


V-W 


/ 


• 


BookLPaitir.HatcI 


Fio-  _^.  „  .^ 


:-      ^  ^'     F 


^»*F^ 


1    !. 


"I     iT^^^ 


• 


o 


FOLDOUT  BLANK 


Bookl  Fiitl . Plate  HI 


o 


Book  I   Pail  U/Hatc^ 

L 

X 


^•y^ 


i 


cum  ( as  I  have  alfo  tried )  when  held  in  this 
beam  of  Light  X  Y,  looks  blue  by  the  reflec^t- 
ed  part  of  the  Lights  ^nd.  red  by  thie.  traxifmit- 
tjed  part  ^f%,  as  when  'tis  view'd  in  Day-light, 
l|ut  if  you  inte!Pcept  the  blue  at  the  Lens  the 
infufion  will  lofe  its  reflected  blue  Colour,  whilil 
its  tranfmitted  red  remains  perfed  and  by  the 
lofs  of  fome  blue-making  Rays  wherewith  it  Was 
allay 'd  becomes  more  intenfe  and  full.  And, 
on  the  contrary,  if  the  red  and  orange-making 
Rays  be  intercepted  at  the  Lens,  the  Infufion  will 
lofe  its  tranfmitted  red,  whillt  its  blue  will  re- 
main and  become  more  full  and  perfed.  Which 
lliews,  that  the  Infufion  does  not  tinge  the  Rays 
with  blue  and  red,  but  only  tranfmit  thofe 
molt  copioufly  which  were  red-making  before, 
and  refleds  thofe  molt  copioufly  which  were 
blue-making  before.  And  after  the  fame  man- 
ner may  the  Reafons  of  other  Phaenomena  be 
examined,  by  trying  them  in  this  artificial  beam 
of  Light  XY. 


M4  THE 


li6S] 


THE 

SECO'ND  BOOK 

OPTIC  KS. 

PART    I. 


Obfervations  concerning  the  ReJIexions,  Refra- 
Bionsy  and  Colours  of  thin  transparent  Bo- 
dies. 

|T  has  been  obferved  by  others,  that 
trani parent  Subflances,  as  Glafs,  War 
ter,  Air,  ^c.  when  made  very  thin  by 
being  blown  into  Bubbles,  or  otherwile 
formed  into  Plates,  do  exhibit  various  Colours 
according  to  their  various  thinnefs,  although  at 

a  greater 


[  ^^9  ] 

a  greater  thicknefs  they  appear  very  clear  and 
colourlefs.  In  the  former  Book  I  forbore  to 
treat  of  thefe  Colours,  becaufe  they  feemed  of 
a  more  difficult  Confideration ,  and  were  not 
neceiTary  for  eftabUfliing  the  Properties  of  Light 
there  difcourfed  of  But  becaule  they  may  con- 
duce to  farther  Difcoveries  for  completing  the 
Theory  of  Light,  efpecially  as  to  the  conltitu- 
tion  of  the  parts  of  natural  Bodies,  on  which 
their  Colours  or  Tranfparency  depend ;  I  have 
here  fct  down  an  account  of  them.  To  render 
this  Difcourfe  fliort  and  diffind,  I  have  firlt  de- 
fcribed  the  principal  of  my  Obiervations ,  and 
then  confider'd  and  made  ufe  of  them.  The 
Obfervations  are  thefe. 

Obf.  I.  Compreiling  two  Prifms  hard  toge- 
ther that  their  fides  ( which  by  chance  were  a 
very  little  convex)  might  fomewhere  touch  one 
another :  I  found  the  place  in  which  they  touch- 
ed to  become  abfolutely  tranfparent,  as  if  they 
had  there  been  one  continued  piece  of  Glals. 
For  when  the  Light  fell  fo  obliquely  on  the 
Air,  which  in  other  places  was  between  them, 
as  to  be  all  reflefted ;  it  feemed  in  that  place  of 
contad  to  be  wholly  tranfmitted,  infomuch  that 
when  look'd  upon,  it  appeared  Uke  a  black  or 
dark  fpot,  by  reafon  that  httle  or  no  fenfible 
Light  was  refleded  from  thence,  as  from  other 
places ;  and  when  looked  through  it  feemed  (as 
it  were  )  a  hole  in  that  Air  which  was  formed 
into  a  thin  Plate,  by  being  comprefs'd  between 
the  GlaiTes.  And  through  this  hole  Objeds  that 
were  beyond  might  be  feen  diflinftly,  which 
could  not  at  all  be  feen  through  other  parts  of 

the 


[  I70  ] 

the  GlafTes  where  the  Air  was  interjacent.  Al- 
though the  Glalles  were  a  little  convex,  yet  this 
tranlparent  fpot  was  of  a  conliderable  breadth, 
which  breadth  fecmed  principally  to  proceed 
from  the  yielding  inwards  of  the  parts  of  the 
GlaiTes,  by  reafon  of  their  mutual  preffure.  For 
by  preihng  them  very  hard  together  it  would 
become  much  broader  than  otherwife. 

Obf.  X.  W  hen  the  Plate  of  Air,  by  turning 
the  Prifms  about  their  common  Axis ,  became 
fo  little  inclined  to  the  incident  Rays,  that  fome 
of  them  l~)egan  to  be  tranfmitted ,  there  arofe 
in  it  many  llender  Arcs  of  Colours  which  at  firlt 
were  fhaped  almoft  like  the  Conchoid ,  as  you 
fee  them  delineated  in  the  firft  Figure.  And 
by  continuing  the  Motion  of  the  Prifms,  thefe 
Arcs  increafed  and  bended  more  and  more  a- 
bout  the  faid  tranfparent  fpot,  till  they  were 
completed  into  Circles  or  Rings  incompaffing 
it,  and  afterwards  contiaually  grew  more  and 
more  contraded. 

Thefe  Arcs  at  their  firlt  appearance  were  of 
'  a  violet  and  blue  Colour ,  and  between  them 
were  white  Arcs  of  Circles,  which  prefently 
by  continuing  the  Motion  of  the  Prifms  became 
a  Uttle  tinged  in  their  inward  Limbs  with  red 
and  yellow,  and  to  their  outward  Limbs  the 
blue  was  adjacent.  So  that  the  order  of  thefe 
Colours  from  the  central  dark  fpot,  was  at  that 
time  white,  blue,  violet;  black,  red,  orange, 
yellow,  white,  blue,  violet,  ^c.  But  the  yel- 
low and  red  were  much  fainter  than  the  blue 
and  violet. 

The 


[I7i] 

The  Motion  of  the  Prifms  about  their  Axis 
yoeing  continued,  thefe  Colours  contracted  more 
[and  more,  fhrinking  towards  the  whitenefs  on 
either  fide  of  it,  until  they  totally  vanillied  in- 
to it.  And  then  the  Circles  in  thofe  parts  ap- 
peared black  and  white,  without  any  other  Co- 
lours intermix'd.  But  by  farther  moving  the 
Prifms  about,  the  Colours  again  emerged  out  of 
the  whitenefs,  the  violet  and  blue  at  its  inward 
Limb,  and  at  its  outward  Limb  the  red  and 
yellow.  So  that  now  their  order  from  the  cen- 
tral Spot  was  white,  yellow,  red;  black;  vio- 
let, blue,  white,  yellow,  red,  ^c.  contrary  to 
what  it  was  before. 

Oiff.  3.  When  the  Rings  or  fome  parts  of 
them  appeared  only  black  and  white,  they  were 
very  diftind  and  well  defined ,  and  the  back- 
nefs  feemcd  as  intenfe  as  that  of  the  central 
Spot.  Alfo  in  the  Borders  of  the  Rings,  where 
the  Colours  began  to  emerge  out  of  the  white- 
nefs, they  were  pretty  diilindl,  which  made 
thei3  vifible  to  a  very  great  multitude.  I  have 
fome  times  number 'd  above  thirty  Succeflions 
(reckoning  every  black  and  white  Ring  for  one 
Succeffion)  and  feen  more  of  them,  which  by 
reafon  of  their  fmalnefs  I  could  not  number. 
But  in  other  Pofitions  of  the  Prifms ,  at  which 
the  Rings  appeared  of  many  Colours ,  I  could 
not  diltinguilh  above  eight  or  nine  of  them, 
and  the  Exterior  of  thofe  were  very  confufed 
and  dilute. 

In  thefe  two  Obfervations  to  fee  the  Rings  di- 
ftind:,  and  without  any  other  Colour  than  black 
and  white,  1  found  it  neceifary  to  hold  my  Eye 

at 


[  172  ] 

at  a  good  diftance  from  them.  For  by  ap- 
proaching nearer,  although  in  the  fame  inclina- 
tion of  my  Eye  to  the  Plane  of  the  Rings,  there 
emerged  a  blueifli  Colour  out  of  the  white, 
which  by  dilating  it  felf  more  and  more  into 
the  black,  render'd  the  Circles  lefs  diltind:,  and 
left  the  white  a  little  tinged  with  red  and  yel- 
low. I  found  alfo  by  looking  through  a  ilit  or 
oblong  hole,  which  was  narrower  than  the  Pu- 
pil of  my  Eye,  and  held  clofe  to  it  parallel  to 
the  Prifms ,  I  could  fee  the  Circles  much  di- 
{l:in<^t:er  and  vifible  to  a  far  greater  number  than 
otherwife. 

Obf.  4.  To  obferve  more  nicely  the  order 
of  the  Colours  which  arofe  out  of  the  white 
Circles  as  the  Rays  became  lefs  and  lefs  incli- 
ned to  the  Plate  of  Air;  I  took  two  Objeft- 
glaffes,  the  one  a  Plano-convex  for  a  fourteen 
Foot  Telefcope ,  and  the  other  a  large  double 
Convex  for  one  of  about  fifty  Foot ;  and  upon 
this,  laying  the  other  with  its  plane  fide  down- 
wards, I  preiTed  them  flowly  together,  to  make 
the  Colours  fucceffively  emerge  in  the  middle 
of  the  Circles,  and  then  flowly  lifted  the  upper 
Glafs  from  the  lower  to  make  them  fucceffive- 
ly vanilh  again  in  the  fame  place.  The  Colour, 
W'hich  by  prelling the GlafTes  together  emerged 
iaftinthe  middle  of  the  other  Colours,  would 
upon  its  firll  appearance  look  like  a  Circle  of  a 
Colour  almoft  uniform  from  the  circumference 
to  the  center,  and  bycompreffingtheGlaifes  ftill 
more,  grow  continually  broader  until  a  new  Co- 
lour emerged  in  its  center,  and  thereby  it  became 
a  Ring  encompalling  that  new  Colour.  And  by 

com- 


I  173  ] 

comprefTing  the  Glaflcs  Hill  more,  the  diameter 
of  this  Ring  would  increafe,  and  the  breadth 
of  its  Orbit  or  Perimeter  decreafe  until  another 
new  Colour  emerged  in  the  center  of  the  lalt: 
And  fo  on  until  a  third ,  a  fourth ,  a  fifth ,  and 
other  following  new  Colours  fucccllivcly  emer- 
ged there,  and  became  Rings  encompaffing  the 
innermolt  Colour,  the  lalt  of  which  was  the 
black  Spot.  And,  on  the  contrary?  by  hfting 
up  the  upper  Glafs  from  the  lower,  the  diame- 
ter of  theRings  would  decreafe,  and  the  breadth 
of  their  Orbit  increafe,  until  their  Colours  reach- 
ed fuccefTively  to  the  center ;  and  then  they 
being  of  a  confiderable  breadth,  I  could  more 
eafily  difcern  and  diilinguifli  their  Species  than 
before.  And  by  this  means  I  obferv'd  their  Suc- 
cefTion  and  Quantity  to  be  as  followeth. 

Nexf  to  the  pellucid  central  Spot  made  by 
the  contacT:  of  theGlafles  fucceeded  blue,  white, 
yello\\',  and  red.  The  blue  was  fo  little  in  quan- 
tity that  I  could  not  dilcern  it  in  the  Circles 
made  by  the  Prifms,  nor  could  I  well  dilHnguilh 
any  violet  in  it,  but  the  yellow  and  red  were 
pretty  copious,  and  fcemed  about  as  much  in 
extent  as  the  white,  and  four  or  five  times  more 
than  the  blue.  The  next  Circuit  in  order  of 
Colours  immediately  encompafling  thefe  were 
violet,  blue,  green,  yellow,  and  red  :  and  thefe 
were  all  of  them  copious  and  vivid,  excepting 
the  green.  Which  was  very  little  in  quantity, 
and  feemed  much  more  faint  and  dilute  than 
the  other  Colours.  Of  the  other  four,  the  vio- 
let was  the  leaft  in  extent,  and  the  blue  lefs 
than  the  yellow  or  red.     The  third  Circuit  or 

Order 


Order  was  purple ,  blue,  green,  yellow,  and 
red ;  in  which  the  purple  feemed  more  reddifli 
than  the  violet  in  the  former  Circuit ,  and  the 
green  was  much  more  confpicuous,  being  as 
brisk  and  copious  as  any  of  the  other  Colours, 
except  the  yellow ;  but  the  red  began  to  be  a 
little  faded,  incHning  very  much  to  purple.  Af- 
ter this  fucceeded  the  fourth  Circuit  of  green 
and  red.  The  green  was  very  copious  and  live- 
ly, inclining  on  the  one  fide  to  blue,  and  on 
the  other  fide  to  yellow.  But  in  this  fourth 
Circuit  there  was  neither  violet,  blue,  nor  yel- 
low, and  the  red  was  very  imperfed  and  dir- 
ty. Alfo  the  fucceeding  Colours  became  more 
and  more  imperfed:  and  dilute,  till  after  three 
or  four  revolutions  they  ended  in  perfedl 
whitenefs.  Their  form,  wheri  the  GlafTes  were 
mofl  comprefs'd  fo  as  to  make  the  black  Spot 
appear  in  the  center,  is  deUneated  in  the  le- 
cond  Figure ; "  where  a^  b^ ,  f,  4  ^  •*  /»  gt  h  h 
k :  /,  m^  n^  o,  f :  q^  r :  j,  t :  ^',  x :  y,  z  de- 
note the  Colours  reckon'd  in  order  from  the 
center,  black,  blue,  white,  yellow,  red:  vio- 
let ,  blue ,  green ,  yellow ,  red  :  purple ,  blue , 
green,  yellow,  red :  green,  red :  greeniih  blue, 
red :  greenifh  blue,  pale  red :  greenifli  blue, 
reddifti  white. 

Obf.  5*.  To  determine  the  interval  of  the 
Glafles,  or  thicknefs  of  the  interjacent  Air,  by 
which  each  Colour  was  produced,  I  meafured 
the  Diameters  of  the  firft  lix  Rings  at  the  moit 
lucid  part  of  their  Orbits,  and  fquaring  them,  I 
found  their  Squares  to  be  in  the  arithmetical 
Progreffion  of  the  odd  Numbers,  i,  3,  $,  7, 9, 11. 

And 


[  175  1 

And  fince  one  of  thefe  Glalles  was  plane,  and 
the  other  fphcrical,  their  Intervals  at  thole  Rings 
muit  be  in  the  fame  Progrefiion.  I  meafured 
alfo  riie  Diameters  of  the  dark  or  faint  Rings 
between  the  more  lucid  Colours,  and  found 
their  Squares  to  be  in  the  arithmetical  Progref- 
fiQn  of  the  even  Numbers,  2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  12. 
And  it  being  very  nice  and  difficult  to  take 
theie  meafures  exadly ;  I  repeated  them  divers 
times  at  divers  parts  of  the  Glaifes,  that  by  their 
Agreement  I  might  be  coniirmed  in  them.  And 
the  fame  method  I  ufed  in  determming  fome 
others  of  the  following  Obfervations. 

Obf.  6.    The  Diameter  of  the  fixth  Ring  at 

the  moft  lucid  part  of  its  Orbit  was  -^    parts  of 

an  Inch ,  and  the  Diameter  of  the  Sphere  on 
which  the  double  convex  Objeclri:  -  glals  was 
ground  was  about  lox  Feet,  and  hence  I  ga- 
thered the  thicknefs  of  the  Air  or  Aereal  Inter- 
val of  the  Glailes  at  that  Ring.  But  lome  time 
after,  fufpeding  that  in  making  this  Obfervation 
I  had  not  determined  the  Diameter  of  the 
Sphere  with  lufKcient  accurateneib,  and  being 
uncertain  whether  the  Plano-convex  Clafs  was 
truly  plane,  and  not  fomething  concave  or  con- 
vex on  that  fide  which  I  accounted  plan-j;  and 
whether  I  had  not  preiled  the  Glailes  together, 
as  I  often  did ,  to  make  them  touch  ;  (For  by 
prefling  fuch  Glailes  together  their  parts  eafily 
yield  inwards,  and  the  Rings  thereby  become 
fenlibly  broader  than  they  would  be ,  did  the 
Glafles  keep  their  Figures.)  I  repeated  the 
Experiment,  and  found  the  Diameter  of  the 

fixth 


fixth  lucid  Ring  about  ^~  parts  of  an  Inch.    I 

repeated  the  Experiment  alfo  with  fuch  an  Ob- 
jeft-glafs  of  another  Telefcope  as  I  had  at  hand. 
This  was  a  double  Convex  ground  on  both 
fides  to  one  and  the  fame  Sphere ,  and  its  Fo- 
cus was dillant  from  it  83' Inches.  And  thence, 
if  the  Sines  of  Incidence  and  Refradion  of  the 
bright  yellow  Light  be  afllimed  in  proportion 
as  II  to  17,  the  Diameter  of  the  Sphere  to 
which  the  Glafs  was  figured  will  by  computa- 
tion be  found  i8i  Inches.  This  Glafs  I  laid 
upon  a  flat  one,  fo  that  the  black  Spot  appear- 
ed in  the  middle  of  the  Rings  of  Colours  with- 
out any  other  Prelfure  than  that  of  the  weight 
of  the  Glafs.  And  now  meafuring  the  Diame- 
ter of  the  fifth  dark  Circle  as  accurately  as  I 
could,  I  found  it  the  fifth  part  of  an  Inch  pre- 
cifely.  This  Meafure  was  taken  with  the  points 
of  a  pair  of  Compafl'es  on  the  upper  Surface 
on  the  upper  Glafs,  and  my  Eye  was  about 
eight  or  nine  Inches  diftance  from  the  Glafs, 
almofl  perpendicularly  over  it ,  and  the'  Glafs 
was  4  of  an  Inch  thick,  and  thence  it  is  eafy  to 
colleft  that  the  true  Diameter  of  the  Ring  be- 
tween the  GlafTes  was  greater  than  its  meafur'd 
Diameter  above  the  GlafTes  in  the  Proportion 
of  80  to  79,  or  thereabouts,  and  by  confequence 
equal  to  i4  part  of  an  Inch,  and  its  true  Semi- 
diameter  equal  to  ^^-  parts.  Now  as  the  Dia- 
meter of  the  Sphere  (i8i  Inches)  is  to  the  Se- 
mi-diameter of  this  fifth  dark  Ring  (-yy  parts  of 
an  Inch)  fo  is  this  Semi-diameter  to  the  thick- 
nefs  of  the  Air  at  this  fifth  dark  Ring ;  which  is 

there- 


[  177  ] 


therefore  -~^  or  ~— ~-  parts  of  an  Inch ;  and 

5-67931  17/47^4  * 

the  fifth  part  thereof,  viz.    the  ^^  part  of  an 

Inch,  is  the  thicknefs  of  the  Air  at  the  firit 
of  thefe  dark  Rings. 

The  fame  Experiment  I  repeated  with  ano- 
ther double  convex Objeft-glals  ground  on  both 
fides  to  one  and  the  fame  Sphere.  Its  Focus 
was  diflant  from  it  i684  Inches,  and  therefore 
the  Diameter  of  that  Sphere  was  184  Inches* 
This  Glafs  being  laid  upon  the  fame  plain  Glals, 
the  Diameter  of  the  fitth  of  the  dark  Rings, 
when  the  black  Spot  in  their  center  appear 'd 
plainly  without  preiling  the  GlalTes,  was  by  the 
meafure  of  the  Compailes  upon  the  upper  Glafs 

600  P^^^^  ^^  ^"^  Inch,  and  by  confequence  be- 


1222 


tween  the  GlafTes  it  was  g^.    For  the  upper 

Glafs  was  4  of  an  Inch  thick,  and  my  Eye  was 
diltant  from  it  8  Inches.  And  a  third  propor- 
tional to  half  this  from  the  Diameter  of  the 

Sphere  is  ^^  parts  of  an  Inch.  This  is  there- 
fore the  thicknefs  of  the  Air  at  this  Ring,  and  a 
fifth  part  thereof,  viz,  the  gj-:-th  part  of  an 

Inch  is  the  thicknefs  thereof  at  the  tirft  of  thQ 
Rings,  as  above. 

I  tried  the  fame  thing  by  laying  thefe  Ob- 
jed-glalfes  upon  flat  pieces  of  a  broken  Look- 
ing-glafs,  and  found  the  fame  Meafures  of  the 
Rings :    Which  makes  me  rely  upon  them  till 

N  they 


[  178  ] 

they  can  be  determin'd  more  accurately  by 
Glaffes  ground  to  larger  Spheres,  though  in 
fuch  GlalFes  greater  care  mull  be  taken  of  a  true 
Plane. 

Thefe  Dimenfions  were  taken  when  my  Eye 
was  placed  almoft  perpendicularly  over  the 
Glalles,  being  about  an  Inch,  or  an  Inch  and. a 
quarter ,  diflant  from  the  incident  Rays ,  and 
eight  Inches  diflant  from  the  Glafs ;  fo  that  the 
Rays  were  inclined  to  the  Glais  in  an  Angle  of 
about  four  Degrees.  •  Whence  by  the  following 
Obfervation  you  will  underftand,  that  had  the 
Rays  been  perpendicular  to  the  GlafTes,  the 
thicknefs  of  the  Air  at  thefe  Rinffs  would  have 
been  lefs  in  the  proportion  of  the  Radius  to  the 
Secant  of  four  Degrees,  that  is  of  loooo  to 
10024.  Let  the  thicknelTes  found  be  therefore 
diminiih'd  in  this  Proportion,  and  they  will  be- 
come en —  and  ^r~r »  or  ( to  ufe  the  ncarefl 
88952         S9063.'         ^  -^ 

round  number  )    the  3-^th  part  of  an  Inch,! 

This  is  the  thicknefs  of  the  Air  at  the  darkeft " 
part  of  the  firlt  dark  Ring  made  by  perpendi- 
cular Rays,  and  half  this  thicknefs  multiplied 
by  the  Progrellion,  i,  3,  5,  7,  9, 11,  ^c.   gives 
the  thicknefles  of  the  Air  at  the  moil  luminous 

parts  of  all  the  brightefl  Rings,  viz.    ;zg^> 
i"78k>  f^'  '-^^   ^''    ^^^'^  arithmetical 


Means  — h— -,    ^n    ■,  ■■r.'     ,    ^c.    being   its 

178000'  17800G'  178000'  o 

thicknefles  iit  the  darkeft  parts  of  all  the  dark 
ones. 

s  '  Obf, 


[  175  ] 


Ohf  7.  The  Rings  were  leafl  when  my  Eye 
was  placed  perpendicularly  over  the  Glalles  iii 
the  Axis  of  the  Rings:  And  when  I  view'd 
them  obliquely  they  became  bigger,  continual- 
ly fwelling  as  I  removed  my  Eye  farther  from 
the  Axis.  And  partly  by  meafuring  the  Diame- 
ter of  the  fame  Circle  at  feveral  Obliquities  of 
my  Eye,  partly  by  other  means,  as  alfo  by  ma- 
king ufe  of  the  two  Prifms  for  very  great'Obli- 
quities,  I  found  its  Diameter,  and  confequent- 
ly  the  thicknefs  of  the  Air  at  its  Perimeter  in 
all  thole  Obliquities  to  be  very  nearly  in  the 
Proportions  exprefs'd  in  this  Table. 


Angle  of  In- 

Angle of  Re- 

T)iameterThicknefs | 

cidence  on 

fraction  in- 

of the 

of  the 

the  Air. 

to  the  Air. 

Ring. 

Air. 

Deg.  Min. 

00       GO 

00      03 

10 

10 

06       26 

10     oo 

10.V 

IOtV 

IX     45- 

20       OQ 

10-^ 

IC| 

18       49 

30     oo 

io.| 

114 

24       30 

40     00 

114 

13 

29       37 

5*0     00 

124 

15-4 

33      5B 

60     00 

H 

20 

35-     47 

6$     00 

15-7 

2'3^ 

37     19 

70     00 

i6| 

28^ 

38     33 

75     00 

^n 

37 

39     27 

80       03 

22^ 

5-2--? 

40      CO 

85-       00 

2-9 

84.V 

40     II 

90      00 

35" 

1224 

N   2/ 


In 


[i8o] 

In  the  two  firlt  Columns  are  exprefs'd  the 
Obliquities  of  the  incident  and  emergent  Rays 
to  the  Plate  of  the  Air^  that  is,  their  Angles  of 
Incidence  and  Refradion.  In  the  third  Column 
the  Diameter  of  any  coloured  Ring  at  thofe  Ob- 
liquities is  expreiled  in  parts,  of  which  ten  con- 
Ititute  that  Diameter  when  the  Rays  are  per- 
pendicular. And  in  the  fourth  Column  the 
thicknefs  of  the  Air  at  the  circumference  of 
that  Ring  is  expreiled  in  parts  of  which  alfo 
ten  conltitute  its  thicknefs  when  the  Rays  are 
perpendicular. 

And  from  thefe  Mcafures  I  feem  to  gather 
this  Rule :  That  the  thicknefs  of  the  Air  is 
proportional  to  the  fecant  of  an  Angle,  whofe 
Sine  is  a  certain  mean  Proportional  between 
the  Sines  of  Incidence  and  Refraction.  And  that 
mean  Proportional,  fo  far  as  by  thefe  Meafures 
I  can  determine  it,  is  the  fird'  of  an  hundred 
and  fix  arithmetical  mean  Proportionals  be- 
tween thofe  Sines  counted  from  the  bigger  Sine, 
that  is,  from  the  Sine  of  Refraction  when  the 
Refradion  is  made  out  of  the  Glafs  into  the 
Plate  of  Air,  or  from  the  Sine  of  Incidence  when 
the  Refraction  is  made  out  of  the  Plate  of  Air 
into  the  Glafs. 

Obj:  8.  The  dark  Spot  in  the  middle  of  the 
Rings  increafed  alfo  by  the  Obliquation  of  the 
Eye,  although  almoll  infenfibly.  But  if  inflead 
of  the  Objed-glafles  the  Prifms  were  made  ufe 
of,  its  Increafe  was  more  manifeit  when  view- 
ed fo  obliquely  that  no  Colours  appear'd  about 
it.  It  u  as  leafl  when  the  Rays  were  incident 
molt  obliquely  on  the^  interjacent  Air,  and  as 

I  the 


[  isi  ] 

the  obliquity  dccreafed  it  increafcd  more  and 
more  until  the  coloured  Rings  appear'd,  and 
then  decreafed  again,  but  not  fo  much  as  it  in- 
creafed  before.  And  hence  it  is  evident,  that 
the  Tranfparency  was  not  only  at  the  abfolute 
Contact  of  the  Glaifes,  but  alio  where  they  had 
fome  little  Interval.  I  have  fometimes  oblcrved 
the  Diameter  of  that  Spot  to  be  between  half 
and  two  tifth  parts  of  the  Diameter  of  the  ex- 
terior Circumference  of  the  red  in  the  iiril  Cir- 
cuit or  Revolution  of  Colours  when  view'd  al- 
moit  perpendicularly;  whereas  when  viev/'d 
obliquely  it  hath  wholly  vaniili'd  and  become 
opake  and  white  like  the  other  parts  of  the 
Glafs;  whence  it  may  be  colledred  that  the 
Glaifes  did  then  fcarcely,  or  not  at  all,  touch 
one  another,  and  that  their  Interval  at  the  pe- 
rimeter of  that  Spot  when  view'd  perpendicu- 
larly was  about  a  fifth  or  fixth  part  of  their  In- 
terval at  the  circumference  of  the  faid  red. 

Obf.  9.  By  looking  through  the  two  conti- 
guous Objeft-glaHes,  I  found  that  the  interja- 
cent Air  exhibited  Rings  of  Colours,  as  well 
by  tranfmitting  Light  as  by  reflefting  it.  The 
central  Spot  was  now  white,  and  from  it  the 
order  of  the  Colours  were  yellovvifli  red ;  black, 
violet,  blue,  white,  yellow,  red ;  violet,  blue, 
green ,  yellow ,  red ,  ^c.  But  thefe  Colours 
were  very  faint  and  dilute,  unlefs  when  the 
Light  was  trajecfled  very  obhquely  through  the 
Glaifes :  For  by  that  means  they  became  pretty 
vivid.  Only  the  firft  yellowiili  red,  like  the 
blue  in  the  fourth  Obfervation,  was  fo  little  and 
faint  as  fcarcely  to  be  difcern'd.    Comparing 

N  3  the 


[l82] 

the  coloured  Rings  made  by  Reflexion,  with 
thefe  made  by  tranfmiffion  of  the  Light ;  I 
found  that  white  was  oppofite  to  black,  red  to 
blue,  yellow  to  violet,  and  green  to  a  Compound 
of  red  and  violet.  That  is,  thofe  parts  of  the 
Glafs  were  black  when  looked  through,  which 
when  looked  upon  appear'd  white,  and  on  the 
contrary.  And  fo  thofe  which  in  one  cafe  ex- 
hibited blue,  did  in  the  other  cafe  exhibit  red. 
And  the  hke  of  the  other  Colours.  The  man- 
ner you  have  reprefented  in  the  third  Figure, 
where  A  B,  CD,  are  the  Surfaces  of  the  Glaf- 
fes  contiguous  at  E,  and  the  black  Lines  be- 
tween them  are  their  Diftances  in  arithmetical 
Progreflion,  and  the  Colours  written  above  are 
feen  by  reflefted  Light,  and  thofe  below  by 
Light  tranfmitted. 

Obf.  lo.  VVetting  the  Objeft-glafles  a  little 
at  their  edges,  the  Water  crept  in  flowly  be- 
tween them,  and  the  Circles  thereby  became 
lefs  and  the  Colours  more  faint :  hifomuch  that 
as  the  Water  crept  along  one  half  of  them  at 
which  it  fn*ft  arrived  would  appear  broken  off 
from  the  other  half,  and  contra61cd  into  a  lefs 
Room.  By  meafuring  them  I  found  the  Pro- 
portions of  their  Diameters  to  the  Diameters  qf 
the  like  Circles  made  by  Air  to  be  about  fevcn 
to  eight,  and  confequently  the  hitervals  of  the 
Glafles  at  like  Circles,  caufed  by  thofe  two  Me- 
diums Water  and  Air,  are  as  about  three  to  four, 
perhaps  it  may  be  a  general  Rule,  That  if  any 
other  Medium  more  or  lefs  denfe  than  Water 
be  comprefs'd  between  the  Glaifes,  their  Inter- 
vals ^t  the  Rings  caufed  thereby  will  be  to  their 

Intervals 


[.1 83] 

fortervals  caufed  by  interjacent  Air,  as  theSiue:? 
are  which  meafure  the  Refradion  made  out  of 
that  Medium  into  Air. 

O^/!  n.  When  the  Water  was  between  the 
Glafles,  if  I  prefTcd  the  upper  Glafsvariou fly  at 
its  edges  to  make  the  Rings  move  nimbly  from 
one  place  to  another,  a  httle  white  Spot  would 
immediately  follow  the  center  of  them ,  which 
upon  creeping  in  of  the  ambient  Water  into  that 
place  would  prcfently  vanifli.  Its  appearance 
was  fuch  as  interjacent  Air  would  have  caufed, 
and  it  exhibited  the  fame  Colours.  But-  if  was 
not  Air,  for  where  any  Bubbles  cfAii*  were  in 
the  Water  they  would  not  vanin..  The  Refle- 
xion mufl:  have  rather  been  caufed  by  a  fubtiler 
Medium,  which  could  recede  through  the 
Glafles  at  the  creeping  in  of  the  Water. 

01^/^  12.  Thefe  Obfervations  were  made  in 
the  open  Air.  But  farther  co  examine  the  Ef- 
feds  of  colour'd  Light  Mling  on  the  Glafl!es,  I 
darken'd  the  Room,  and  view'd  them  by  Re- 
flexion of  the  Colours  of  a  PrifiT!  cafl  on  a  Sheet 
of  white  Paper,  my  Eye  being  fo  placed  that  I 
could  fee  the  colour'd  Paper  by  Reflexion  in  the 
Glafles,  as  in  a  Looking-glafs.  And  by  this 
means  the  Rings  became  diflincter  and  vifible 
to  a  hi'  greater  number  than  in  the  open  Air. 
I  have  fometimes  feen  more  than  twenty  of 
them,  whereas  in  the  open  Air  I  could  not  dif- 
cern  above  eight  or  nine. 

Oi/f!  1 3.  Appointing  an  AfTiflant  to  move  the 
Prifm  to  and  fro  about  its  Axis,  that  all  the 
Colours  might  fucceflively  fall  on  that  part  of 
the  Paper  which  I  faw  by  Reflexion  from  thai 

N  4  "        part 


I  m  1 

part  of  the  Glaffes,  where  the  Circles  appear'd, 
fo  that  all  the  Colours  rrlight  be  fuccefiively  re- 
flefted  from  the  Circles  to  my  Eye  whilft  I  held 
it  immovable,  I  found'  the  "Circles  which  the 
red  Li^^ht  made  to  be  manifeflly  bigger  than 
thole  which  were  made  by  the  blue  and  violet. 
And  it  was  very  pleafant  to  fee  them  gradually 
fwell  oi'  conrrad  accordingly  as  the  Colour  of  the 
Light  was  changed. .  The  Interval  of  the  Glaf- 
fes at  any  of  the  Rings  when  they  were  made 
by  the  utmoft  red  Light,  was  to  their  Interval 
at  the  fame  Ring  when  made  by  the  utmoll: 
violet,  greater  than  as  3  to  2,  and  lefs  than  as 
13  to  8.  By  the  molt  of  my  Obfervations  it  was 
as  14  to  9.  And  this  Proportion  feem'd  very, 
nearly  the  fame  in  all  Obliquities  of  my  Eye ; 
unlefs  when  two  Prifms  were  made  ufe  of  in- 
flead  of  the  Objeft-glaiTes.  For  then  at  a  cer- 
tain great  obliquity  of  my  Eye,  the  Rings  made 
by  the  feveral  Colours  feem'd  equal,  and  at  -a 
greater  obHquity  thofe  made  by  the  violet  would 
be  greater  than  the  fame  Rings  made  by  the 
red  :  the  Refra6lion  of  the  Prifm  in  this  cafe 
cauling  the  moft  refrangible  Rays  to  fall  more 
obliquely  on  that  plate  of  the  Air  than  the  leall 
refrangible  ones.  Thus  the  Experiment  fuc- 
ceeded  in  the  colour'd  Light ,  which  was  fuf- 
ficiently  Ib'ong  and  copious  to  make  the  Rings 
fenfible.  And  thence  it  may  be  gather'd,  that 
if  the  moft  refrangible  and  leaft  refrangible  Rays 
had  been  copious  enough  to  make  the  Rings 
fenfible  without  the  mixture  of  other  Rays,  the 
Proportion  which  here  was  14  to  9  would  have 
been  a  little  greater,  fuppofe  144  or  144  to  9. 


[i85] 


Ohf.  14.  Whilft  the  Prilm  was  turn'd  about 
its  Axis  with  an  uniform  Motion,  to  make  all 
the  feveral  Colours  fi\ll  luccefiivcly  upon  the 
ObjcCl-glalles,  and  thereby  to  make  the  Rings 
contract  and  dilate :  The  Contraction  or  Dila- 
tation of  each  Ring  thus  made  by  the  variation 
of  its  Colour  was  fwiftelt  in  the  red,  aiKl  ilow- 
efl  in  the  violet,  and  in  the  intermediate  Colours" 
it  had  intermediate  degrees  of  Celerity.  Com- 
paring the  quantity  of  Contraction  and  j)ilata- 
tion  made  by  all  the  degrees  of  each  Colour,  I 
found  that  it 'was  greateil  in  the  red  ;  lefs  in 
the  yellow,  Hill  lefs  in  the  blue,  and  leait  in  the 
violet.  And  to  make  as  jull  an  Eltimation  as  I 
could  of  the  Proportions  of  their  Contradions 
or  Dilatations ,  I  obferv'd  that  the'  whole  Con- 
traction or  Dilatation  of  the  Diameter  of  anv 
Ring  made  by  all  the  degrees  of  red ,  was  to 
that  of  the  Diameter  of  the  fame  Ring  made  by 
all  the  degrees  of  violet,  as  about  four  to  three, 
or  five  to  four,  and  that  when  the  Light  was 
of  the  middle  Colour  between  yellow  and  green, 
the  Diameter  of  the  Ring  was  very  nearly  an 
arithmetical  Mean  between  the  greatelt  Diame- 
ter of  the  fame  Ring  made  by  the  outmoll:  red, 
and  the  lead  Diameter  thereof  made  by  the 
outmoll  violet :  Contrary  to  what  happens  in 
the  Colours  of  the  oblong  Speclrum  made  by 
the  Refradion  of  a  Prifm,  where  the  red  is 
mod  contraded,  the  violet  moit  expanded-, 
aind  in  the  midit  of  all  the  Colours  is  the  Con- 
fine of  green  and  blue.  And  hence  I  feem  to 
colle(^l  that  the  thicknelTes  of  the  Air  between 
the  Glailes  there,  where  the  Ring  is  fucce/Tive- 


[  18^  ] 

ly  made  by  the  limits  of  the  five  principal  Co- 
lours (red,  yellow,  green,  blue,  violet)   in  or- 
der (that  is,  by  the  extreme  red,  by-  the  hmit 
of  red  and  yellow  in  the  middle  of  the  orange, 
by  the  limit  of  yellow  and  green,  by  the  limit 
of  green  and  blue,  by  the  Hmit  of  blue  and 
violet  in  the  middle  of  the  indigo,  and  by  the 
extreme  violet)  are  to  one  another  very  nearly 
as  the  fix  lengths  of  a  Chord  which  found  the 
Notes  in  a  /ixth  Major,  fol^  la^,  m'l^  fa^  fol^  la. 
But  it  agrees  fomething  better  with  the  Obfer- 
vation  to  fay ,   that  the  thicknelfes  of  the  Air 
between  theGlafles  thercj  where  the  Rings  aret 
fucceilively  made  by  the  limits  of  the  feven  Co- 
lours, red,  orange,  yellow^  ^"eep?  blue,  indi- 
go ,  violet  in  order,  are  to  one  another  as  the 
Cube  Roots  of  the  Squares  of  the  eighjt  lengths 
of  a  Chord,  which  found  the  Notes  in  an  eighth, 
fol^  Idy  fay  foly  lay  ffiiy  fuy  fil \   that  is,  as  the 
Cube  Roots  of  the  Squares  q{  ^he  Numbers,  I3 

*        S         ?       ^        J       _9_        • 

ObJ.  15.  Thefc  Rings  "were  not  of  various 
Colours  hke  thofe  made  in  the  open  Air,  but 
appeared  all  over  of  that  prifmatick  Colour  on- 
ly v/ith,  which  they  were  illuminated.  And  by 
projecting  the  priimatick  Colours  immediately 
upon  the  Glalles,  I  found  that  the  Light  which 
fell  on  the  dark  Spaces  which  were  between 
the  coloured  Rings,  was  tranfmitted  through  the 
GlalTes  without  any  variation  of  Colour.  For 
on  a  white  Paper  placed  behind,  it  would  paint 
Rings  of  the  fame  Colour  with  thofe  which 
vi^ere  refleded,  and  of  the  bignefs  of  their  im^ 
mediate  Spaces.    And  from  thence  the  origin 

of 


t  ^S7] 


of  thefe  Rings  is  manifeft ;  namely ,  that  the 
Air  between  the  Glafles,  according  to  its  vari- 
ous thicknefs,  is  dilpofed  in  fome  places  to  re- 
fled,  and  in  others  to  tranfmit  the  Light  of  a- 
ny  one  Colour  ( as  you  may  fee  reprefented  in 
the  fourth  Figure)  ;ind  in  the  lame  place  to  re- 
fleft  that  of  one  Colour  where  jt  tranfmits  that 
of  another. 

Obf.  id.  The  Squares  of  the  Diameters  of 
thefe  Rings  made  by  any  prifmatick  Colour  were 
in  arithmetical  Progi-cllion,  as  in  the  fifth  Ob- 
fervation.  And  the  Diameter  of  the  fixth  Cir- 
cle,  when  made  by  the  citrine  yellow,  and 

viewed  almolt  perpendicularly,  was  about  — 

parts  of  an  Inch ,  or  a  little  lefs ,  agreeable  to 
the  fixth  Obfervation. 

The  precedent  Obfervations  were  made  with 
a  rarer  thin  Medium ,  terminated  by  a  denfer, 
fuch  as  was  Air  or  Water  comprcfs'd  between 
two  Glafles.  In  thofe  that  follow  are  fet  down 
the  Appearances  of  a  denfer  Medium  thin'd 
within  a  rarer ,  fuch  as  are  Plates  of  Mufcovy 
G\'\k^  Bubbles  of  Water,  and  fome  other  thin 
Subftances  terminated  on  all  fides  with  Air. 

Obf,  17.  If  a  Bubble  be  blown  with  Water 
firil  made  tenacious  by  dilTolving  a  little  Soap 
in  it,  'tis  a  common  Obfervation,  that  after  a 
while  it  will  appear  tinged  vi'ith  a  great  variety 
of  Colours.  To  defend  thefe  Bubbles  from  be- 
ing agitated  by  the  external  Air  (whereby  their 
Colours  are  irregularly  moved  one  among  ano- 
ther, fo  that  no  accurate  Obfervation  can  be 
made  of  them,)  as  foon  as  I  had  blown  any  of 

them 


ti88] 


them  I  cover'd  it  with  a  clear  Glafs,  and  by  that 
means  its  Colours  emerged  in  a  very  regular 
order,  like  fo  many  concentrick  Rings  encom- 
paffing  the  top  of  the  Bubble.  And  as  the  Bub- 
ble grew  thinner  by  the  continual  fubliding  of 
the  Water,  thefe  Rings  dilated  flowly  and  over- 
fpread  the  whole  Bubble,  defcending  in  order 
to  the  bottom  of  it,  where  they  vaniili'd  fuc- 
ceflively.    In  the  mean  while,  after  all  the  Co- 
lours were  emerged  at  the  top,  there  grew  in 
the  center  of  the  Rings  a  fmall  round  black 
Spot,  hke  that  in  the  firft  Observation ,   which 
continually  dilated  it  felf  till  it  became  fome- 
times  more  than  4  or  i  of  an  Inch  in  breadth 
before  the  Bubble  broke.     At  firlt  I  thought 
there  had  been  no  Light  reflefted  froni  the  Wa- 
ter in  that  place ,  but  obferving  it  more  curi- 
oufly,    I  faw  within  it  feveral  fm-aller  round 
Spots,  which  appeared  much  blacker  and  dark- 
er than  the  reft ,   whereby  I  knew  that  there 
was  fome  Reflexion  at  the  other  places  which 
were  not  fo  .dark  as  thofe  Spots.     And  by  far- 
ther Tryal  I  found  that  I  could  fee  the  Images 
of  fome  things  (as  of  a  Candle  or  the  Sun)  ve- 
ry faintly  retledted,   not  only  from  the  great 
black  Spot,  but  alfo  from  the  little  darker  Spots 
which  Vere  within  it. 

Befides  the  aforefaid  colour'd  Rings  there 
would  often  appear  fmall  Spots  of  Colours,  af- 
cending  and  defcending  up  and  down  the  fides 
of  the  Bubble,  by  reafon  of  fome  Inequalities 
in  the  fubfiding  of  the  Water.  And  fometimes 
fmall  black  Spots  generated  at  the  fides  would 

afcend 


[  i89  ] 


alcend  up  to  the  larger  black  Spot  at  the  top 
of  the  Bubble,  and  unite  with  it. 

Obf.  1 8.  Becaufe  the  Colours  of  thefe  Bub- 
bles were  more  extended  and  Hvely  than  thofe 
of  the  Air  thinn  d  between  two  Glalles,  and  fo 
more  eafy  to  be  ditlinguiih'd ,  I  fliall  here  give 
you  a  farther  defcription  of  their  order,  as  they 
w'ere  obferv'd  in  viewing  them  by  Reflexion 
of  the  Skies  when  of  a  white  Colour ,  whilil  a 
black  fubltance  was  placed  behind  the  Bubble. 
And  they  were  thefe,  red,  blue;  red,  blue.; 
red,  blue;  red,  green;  red,  yellow,  green, 
blue,  purple ;  red,  yellow,  green,  blue,  violet ; 
red,  yellow,  white,  blue,  black. 

The  three  firil  Succefllons  of  red  and  blue 
were  very  dilute  and  dirty,  efpecially  the  firft, 
where  the  red  feem'd  in  a  manner  to  be  white. 
Among  thefe  there  w^as  fcarce  any  other  Colour 
fenfible  befides  red  and  blue,  only  the  blues 
(and  principally  the  fecond  blue)  inclined  a  Ht- 
tle  to  green. 

The  fourth  red  was  alfo  dilute  and  dirty,  but 
not  fo  much  as  the  foiTner  three;  after  that 
fucceeded  little  or  no  yellow,  but  a  copious 
green,  w^hich  at  firft  inclined  a  little  to  yellow, 
and  then  became  a  pretty  brisk  and  good  wil- 
low green,  and,  afterwards  changed  to  a  bluifli 
Colour ;  but  there  fucceeded  neither  blue  nor 
\dolet. 

The  fifth  red  at  lirft  inclined  very  much  to 
purple,  and  afterwards  became  more  bright 
^nd  brisk,  but  yet  not  very  pure.  This  was 
fucceeded  with  a  very  bright  and  intenfe  yel- 
low, which  was  but  little  in  quantity,  and  foon 

chang'd 


t  ^90] 


chdng'd  to  green :  But  that  green  was  copious 
and  Ibmething  more  pure,  deep  and  lively,  than 
the  former  green.  After  that  follow'd  an  ex- 
cellent blue  of  a  bright  Sky-colour,  and  then  a 
purple,  which  was  lefs  in  quantity  than  the  blue, 
and  much  inclined  to  red. 

The  fixth  red  was  at  firfl  of  a  very  fair  and 
lively  Scarlet,  and  foon  after  of  a  brighter  Co- 
lour, being  very  pure  and  brisk ,  and  the  beft 
of  all  the  reds.  Then  after  a  lively  orange  fol- 
low'd an  intenfe  bright  and  copious  yellow, 
which  was  alfo  the  bell  of  all  the  yellows ,  and 
this  changed  firfl  to  a  greenifli  yellow,  and  then 
to  a  greenifli  blue ;  but  the  green  between  the 
yellow  and  the  blue,  was  very  little  and  dilute, 
feeming  rather  a  greenifli  white  than  a  green*. 
The  blue  which  fucceeded  became  very  good, 
and  of  a  very  fair  bright  Sky-colour ,  but  yet 
fomething  inferior  to  the  former  blue;  aud  the 
violet  was  intenfe  and  deep  with  little  or  no 
rednefs  in  it.  And  lefs  in  quantity  than  the 
blue. 

In  the  lafl  red  appeared  a  tindlure  of  fcarlet 
next  to  violet,  which  foon  changed  to  a  bright- 
er Colour,  inclining  to  an  orange ;  and  the  yel- 
low which  follow'd  was  at  firfl  pretty  good 
and  lively,  but  afterwards  it  grew  more  dilute, 
until  by  degrees  it  ended  in  perfed:  whitenefs. 
And  this  whitenefs,  if  the  Water  was  very  te- 
nacious and  well  temper'd,  would  flovi^ly  fpread 
and  dilate  it  felf  over  the  greater  part  of  the 
Bubble ;  continually  growing  paler  at  the  top, 
v/here  at  length  it  would  crack  in  many  places, 
and  thole  cracks,  as  they  dilated,  would  appear 

of 


[  ^91  ] 

of  a  pretty  good,  but  yet  obfcure  and  dark 
Sky-colour ;  the  white  between  the  blue  Spots 
diminifhmg,  until  it  refembled  the  Threds  of 
an  irregular  Net-v»^orky  and  foon  after  vani(h'd 
and  left  all  the  upper  part  of  the  Bubble  of  the 
faid  dark  blue  Colour.  And  this  Colour,  after 
the  aforefaid  manner,  dilated  it  felf  downwards^ 
until  fometimes  it  hath  overfpread  the  whole 
Bubble.  In  the  mean  while  at  the  top,  which 
was  of  a  darker  blue  than  the  bottom,  and  ap- 
pear'd  alio  full  of  many  round  blue  Spots,  fome- 
thing  darker  than  the  refl,  there  would  emerge 
one  or  more  very  black  Spots,  and  within  thofe, 
other  Spots  of  an  intenier  blacknefs ,  which  I 
mention'd  in  the  former  Obferv^ation ;  and  thefe 
continually  dilated  themlelves  until  the  Bubble 
broke. 

If  the  Water  was  not  very  tenacious  the  black 
Spots  would  break  forth  in  the  white,  without 
any  fenfible  intervention  of  the  blue.  And 
fometimes  they  would  break  forth  within  the 
precedent  yellow,  or  red,  or  perhaps  within 
the  blue  of  the  fecond  order,  before  the  inter- 
mediate Colours  had  time  to  difplay  themfelves. 

By  this  defcription  you  may  perceive  how 
great  an  affinity  thefe  Colours  have  with  thofe 
of  Air  defcribed  in  the  fourth  Obfervation,  al- 
though fet  down  in  a  contrary  order,  by  reafoa 
that  they  begin  to  appear  when  the  Bubble  is 
thickeft,  and  are  mofl  conveniently  reckon'd 
from  the  loweft  and  thickeft  part  of  the  Bub- 
ble upwards. 

O/ff  19.  Viewing  in  feveral  oblique  Pofitions 
of  my  Eye  the  Rings  of  Colours  emerging  on 

the 


I  ^92  ]       ■ 

the  top  of  the  Bubble,  I  found  that  they  were 
fenfibly  dilated  by  increafmg  the  obliquity,  but 
yet  not  fo  much  by  far  as  thofe  made  by  thinn'd 
Air  in  the  feventh  Obfervation.  For  there  they 
were  dilated  fo  much  as,  when  view'd  molt  ob- 
liquely ,  to  arrive  at  a  part  of  the  Plate  more 
than  twelve  times  thicker  than  that  where  they 
appear'd  when  viewed  perpendicularly ;  where- 
as in  this  cafe  the  thicknefs  of  the  Water,  at 
which  they  arrived  when  viewed  mod  oblique- 
ly, was  to  that  thicknefs  which  exhibited  them 
by  perpendicular  Rays ,  fomcthing  lefs  than  as 
8  to  5.  By  the  belt  of  my  Obfervations  it  was 
between  15"  and  ifv  to  10;  an  increafe  about 
24  times  lefs  than  in  the  other  cafe. 

Sometimes  the  Bubble  would  become  of  an 
uniform  thicknefs  all  over,  except  at  the  top  of 
it  near  the  black  Spot ,  as  I  knew ,  becaufe  it 
would  exhibit  the  fame  appearance  of  Colours 
in  all  Pofitions  of  the  Eye.  And  then  the  Co- 
lours which  were  fecn  at  its  apparent  circumfe- 
rence by  the  obliqued  Rays,  would  be  different 
from  thofe  that  were  feen  in  other  places,  by 
Rays  lefs  oblique  to  it.  And  divers  Spectators 
might  fee  the  fame  part  of  it  of  differing  Co- 
lours, by  viewing  it  at  very  differing  Obliqui- 
ties. Now  obferving  how  much  the  Colours  at 
the  fame  places  of  the  Bubble,  or  at  divers  pla- 
ces of  equal  thicknefs,  were  varied  by  the  fe- 
veral  Obliquities  of  the  Rays ;  by  the  afliftance 
of  the  4th,  14th,  1 6th  and  1 8th  Obfervations, 
as  they  are  hereafter  explain'd ,  I  colleCt  the 
thicknefs  of  the  Water  requifite  to  exhibit  any 
one  and  th'e  fame  Colour,  at  feveral  Obliquities^ 

to 


[  193  ] 


to  be  very  nearly  in  the  Proportion  exprefTed 
in  this  Table. 


Incidence  on 
the  JVater. 

ReJra6iion  in- 
to the  JVater. 

Thicknefs  of 
the  Water. 

Deg.  Min. 
OO      OO 

Deg.  Min. 
00     00 

10 

15-      00 

II     II 

107 

30      00 

22           I 

IOt 

45-      00 
60      00 

15     00 
90     00 

32          2 

40    30 
46  25- 

48     35- 

Hi 

13 

1^4 

In  the  two  firft  Columns  are  exprefs'd  the 
Obliquities  of  the  Rays  to  the  Superficies  of  the 
Water,  that  is,  their  Angles  of  Incidence  and 
Refraftion.  Where  I  fuppofe  that  the  Sines 
which  meafure  them  are  in  round  Numbers,  as 
3  to  4,  though  probably  the  dilTolution  of  Soap 
in  the  Water,  may  a  Uttle  alter  Jts  refradive 
Virtue.  In  the  third  Column  the  thicknefs  of 
the  Bubble,  at  which  any  one  Colour  is  exhibit- 
ed in  thofe  feveral  Obliquities,  is  exprefs'd  in 
parts,  of  which  ten  conllitute  its  thicknefs  when 
the  Rays  are  perpendicular.  And  the  Rule 
found  by  the  feventh  Obfervation  agrees  well 
with  thefe  Meafures ,  if  duly  apply'd  ;  namely, 
that  the  thicknefs  of  a  Plate  of  Water  requiiite 
to  exhibit  one  and  the  fame  Colour  at  feveral 
Obliquities  of  the  Eye,  is  proportional  to  the 
fecant  of  an  Angle  whole  Sine  is  the  firft  of  an 
hundred  and  fix  arithmetical  mean  Proportio- 

O  jials 


[  i?4  ] 

iials  between  the  Sines  of  Incidence  and  Refra- 
ction counted  from  the  lelfer  Sine,  that  is,  from 
the  Sine  of  Refradion  when  the  Refradion  is 
made  out  of  Air  into  Water,  otherwife  from 
the  Sine  of  Incidence. 

I  have  fometimes  obferv'd,  that  the  Colours 
which  arife  on  polifli'd  Steel  by  heating  it,  or 
on  Bell-metal,  and  fome  other  metalline  Sub- 
llances,  when  melted  and  pour'd  on  the  ground, 
where  they  may  cool  in  the  open  Air,  have,  like 
the  Colours  of  Water-bubbles,  been  a  little 
changed  by  viewing  tliem  at  divers  Obliquities, 
and  particularly  that  a  deep  blue,,  or  violet, 
when  view'd  very  obliquel)^  hath  been  changed 
to  a  deep  red.  But  the  Changes  of  thefe  Co- 
lours are  not  i'o  great  and  fenlible  as  of  thofe 
made  by  W  ater.  For  the  Scoria  or  vitritit  d  part 
of  the  jVIetal,  which  moil  Metals  when  heated  or 
jnelted  do  continually  protrude,  and  fend  out 
to  their  Surface,  and  which  by  covering  the 
Metals  in  form  of  a  thin  glally  Skin,  caufes 
thefe  Colours,  is  much  denfer  than  W  ater ;  and 
I  find  that  the  Change  made  by  the  Obliquation 
of  tix  Eye  is  lead  in  Colours  of  the  denlcll:  thin 
Sublknces. 

Oi^f  xo.  As  in  the  ninth  Obfervation,  fo  here, 
the  Bubble,  by  tranfmitted  Light,  appear'd  of 
a  contrary  Colour  to  that  which  it  exhibited  by 
Reflexion,  Thus  when  the  Bubble  being  look'd 
on  by  the  Light  of  the  Clouds  refleded  from 
ir,  feemed  red  at  its  apparent  circumference, 
if  the  Clouds  at  the  fame  time,  or  immediately 
after,  were  view'd  through  it,  the  Colour  at  its 
circumference  would  be  blue.    And,  on  the 

contrary, 


[195] 

contrary,  when  by  reflected  Light  it  appeared 
blue,  it  would  appear  red  by  trani'mitted  Light. 

Ob/.zi.  By  wetting  very  thin  Plates  of  Muf- 
covy  Glafs ,  whofe  thinnefs  made  the  like  Co- 
lours appear,  the  Colours  became  more  faint 
and  languid,  efpecially  by  wetting  the  Plates  on 
that  fide  oppofite  to  the  Eye :  But  I  could  not 
perceive  any  variation  of  their  Species.  So  then 
the  thicknefs  of  a  Plate  requifite  to  produce 
any  Colour,  depends  only  on  the  denfity  of  the 
Plate,  and  not  on  that  or  the  ambient  Medium. 
And  hence,  by  the  loth  and  i6thObfervations, 
may  be  known  the  thicknefs  which  Bubbles  of 
Water,  or  Plates  of  Mufcovy  Glafs,  or  other 
Subltances,  have  at  any  Colour  produced  by 
them. 

Ohf,%%.  A  thin  tranfparent  Body,  w^hich  is 
denfer  than  its  ambient  Medium,  exhibits  more 
brisk  and  vivid  Colours  than  that  which  is  fo 
much  rarer ;  as  I  have  particularly  obferved  in 
the  Air  and  Glafs.  For  blowing  Glafs  very  thin 
at  a  Lamp  Furnace ,  thofe  Plates  encompafled 
with  Air  did  exhibit  Colours  much  more  vivid 
than  thofe  of  Air  made  thin  between  two  Glaf- 

Ohf.  23.  Comparing  the  quantity  of  Light 
refleded  from  the  feveral  Rings ,  I  found  that 
it  was  molt  copious  from  the  tirll  or  inmoil^ 
and  in  the  exterior  Rings  became  gradually  lefs 
and  lefs.  Alfo  the  whitenefs  of  the  firit  King 
was  flronger  than  that  redccfed  from  thofe 
parts  of  the  thin  Medium  or  Plate  which  were 
without  the  Rings ;  as  I  could  manifeilly  per- 
•ceive  by  viewing  at  a  diftance  the  Rings  made 

O"  X  ^        bv 


[  ^9^  1 

b}^  the  two  Obje^l-glafTes ;  or  by  comparing  two 
Bubbles  of  Water  blown  at  dillant  times,  in 
the  firft  of  which  the  whitenefs  appear 'd,  which 
fucceeded  all  the  Colours,  and  in  the  other, 
the  whitenefs  which  preceded  them  all. 

Oi^J^  24.  When  the  two  Objeft-glafTcs  were 
lay'd  upon  one  another,  fo  as  to  make  the  Rings 
of  the  Colours  appear,  though  with  my  naked 
Eye  I  could  not  difcern  above  eight  or  nine  of 
thofe  Rings,  yet  by  viewing  them  through  a 
Prifm  I  have  feen  a  far  greater  multitude,  info- 
much  that  I  could  number  more  than  forty,  be- 
lides  many  others,  that  were  fo  very  fmall  and 
clofe  together ,  that  I  could  not  keep  my  Eye 
Heady  on  them  feverally  fo  as  to  number  them, 
but  by  their  Extent  I  have  fometimes  eftimated 
them  to  be  more  than  an  hundred.  And  I  be- 
lieve the  Experiment  may  be  improved  to  the 
difcovery  of  far  greater  Numbers.  For  they 
feem  to  be  really  unlimited,  though  vifible  on- 
ly fo  far  as  they  can  be  feparated  by  the  Refra- 
aion,  as  I  Ihall  hereafter  explain. 

But  it  was  but  one  fide  of  thefe  Rings,  name- 
ly, that  towards  which  the  Refraction  was  made, 
which  by  that  Refraction  was  render'd  diftinft, 
and  the  other  fide  became  more  confufed  than 
when  view'd  by  the  naked  Eye,  infomuch  that 
there  I  could  not  difcern  above  one  or  two, 
and  fometimes  none  of  thofe  Rings ,  of  which 
I  could  difcern  eight  or  nine  with,  my  naked 
Eye.  And  their  Segments  or  Arcs,  which  on 
the  other  fide  appear'd  fo  numerous,  for  the 
mofl  part  exceeded  not  the  third  part  of  a  Cir- 
cle.   If  the  Refra6lion  was  verv  great,  or  the 

Prifm 


I  197  ] 

Prifm  very  diftant  from  the  Objeft-glafTes ,  the 
middle  part  of  thofe  Arcs  became  alio  confu- 
fed ,  fo  as  to  difappear  and  conltitute  an  even 
whitenefs,  whilft  on  either  fide  their  ends,  as 
alfo  the  whole  Arcs  fartheft  from  the  center, 
became  diilin6ter  than  before,  appearing  in  the 
form  as  you  fee  them  defign'd  in  the  tifth  Fi- 
gure. 

The  Arcs,  where  they  feem'd  diftin6leil,  were 
only  white  and  black  fuccefTively,  without  any 
other  Colours  intermix'd.  But  in  other  places 
there  appeared  Colours,  whofe  order  was  in- 
veried  by  the  Refradion  in  luch  manner,  that 
if  I  hrlt  held  the  Prilm  very  near  the  Objedl:- 
glafTes,  and  then  gradually  removed  it  farther 
off  towards  myl'^ye,  the  Colours  of  the  id,  3d, 
4th ,  and  following  Rings  llirunk  towards  the 
white  that  emerged  between  them ,  until  they 
wholly  vanifh'd  into  it  at  the  middle  of  the 
Arcs,  and  afterwards  emerged  again  in  a  con- 
trary order.  But  at  the  ends  of  the  Arcs  they 
retain'd  their  order  unchanged. 

I  have  fometimes  fo  lay'd  one  Objc6t-glafs 
upon  the  other,  that  to  the  naked  Eye  they 
have  all  over  feem'd  uniformly  white,  without 
the  leaft  appearance  of  any  of  the  colour'd 
Rings;  and  yet  by  viewing  them  through  a 
Prifm,  great  multitudes  of  thofe  Rings  have 
difcover'd  themfelves.  And  in  like  manner 
Plates  of  Mufcovy  Glafs,  and  Bubbles  of  Glafs 
blown  at  a  Lamp  Furnace,  which  w^ere  not  fo 
thin  as  to  exhibit  any  Colours  to  the  naked  Eye, 
have  through  the  Prifm  exhibited  a  great  varie- 
ty of  them  ranged  irregularly  up  and  down  in 

O  3  th^ 


^- 


1 158  ] 

the  form  of  Waves.  And  fo  Bubbles  of  Wa- 
ter, before  they  began  to  exhibit  their  Colours 
to  the  naked  Eye  of  a  By-ftander,  have  appear- 
ed through  a  Prifm ,  girded  about  with  many 
parallel  and  horizontal  Rings ;  to  produce  which 
Effeci ,  it  was  neceilary  to  hold  the  Prifm  pa- 
rallel ,  or  very  nearly  parallel  to  the  Horizon, 
and  to  difpofe  it  fo  that  the  Rays  might  be  re- 
fraded  upwards. 


THE 


[  ^99  ] 


THE 

SECOND  BOOK 

OPTIC  KS. 


PART    II. 

Remarks  u^on  the  foregoing  Obfervations. 

VV I N  G  given  my  Obfervations  of  thefe 
Colours,  before  I  make  ufe  of  them  to 
unfold  the  Caufes  of  the  Colours  of  na- 
tural Bodies,  it  is  convenient  that  by 
the  fimpleil  of  them,  fuch  as  are  the  id,  3d', 
4th,  9th,  nth,  1 8th,  loth,  and  24th,  Ifirflex- 

O  4  plain 


[  200  ]  ^ 

plain  the  more  compounded.  And  firfi:  to  fliew 
how  the  Colours  in  the  fourth  and  eighteenth 
Obfervations  are  produced,  let  there  be  taken 
in  any  right  Line  from  the  Point  Y,  [in  Fig.  6.] 
the  lengths  YA,  YB,  YC,  YD,  YE,  YF,  YG, 
YH,  in  proportion  to  one  another,  as  the  Cube 
Roots  of  the  Squares  of  the  Numbers,  4,  t^,  t> 
T?  75  4,  V,  I ,  whereby  the  lengths  of  a  mufical 
Chord  to  found  all  the  Notes  in  an  eighth  are 
reprefented ;  that  is,  in  the  proportion  of  the 
Numbers  6300,  6814,  71 14,  7631,  815-5',  885-5', 
9243,  loooo.  And  at  the  Points  A,  B,  C,  D, 
E,  F,  G,  H,  let  perpendiculars  A  ct,  B  /3,  &c.  be 
crcdcd ,  by  whofe  Intervals  the  Extent  of  the 
fcveral  Colours  fet  underneath  againft  them,  is 
to  be  reprefented.  Then  'divide  the  Line  A  c* 
in  fuch  proportion  as  the  Numbers  i,  2,  3,  5-, 
6,  y,  ^,  10,  II,  ^c.  fet  at  the  Points  of  Divifion 
denote.  And  through  thofe  Divifions  from  Y 
draw  Lines  il,  xK,  3  L,  5M,  6N,  7O,  ^c. 

Now  if  A  2  be  fuppoled  to  reprefent  the 
thicknefs  of  any  thin  tranfparentBody,  at  which 
the  outmoft  violet  is  molt  copioufly  reflected 
in  the  firll  Ring,  or  Series  of  Colours,  then  by 
the  13th  Obfcrvation,  HKwill  reprefent  its 
thicknefs,  at  which  the  utmoft  red  is  molt  co- 
pioufly refledled  in  the  fame  Series.  'Alfo  by 
the  5-th  and  1 6th  Obfervations,  A  6  and  HN 
will  denote  the  thickneifes  at  which  thofe  ex- 
treme Colours  are  moil  copioufly  refledcd  in 
the  fecond  Series,  and  A  10  and  HQ  the  thick- 
nelFes,  at  which  they  are  molt  copioufly  reliev- 
ed in  the  third  Series,  and  fo  on.  And  the 
thicknefs  at  which  any  of  the  intermediate  Co- 
lours 


[  20I   ] 

lours  are  refleded  mod  copioufly,  will,  accor- 
ding to  the  14th  Obfervation,  be  defined  by  the 
diitance  of  the  Line  AH  from  the  intermediate 
parts  of  the  Lines  xK,  6N,  loQ,  ^c,  againfl 
which  the  Names  of  thofe  Colours  are  written 
below. 

But  farther,  to  define  the  Latitude  of  thefe 
Colours  in  each  Ring  or  Series,  let  A  i  defign 
the  lealt  thicknefs,  and  A3  the  greatell  thick- 
nefs ,  at  which  the  extreme  violet  in  the  firfl 
Series  is  refleded,  and  let  HI,  and  HL,  de- 
fign the  like  limits  for  the  extreme  red,  and  let 
the  intermediate  Colours  be  limited  by  the  in- 
termediate parts  of  the  Lines  1 1,  and  3  L,  a- 
gainfi:  which  tlie  Names  of  thofe  Colours  are 
written,  and  fo  on :    But  yet  with  this  caution, 
that  the  Reflexions  be  fuppofed  firongeit  at  the 
intermediate  Spaces,  2K,  6  N,  loQ,  &c.  and 
from  thence  to  decreafe  gradually  towards  thefe 
limits,  1 1,  3  L,  5-  M,  7  O,  ^c.   on  either  fide ; 
where  you  mufi:  not  conceive  them  to  be  pre- 
cifely  limited,  but  to  decay  indefinitely.     And 
whereas  I  have  afiign  d  the  fame  Latitude  to  e- 
very  Series,  I  Aid  it,  becaufe  although  the  Co- 
lours in  the  firlt  Scries  feem  to  be  a  little  broad- 
er than  the  rell,   by  reafon  of  a  fironger  Re- 
flexion there,   yet  that  inequality  is  fo  infenfi- 
ble  as  fcarcely  to  be  determin'd  by  Obferva- 
tion. 

Now  according  to  this  Defcription,  concei- 
ving that  the  Rays  originally  of  feveral  Colours 
are  by  turns  retleded  at  the  Spaces  il  L  3,  5-1X1 
O  7,  y  P  R 1 1,  ^c.  and  tranfmitted  at  the  Spaces 
AHIi,  3L  M5,  7OP9,  &c.  itiscafytoknow 

what 


[  202   ] 


what  Colour  muft  in  the  open  Air  be  exhi- 
bited at  any  thicknefs  of  a  tranfparent  thin  Bo- 
dy. For  if  a  Ruler  be  applied  parallel  to  AH, 
at  that  di (lance  from  it  by  which  the  thicknefs 
of  the  Body  is  reprefented  the  alternate  Spaces 
1 1  L  3,  5-M  O  7,  &c.  which  it  crdifeth  will  de- 
note the  refleded  original  Colours,  of  which 
the  Colour  exhibited  in  the  open  Air  is  com- 
pounded. Thus  if  the  coniiitution  of  the  green 
in  the  third  Series  of  Colours  be  defircd,  apply 
the  Ruler  as  you  fee  at  Tr^o-cp,  and  by  its  paf- 
fmg  through  Ibme  of  the  blue  at  tt  and  yellow 
at  <r,  as  well  as  through  the  green  at  ^,  you  may 
conclude  that  the  green  exhibited  at  that  thick- 
nefs of  .the  Body  is  principally  conllituted  of 
original  green ,  but  not  without  a  mixture  of 
fome  blue  and  yellow. 

By  this  means  you  may  know  how  the  Co- 
lours from  the  center  of  the  Rings  outward 
ought  to  fucceed  in  order  as  they  were  defcri- 
bed  in  the  4th  and  i8th  Obiervations.  For  if 
you  move  the  Ruler  gradually  from  AH  through 
all  diilances,  having  pafs'd  over  the  tirft  Space 
which  denotes  httleorno  Reflexion  to  be  made 
by  thinneitSubibnceSjit  will  lirli:  arrive  at  i  the 
violet,  and  then  very  quickly  at  the  blue  and 
green ,  which  together  with  that  violet  com- 
pound blue,  and  then  at  the  yellow  and  red,  by 
whofe  farther  addition  that  blue  is  converted 
into  whitencfs,  which  whitenefs  continues  du- 
ring the  tranfit  of  the  edge  of  the  Ruler  from 
I  to  3,  and  after  that  by  the  fucceiTive  delici- 
ence  of  its  component  Colours,  turns  firll  to 
compound  vellow,  and  then  to  red,  and  lall  of 

ail 


[   203    ] 


HI  the  red  ceafeth  at  L.  Then  begin  the  Co- 
lours of  the  I'econd  Series,  which  fucceed  in 
order  during  the  tranlit  of  the  edge  of  the 
Ruler  from  5  to  O,  and  are  more  lively  than 
before,  becaufe  more  expanded  and  fevered. 
And  for  the  lame  reafon,  inftead  of  the  former 
white  there  intercedes  between  the  blue  and 
yellow  a  mixture  of  orange,  yellow,  green, 
blue  and  indigo,  all  which  together  ought  to 
exhibit  a  dilute  and  imperfeft  green.  So  the 
Colours  of  the  third  Series  all  fucceed  in  or- 
der; hrft,  the  violet,  which  a  little  interferes 
with  the  red  of  the  fccond  order,  and  is  there- 
by inclined  to  a  reddilh  purple ;  then  the  blue 
and  green,  which  are  lefs  mix'd  with  other 
Colours,  and  confcquently  more  lively  than  be- 
fore, efpccially  the  green:  Then  follows  the 
yellow,  fome  of  which  towards  the  green  is  di- 
llindt  and  good,  but  that  part  of  it  towards  the 
fucceeding  red,  as  alfo  that  red  is  mix'd  with 
the  violet  and  blue  of  the  fourth  Series,  where- 
by various  degrees  of  red  very  much  inclining 
to  purple  are  compounded.  This  violet  and 
blue,  which  Ihould  I'ucceed  this  red,  being  mix- 
ed with,  and  hidden  in  it,  there  fuccecds  a 
green.  And  this  at  firit  is  much  inclined  to 
blue,  but  foon  becomes  a  good  green,  the  on- 
ly unmix'd  and  lively  Colour  in  this  fourth  Se- 
ries. For  as  it  verges  towards  the  yellow,  it 
begins  to  interfere  with  the  Colours  of  the  fifth 
Series,  by  whofe  mixture  the  fucceeding  yel- 
low and  red  are  very  much  diluted  and  made 
dirty,  efpccially  the  yellow ,  which  being  the 
weaker  Colour  is  fcarce  able  to  lliew  it  felf. 

After 


[204] 

After  this  the  feveral  Series  interfere  more  and 
more,  and  their  Colours  become  more  and  more 
intermix'd,  till  after  three  or  four  more  revo- 
lutions (in  which  the  red  and  blue  predominate 
by  turns)  all  forts  of  Colours  are  in  all  places 
pretty  equally  blended,  and  compound  an  even 
whitenels. 

And  fmce  by  the  15'thObfervation  the  Rays 
endued  with  one  Colour  are  tranfmitted,  where 
thofe  of  another  Colour  are  refleded,  the  rea- 
fon  of  the  Colours  made  by  the  tranfmitted 
Light  in  the  9th  and  xoth  Obfervations  is  from 
hence  evident. 

If  not  only  the  Order  and  Species  of  thefe 
Colours ,  but  alfo  the  precife  thicknefs  of  the 
Plate,  or  thin  Body  at  which  they  are  exhibited, 
be  defired  in  parts  of  an  Inch,  that  may  be  alfo 
obtained  by  allillance  of  the  6th  or  i6ih  Obfer- 
vations. For  according  to  thofe  Obfervations 
the  thicknefs  of  the  thinned  Air,  which  be- 
tween two  Glaffes  exhibited  the  mod  luminous 

parts  of  the  firil  fix  Rings  were  ^^,  ^^  , 

^7/^0'  T^'  itIto,  7^0  P^^^s  ^^  ^^  ^"c^- 
Suppofe  the  Light  reflefted  mod  copioufly  at 
thefe  thicknefles  be  the  bright  citrine  yellow, 
or  confine  of  yellow  and  orange,  and  thefe 
thickneifes  wiU'be  F^,  F  v,  F£,  Fo,  F  7.  And 
this  being  known,  it  is  eafy  to  determine  what 
thicknefs  of  Air  is  reprefented  by  G(p,  or  by 
any  other  diitance  of  the  Ruler  from  AH. 

But  farther,  fmce  by  the  lothObfervation  the 
thicknefs  of  Air  was  to  the  thicknefs  of  Water, 

which 


[  205  ] 

which  between  the  fame  GlaiTes  exhibited  the 
fame  Colour,  as  4  to  3,  and  by  the  21H:  Obfer- 
vation  the  Colours  of  thin  Bodies  are  not  varied 
by  varying  the  ambient  Medium;  the  thick- 
nefs  of  a  Bubble  of  Water,  exliibiting  any  Co- 
lour, will  be  4  of  the  thicknefs  of  Air  produ- 
cing the  fame  Colour.  And  fo  according  to 
the  fame  loth  and  xiltObfervations  the  thick- 
nefs of  a  Plate  of  Glafs,  whofe  Refraction  of 
the  mean  refrangible  Ray ,  is  meafured  by  the 
proportion  of  the  Sines  3 1  to  20,  may  be  ~  of 
the  thicknefs  of  Air  producing  the  fame  Co- 
lours ;  and  the  like  of  other  Mediums.  I  do 
not  affirm,  that  this  proportion  of  xo  to  31, 
holds  in  all  the  Rays ;  for  the  Sines  of  other 
forts  of  Rays  have  other  Proportions.  But  the 
differences  of  thofe  Proportions  are  fo  little 
that  I  do  not  here  confider  them.  On  thefe 
Grounds  I  have  compofed  the  following  Ta- 
ble, wherein  the  thicknefs  of  Air,  Water,  and 
Glafs,  at  which  each  Colour  is  mod  intenfe 
and  fpecifick ,  is  exprelTed  in  parts  of  an  Inch 
divided  into  ten  hundred  thouland  equal  parts. 


The 


r  20^  ] 


The  thicknefs  of  colour'' d  Plates  and  Particles  of 


Their  Colours  of  the 

filft  Order, 


Of  the  third  Order, 


Of  the  fourth  Order, 


Of  the  fifth  Order, 

Of  the  fixth  Order, 

Of  the  fevcnth  Or- 
der, 


Of  the  fecond  Order, 


(rVery  black 

Black 

Beginning  of 
Black 

BKie 

White 

Yellow 

Orange 
\.Red 

Violet 

Tndigo 
jBlue 
'Ureen 

Yellow 

Orange 

Bright  red 

Scarlet 

Purple 

Indigo 
jBlne 

Green 
I  Yellow 

Red 

Bluifh  red 

Bluifh  green 
Green 

lYellowifhgreen 
Red 


{ 


Green: (li  blue 
Red 


f  Greenifliblue 
\Red 

5"Greenifh  blue 
(_Ruddy  white 


r" 


-^ 


Air. 

WAter. 

G/^l^. 

i_ 

? 

1  0 

"z 

8 

J  t 

I 

? 

T 

■^  I 

1 

i4- 

ly 

^Y 

It 

i4-T 

5t 

3-J 

7-ir 

sf 

4-1- 

8 

6 

5v 

9 

^^ 

5* 

I  '-r 

£4 

I^-T 

9i 

8-T^ 

14 

rc^- 

9 

I  ST 

''T 

94 

i^i- 

IZ| 

I0| 

17^- 

^3 

I  Iv 

l^ 

13-^ 

I'^* 

3 

Mi 

^^Y 

ZI 

^5i 

xSrv 

2-1-tV 

'"t. 

I4v 

^-3t 

f-TT 

iStV 

^5-f 

I?T^ 

i6i. 

i7| 

iC^ 

-174- 

Z9 

^4 

i?f 

3^ 

14 

2C^ 

34 

i5T 

iZ 

3S4 

164: 

xz{- 

36 

17 

^3'> 

4cf 

26 

46 

344- 

29f 

5^-T 

3^T. 

34 

sH 

44 

38 

6j 

4^i 

4Z 

71 

^3i 

4S-t 

77  • 

?7^ 

•4Cf 

Now 


[   207   ] 

Now  if  this  Table  be  comparcd  with  the  6th 
Scheme,  you  will  there  fee  the  conltitution  of 
each  Colour,  as  to  its  Ingredients ,  or  the  ori- 
ginal Colours  of  which  it  is  compounded ,  and 
thence  be  enabled  to  judge  of  itslntenfenefs  or. 
Imperfedion ;  which  may  fuiiice  in  explication 
of  the  4th  and  i8th  Obfervations ,  unlcfs  it  be 
farther  dciired  to  delineate  the  manner  how 
the  Colours  appear,  when  tlie  two  Objeft-glaf- 
fes  are  laid  upon  one  another.  To  do  which, 
let  there  be  defcribed  a  large  Arc  of  a  Circle, 
and  a  llreight  Line  which  may  touch  that  Arc, 
and  parallel  to  that  Tangent  feveral  occult 
Lines,  at  fuch  diilances  from  it,  as  the  Num- 
bers let  againit  the  feveral  Colours  in  the  Ta- 
ble denote.  For  the  Arc,  and  its  Tangent,  will 
reprefent  the  Superficies  of  the  Glalles  termi- 
nating the  interjacent  Air ;  and  the  places  where 
the  occult  Lines  cut  the  Arc  will  ihow  at  what 
diltances  from  the  center,  or  Point  of  contad, 
each  Colour  is  refleded. 

There  arealfo  other  Ufes  of  this  Table:  For 
by  its  ailiflance  the  thicknefs  of  the  Bubble  in 
the  19th  Obfervation  was  determined  by  theCo- 
lours  which  it  exhibited.  And  fo  the  bignefs 
of  the  parts  of  natural  Bodies  may  be  conje- 
dured  by  their  Colours,  as  iliall  be  hereafter 
fliewn.  Alfo,  if  two  or  more  very  thin  Plates 
be  laid  one  upon  another,  fo  as  to  compofe  one 
Plate  equalling  them  all  in  thicknefs,  the  refult- 
ing  Colour  may  be  hereby  determin'd.  For  in- 
llance,  Mr.  Hook  obferved,  as  is  mentioned  in 
his  Mlcrographia ,  that  a  faint  yellow  Plate  of 
Mufcovy  Glafs  laid  upon  a  blue.one,  conltituted 

a  verv 


[  208   ] 

a  very  deep  purple.  The  yellow  of  the  firft 
Order  is  a  faint  one ,  and  the  thicknefs  of  the 
Plate  exhibiting  it,  according  to  the  Table  is 
44,  to  which  add  9,  the  thicknefs  exhibiting 
blue  of  the  fecond  Order,  and  the  Sum  will  be 
134,  which  is  the  thicknefs  exhibiting  the  pur- 
ple of  the  third  Order. 

To  explain,  in  the  next  place,  the  circum- 
fiances  of  the  2d  and  3d  Oblervations ;  that  is, 
how  the  Rings  of  the  Colours  may  (by  turning 
the  Prifms  about  their  common  Axis  the  con- 
trary way  to  that  exprefTed  in  thofe  Obferva- 
tions)  be  converted  into  white  and  black  Rings, 
and  afterwards  into  Rings  of  Colours  again,  the 
Colours  of  each  Ring  lying  now  in  an  inverted 
order ;  it  muft  be  remember'd,  that  thofe  Rings 
of  Colours  are  dilated  by  the  obliquation  of  the 
Rays  to  the  Air  which  mtercedes  the  GlalTes, 
and  that  according  to  the  Table  in  the  7th  Ob- 
fervation,  their  Dilatation  or  Increafe  of  their 
Diameter  is  molt  manifeft  and  fpcedy  when 
they  are  obliqueit.  Now  the  Rays  of  yellow 
being  more  refracted  by  the  firil  Superficies  of 
the  laid  Air  than  thofe  of  red,  are  thereby 
made  more  oblique  to  the  fecond  Superficies, 
at  which  they  are  reflected  to  produce  the  co- 
lour'd  Rings,  and  confequently  the  yellow  Cir- 
cle in  each  Ring  will  be  more  dilated  than  the 
red  ;  and  the  Excefs  of  its  Dilatation  will  be  fo 
much  the  greater,  by  how  much  the  greater  is 
the  obliquity  of  the  Rays,  until  at  lall  it  be- 
come of  equal  extent  with  the  red  of  the  fame 
Ring.  And  for  the  fame  reafon  the  green,  blue 
and  Violet,  will  be  alfo  fo  much  dilated  by  the 

itill 


[   209   ] 


M\  greater  obliquity  of  their  Rays,  as  to  be- 
come all  very  nearly  of  equal  extent  with  the 
red,  that  is,  equally  diilant  from  the  center  of 
the  Rings.  And  then  all  the  Colours  of  the 
fame  Ring  mull  be  coincident,  and  by  their 
mixture  exhibit  a  white  Ring.  And  chefe  white 
Rings  mull  have  black  ai^dark  Rings  between 
them,  becaufe  they  do  nftfpread  and  interfere 
with  one  another  as  before.  And  for  that  rea- 
fon  alfo  they  muft  become  diitinder  and  vilible 
to  far  greater  numbers.  But  yet  the  violet  be- 
ing obHqueft  will  be  fomething  more  dilated 
in  proportion  to  its  extent  than  the  other  Co- 
lours, and  fo  very  apt  to  appear  at  the  exterior 
Verges  of  the  white. 

Afterwards,  by  a  greater  obliquity  of  the 
Rays,  the  violet  and  blue  become  more  fenfibly 
dilated  than  the  red  and  yellow,  and  fo  being 
farther  removed  from  the  center  of  the  Rings^ 
the  Colours  mult  emerge  out  of  the  white  in  an 
order  contrary  to  that  which  they  had  before, 
the  violet  and  blue  at  the  exterior  Limbs  of 
each  Ring,  and  the  red  and  yellow  at  the  in- 
terior. And  the  violet,  by  reafon  of  the  great- 
ell  obliquity  of  its  Rays ,  being  in  proportion 
molt  of  all  expanded,  will  fooneft  appear  at 
the  exterior  Limb  of  each  white  Ring,  and  be- 
come more  confpicuous  than  the  reft.  And  the 
feveral  Series  of  Colours  belonging  to  the  feve- 
ral  Rings,  will  by  their  unfolding  and  fpread-^ 
ing,  begin  again  to  interfere,  and  thereby  ren- 
der the  Rings  lefs  diftind,  and  not  viiible  to  fo 
great  numbers. 

P  If 


[    2IO  ] 

If  inftead  of  the  Prifms  the  Objeft-glafTes  be 
made  uie  of,  the  Rings  which  they  exhibit  be- 
come not  white  and  diltind  by  the  obliquity  of 
the  Eye,  by  reafon  that  the  Rays  in  their  paifage 
through  that  Air  which  intercedes  the  Glalies 
are  very  nearly  parallel  to  thofe  Lines  in  which 
they  were  tirll  incidqj^  on  the  Glafles,  and  con- 
fequently  the  Rays  eii^ed  with  feveral  Colours 
are  not  inchned  one  more  than  another  to  that 
Air,  as  it  happens  in  the  Prifms. 

There  is  yet  another  circumitance. of  thefe 
Experiments  to  be  confider'd,  and  that  is  why 
the  black  and  white  Rings  which  when  view'd 
at  a  diflance  appear  diilincf,  iliould  not  only  be- 
come confufcd  by  viewing  them  near  at  hand, 
but  alio  yield  a  violet  Colour  at  both  the  edges 
of  every  white  Ring.  And  the  reafon  is,  that 
the  Rays  which  enter  the  Eye  at  feveral  parts 
ofthe  Pupil,  have  feveral  Obliquities  to  theGlaf- 
fes,  and  thofe  which  are  molt  oblique,  if  confi- 
der'd apart,  would  reprefent  the  Rings  bigger 
than  thofe  which  are  the  leail  oblique.  Whence 
the  breadth  of  the  Perimeter  of  every  white 
Ring  is  expanded  outwards  by  the  obliqued 
Rays-  ,ind  inwards  by  the  leall  oblique.  And 
this  Expanfion  is  fo  much  the  greater  by  how 
much  the  greater  is  the  difference  of  the  Obli- 
quity ;  that  is,  by  how  much  the  Pupil  is  wider, 
or  the  Eye  nearer  to  the  Glalies.  And  the 
breadth  of  the  violet  mull  be  moll  expanded , 
becaufe  the  Rays  apt  to  excite  a  Senfation  of 
that  Colour  are  molt  obhque  to  a  fecond,  or 
farther-  Superiicies  of  the  thinn'd  Air  at  which 
they  are  refU-'fled ,  and  have  alfo  the  greateft 

*  varia» 


Variation  of  Obliquity,  which  makes  that  Co- 
lour foonelt  emerge  out  of  the  edffes  of  the 
white.  And  as  the  breadth  of  every  Ring  is 
thus  augmented,  the  dark  Intervals  muit  be  di- 
minifli'd,  until  the  neighbouring  Rings  become 
continuous,  and  are  blended,  the  exterior  firil^ 
and  then  thofe  nearer  the  center,  fo  that  they 
can  no  longer  be  diitinguifli'd  apart,  but  feem 
to  conltitute  an  even  and  unifoi'm  whitenefs. 

Among  all  the  Obfervations  there  is  none  ac- 
companied with  fo  odd  circumftances  as  the 
twenty  fourth.  Of  thofe  the  principal  are,  that 
in  thin  Plates,  which  to  the  naked  Eye  feem  of 
an  even  and  uniform  tranfparent  whitenefs  ? 
without  any  terminations  of  Shadows,  the  Re- 
fradion  of  a  Prifm  iliould  make  Rings  of  Co- 
lours appear ,  whereas  it  mfually  makes  Objeds- 
appear  colour'd  only  there  where  they  are  ter- 
minated with  Shadows,  or  have  parts  unequal- 
ly luminous;  and  that  it  lliould  make  thofe 
Rings  exceedingly  diitind  and  white,  although 
it  ufualiy  renders  Obje6ls  confufed  and  colour- 
ed. The  Caufe  of  thefe  things  you  will  under- 
Hand  byconfidering,  that  all  the  Rings  of  Co- 
lours ar6  really  in  the  Plate,  when  view'd  with 
the  naked  Eye,  although  by  reafon  of  the  great 
breadth  of  their  Circumferences  they  fo  much 
interfere  and  are  blended  together,  that  they 
feem  to  conltitute  an  uniform  whitenefs.  But 
when  the  Rays  pafs  through  the  Prifm  to  the 
Eye,  the  Orbits  of  the  feveral  Colours  in  every 
Ring  are  refraded,  fome  more  than  others^  ac- 
cording to  their  degrees  of  Refrangibility :  By 
which  mean^  the  Colours^  on  ooie  fide  of  the 


[212] 

Ring  (that  is  on  one  fide  of  its  center)  become 
more  unfolded  and  dilated ,  and  thofe  on  the 
other  fide  more  complicated  and  contrai^led. 
And  where  by  a  due  Refradion  they  are  lb 
much  contracted,  that  the  leveral  Rings  be- 
come narrower  than  to  interfere  with  one  ano- 
ther, they  mull:  appear  diftinCt,  and  alfo  white, 
if  the  conilituent  Colours  be  fo  much  contract- 
ed as  to  be  wholly  coincident.  But,  on  the 
other  fide ,  where  the  Orbit  of  every  Ring  is 
made  broader  by  the  farther  unfolding  of  its 
Colours,  it  mull  interfere  more  with  other  Rings 
than  before,  and  fo  become  lels  diilincL 

To  explain  this  a  little  farther,  fuppofe  the 
concentrick  Circles  AV,  and  BX,  [inF/g.  7.] 
reprefent  the  red  and  violet  of  any  Order, 
which,  together  \^'itlf  the  intermediate  Colours, 
conllitute  any  one  of  theie  Rings.  .  Now  thefe 
being  view'd  through  a  Prifm,  the  violet  Circle 
BX,  will  by  a  greater  P.efraCtion  be  farther 
tranilated  from  its  place  than  the  red  AV,  and 
fo  approach  nearer  to  it  on  that  fide  of  the  Cir- 
cles, towards  which  the  Refractions  are  made. 
For  inliance ,  if  the  red  be  tranilated  to  a  v, 
the  violet  maybe  tranilated  to  ^x,  fo  as  to  ap- 
proach nearer  to  it  at  x  than  before,  and  if  the 
red  be  farther  tranflated  to  a  v,  the  violet  may 
l;e  fo  miuch  farther  tranilated  to  bx  as  to  con- 
vene with  it  at  X,  and  if  the  red  be  yet  farther 
tranilated  to  aT,  the  violet  may  be  ftiil  fo  much 
farther  tranilated  to  /S  ^  as  to  pafs  beyond  it  at 
|,  and  convene  with  it  at  e  and  /.  And  this 
being  underilood  not  only  of  the  red  and  vio- 
let, but  of  all  the  other  intermediate  Colours, 

and 


[  213   ] 

tnd  alfo  of  ex^ery  revolution  ot  thofe  Colours, 
you  will  cafily  perceive  how  thofe  of  the  fame 
revolution  Or  order,  by  their  nearnefs  at  xv 
and  T|,  and  their  coincidence  at  x  v,  e  and /J 
ought  to  conftitute  pretty  dillind  Arcs  of  Cir- 
cles, cfpecially  at  xv,  or  at  e  and/,  and  that 
they  wdll  appear  feverally  at  xz;  and  at  xv  ex- 
hibit whitenefs  by  their  coincidence,  and  again 
appear  feveral  at  T^,  but  yet  in  a  contrary  or- 
der to  that  which  they  had  before,  and  itill  re- 
tain beyond  e  and  f.  But,  on  the  other  fide, 
at  a  if,  ab,  or  ccl3,  thefe  Colours  mull:  become 
much  more  confufed  by  being  dilated  and  fpread 
fo,  as  to  interfere  with  thofe  of  other  Orders. 
And  the  fame  confufion  will  happen  at  T^  be- 
tween ^  and  /J  if  the  Refraftion  be  very  great, 
or  the  Priim  very  diltant  from  the  Objed-glaf- 
fes :  In  which  cafe  no  parts  of  the  Rings  will 
be  feen,  fave  only  two  little  Arcs  at  e  and  f, 
whofe  diflance  from  one  another,  will  be  aug- 
mented by  removing  the  Prifm  Itill  farther  from 
the  Objed-glaires :  And  thefe  little  Arcs  mufl 
be  diilinclell;  and  whiteil  at  their  middle,  and 
at  their  ends,  where  they  begin  to  grow  con- 
fufed they  muft  be  colour'd.  And  the  Colours 
at  one  end  of  every  Arc  mult  be  in  a  contrary 
order  to  thofe  at  the  other  end,  by  reafon  that 
they  crofs  in  the  intermediate  white  ;  namely, 
their  ends,  which  verge  towards  T|,  will  be 
red  and  yellow^  on  that  fide  next  the  center, 
and  blue  and  violet  on  the  other  fide.  But 
their  other  ends  which  verge  from  T|  will  on 
the  contrary  be  blue  and  violet  on  that  fide  to- 

P  3  wards 


[214] 

wards  the  center,  and  on  the  other  fide  red 
and  yellow. 

Now  as  all  thefe  things  follow  from  the  pro- 
perties of  Light  by  a  mathematical  way  of  rea- 
foning,  fo  the  truth  of  them  may  be  manifelled 
by  Experiments.  For  in  a  dark  Room,  by  view- 
ing thefe  Rings  through  a  Prifm ,  by  reflexion 
of  the  feveral  prifmatick  Colours,  which  an 
afliftant  caufes  to  move  to  and  fro  upon  a  Wall 
or  Paper  from  whence  they  are  refleaed,  whilfl 
the  Spectator's  Eye,  the  Prifm  and  the  Objeft- 
glafTes  (as  in  the  15th  Obfervation)  are  placed 
Iteady :  the  Pofition  of  the  Circles  made  fuc- 
ceffively  by  the  feveral. Colours,  will  be  found 
fuch,  in  refpeft  of  one  tmother,  as  I  have  de- 
fcribed  in  the  Figures  abxv^  or  abxv,  or 
rt/3|r.  And  by  the  fame  method  the  truth  of 
the  Explications  of  other  Obfervations  may  be 
examined. 

By  what  hath  been  faid,  the  like  Phaenomena 
of  Water,  and  thin  Plates  of  Glafs  may  be  un- 
derftood.  But  in  fmall  fragments  of  thofe  Plates, 
there  is  this  farther  obfervable,  that  where  they 
lye  flat  upon  a  Table  and  are  turned  about  their 
centers  whilil  they  are  viewed  through  a  Prifm, 
they  will  in  fome  pollures  exhibit  Waves  of  va- 
rious Colours,  and  fome  of  them  exhibit  thefe 
Waves  in  one  or  two  Pofitions  only,  but  the 
mofl  of  them  do  in  all  Politions  exhibit  them, 
and  make  them  for  the  molt  part  appear  al- 
moil  all  over  the  Plates.  The  reafon  is ,  that 
the  Superficies  of  fuch  Plates  are  not  even,  but 
have  many  Cavities  and  Swelhngs,  which  how 
fliallow  foever  do  a  little  vary  the  thicknefs  of 

the 


[215] 

the  Plate.  For  at  the  fcveml  fides  of  thofe  Ca- 
vities, for  the  Realons  newly  defcribed,  there 
ought  to  be  produced  Waves  in  feveral  po- 
llures  of  the  Prifm.  Now  though  it  be  but 
fome  very  fmall,  and  narrower  parts  of  the  Glafs, 
by  which  thefe  Waves  for  the  molt  part  are  cau- 
fed ,  yet  they  may  feem  to  extend  themfelves 
over  the  whole  Glafs,  becaufefrom  the  narrow- 
eft  of  thofe  parts  there  are  Colours  of  feveral 
Orders,  that  is  of  ieveral  Rings,  confuledly  rc- 
flefted ,  which  by  Refradion  of  the  Prifm  are 
unfolded,  feparated,  and  according  to  their 
degrees  of  Refraction,  difperfed  to  le\Tral  pla- 
ces, fo  as  to  conftitute  fo  many  feveral  Waves, 
as  there  were  divers  orders  of  Colours  promif- 
cuoully  reflefted  from  that  part  of  the  Glafs. 

Thefe  are  the  principal  Pha^mwncna  of  thin 
Plates  or  Bubbles,  whole  Explications  depend 
on  the  properties  of  I  .ight,  which  I  have  here- 
tofore deliver'd.  And  thefe  you  fee  do  necef- 
farily  follow  from  them,  and  agree  with  them, 
even  to  their  very  leail  circumilances ;  and  not 
only  fo,  but  do  very  much  tend  to  their  proof 
Thus,  by  the  i4thObfervation,  it  appears,  that 
the  Rays  of  feveral  Colours  made  as  well  by  thin 
Plates  or  Bubbles,  as  by  Refradfions  of  a  Prilm, 
have  feveral  degrees  of  Refrangibility,  where- 
by thofe  of  each  order ,  which  at  the  retiexion 
from  the  Plate  or  Bubble  are  intcrmix'd  with 
thofe  of  other  Orders,  are  i'eparated  from  them 
by  Refraction,  and  alibciarcd  together  fo  as  to 
become  vifible  bv  themielves  like  Arcs  of  Cir- 
cles. For  if  the  Rays  were  all  alike  refrangi- 
ble,  'tis  impoilible  that  the  whitenefs,   which 

P  4  to 


J  21^  ] 

to  the  naked  Senfe  appears  uniform,  Ihould  bjf 
Refraclion  have  its  parts  trani'pofed  and  ranged 
into  thofe  black  and  white  Arcs, 

It  appears  alio  that  the  unequal  Refradions 
of  diftorm  Rays  proceed  not  from  any  contin- 
gent irregularities ;  fuch  as  are  Veins,  aq  uneven 
Polifh,  or  fortuitous  Poiirion  of  the  Pores  of 
Glafs;  unequal  and  cafual  Motions  in  the  Air 
or  /Ether,  the  fpreading,  breaking,  or  dividing 
the  fame  Pvay  into  many  diverging  parts,  or  the 
like.  (For,  admitting  any  fuch  irregularities, 
it  would  be  iiiipofTible  for  Refraftions  to  render 
thofe  Rings  fo  very  diltinct,  and  well  defined, 
as  they  do  in  the  24th  Obfervation.  It  is  ne- 
celTary  therefore  that  every  Ray  have  its  proper 
and  conilant  degree  of  Refrangibility  connate 
with  it,  accqp(ing  to  which  its  refraction  is  e- 
ver  juftly  andregularly  perform'd,  and  that  fe- 
veral  Rays  have  feveral  of  thofe  degrees. 

And  wliat  is  faid  of  their  Refrangibility  may 
Ipe  alfo  underllood  of  their  Refiexibility,  that  is 
of  their  Difpofitions  to  be  reflected  fome  at  ^ 
greater,  and  others  at  a  lefs  thicknefs,  of  thin 
plates  or  Bubbles,  namely,  that  thofe  Difpofi- 
t:ions  are  alio  connate  with  the  Rays ,  and  im- 
piutable;  as  may  appear  by  the  13th,  14th,  and 
ifth  Obfervations  compared  with  the  fourth 
gnd  eighteenth. 

By  the  precedent  Obfervations  it  appears  al- 
fo, that  whitenefs  is  a  diiiimilar  mixture  of  all 
Colours  9  and  that  Light  is  a  mixture  of  Rays 
enfiued  with  all  thofe  Colours,  For  conliderr 
ing  the  multitude  of  the  Rings  of  Colours,  in 
rhe  ads  12th  ar^d  ^4th  Obfervations,  it  is  manir 

■ ftft. 


[  217  ] 

fell,  that  although  in  the  4th  and  iSthObfer- 
vations  there  appear  no  more  than  eight  or 
nine  of  thofe  Rings ,  yet  there  are  really  a  far 
gi'eatcr  number,  which  fo  much  interfere  and 
mingle  with  one  another,  as  after  thofe  eight 
or  nine  revolutions  to  dilute  one  another  whol- 
ly, and  conllitute  an  even  and  fenfibly  uniform 
vvhitenefs.  And  confequently  that  whitenefs 
muil  be  allow'd  a  mixture  of  all  Colours,  and 
the  Light  which  conveys  it  to  the  Eye  mufl 
be  a  mixture  of  Rays  endued  with  all  thofe  Co- 
lours. 

But  farther,  by  the  24th  Obfervation,  it  ap- 
pears, that  there  is  a  conllant  relation  between 
Colours  and  Refrangibility,  the  moll  refrangi- 
ble Rays  being  violet,  the  leail;  refrangible  red, 
and  thofe  of  intermediate  Colours  having  pro- 
portionably  intermediate  degrees  of  Refrangibi- 
lity. And  by  the  13th,  14th  and  i^thObfer- 
vations,  compared  with  the  4th  or  i8th,  there 
appears  to  be  the  fame  conllant  relation  be- 
tween Colour  and  Rellexibihty,  the  violet  be- 
ing in  like  circumitances  relleaed  at  lealt  thick- 
nelfes  of  any  thin  Plate  or  Bubble,  the  red  at 
greatefl  thicknelfes,  and  the  intermediate  Co- 
lours at  intermediate  thicknelfes.  Whence  it 
follows,  that  the  colorifick  Diipoiitions  of  Rays 
are  alfo  connate  with  them  and  immutable,  and 
by  confequence  that  all  the  Produdions  and 
Appearances  of  Colours  in  the  World  are  de- 
rived not  from  any  phyfical  Change  caufed  in 
Light  by  RefraClion  or  Reflexion,  but  only 
f^om  the  various  Mixtures  or  Separations  of 
Rays,  by  virtue  of  their  different  RefrangibiUty 

or 


[2I8] 

orReflexibility.  And  in  this  refpeft  the  Science 
of  Colours  becomes  a  Speculation  as  truly  ma- 
thematical as  any  other  part  of  Opticks.  I  mean 
fo  far  as  they  depend  on  the  Nature  of  Light , 
and  are  not  produced  or  alter'd  by  the  Power 
of  Imagination,  or  by  flriking  or  prefling  the 
Eye. 


THE 


[  219  ] 


THE 

SECOND  BOOK 

OP  TICKS. 

PART   III. 

Of  the  permanent  Colours  of  natural  Bodies^  and 
the  Analogy  between  them  and  the  Colours  of 
thin  tranjparent  'Plates, 

j^^^l  AM  now  come  to  another  part  of 
^"j'MJ  this  Defign,  which  is  to  confider  how 


pi  the  Phaenomena  of  thin  tranfparent 
"^  Plates  ftand  related  to  thofe  of  all  o- 
ther  natural  Bodies.    Of  thefe  Bodies  I  have  al- 
ready told  you  that  they  appear  of  divers  Co- 
lours, 


[  220  ] 

lours,  accordirigly  as  they  are  difpofed  to  refleft 
moil  copiouily  the  Rays  originally  endued  with 
thofe  Colours.  But  their  ConiUtutions,  where- 
by they  reflect  fome  Rays  more  copioufly  than 
others,  remain  to  be  difcover'd,  and  thefe  I 
fhall  endeavour  to  manifelt  in  the  following 
Proportions. 

Prop.     I. 

Thofe  Superficies  of  tranjparent  Bodies  refleB 
the  great efl  quantity  of  Lights  which  have 
the  great  eft  re  franking  Tower ;  that  is,  which 
intercede  Mediums  that  differ  moft  in  their 
refraBive  ^enfities.  u4nd  in  the  Confines  of 
equally  refra^iing  Mediums  there  is  no  Re^ 
flexion. 

THE  Analogy  between  Reflexion  and  Re- 
fraftion  will  appear  by  coniidering,  that 
when  Li?ht  pafleth  obliquely  out  of  one  Medi- 
um into  another  which  refrads  from  the  per- 
pendicular, the  greater  is  the  difference  of  their 
refradive  Denlity ,  the  lefs  Obliquity  of  Inci-^ 
dence  is  requifite  to  caufe  a  total  Reflexion. 
For  as  the  Sines  are  which  meafure  the  Refra- 
<^ion,  fo  is  the  Sine  of  Incidence  at  which  the 
total  Reflexion  begins,  to  the  Radius  of  the 
Circle,  and  confequently  that  Angle  of  Inci- 
dence is  leafl:  W'here  there  is  the  greatefl:  diffe- 
rence of  the  Sines.  Thus  in  the  paffing  of 
Light  out  of  Water  into  Air,  where  theRefra- 
ftion  is  meafured  by  the  Ratio  of  the  Sines  3  to 
4,  the  total  Reflexion  begins  when  the  Angle 
of  Incidence  is  about  48  Degrees  35-  Minutes. 

In 


[  221   ] 


In  pafling  out  of  Glafs  into  Air,  where  the  Re* 
fradion  is  meaiured  by  the  Ratio  of  the  Sines 
ao  to  31,  the  total  Retlexion  begins  when  the 
Angle  of  Incidence  is  40  Degrees  10  Minutes; 
and  fo  in  pafling  out  of  Cryllal,  or  more  Itrong- 
lyrefrading  Mediums  into  Air,  thereisliiilalefs 
Obliquity  requilite  to  caufe  a  total  Retiexion. 
Superhcies  therefore  which  refraft  moil  do 
foonelt  refled  all  the  Light  which  is  incident 
on  tKem,  and  fo  mult  be  allowed  moil  Itrongly 
reflexive. 

But  the  truth  of  this  Proportion  will  farther 
appear  by  obierving,  that  in  the  Superficies  in- 
terceding two  traniparent  Mediums,  (fuch  as  are 
Air,  Water,  Oil,  common  Glafs,  Cryilal,  me- 
talline Glaffes,  Ifland  Glafles,  white  tranfparent 
Arfenick,  Diamonds,  &c.)  the  Reflexion  is 
Itronger  or  weaker  accordingly,  as  the  Super- 
ficies hath  a  greater  or  lefs  refrading^ower 


gTn 


For  in  the  Confine  of  Air  and  Sal-gem  'tis 
fh-onger  than  in  the  Confine  of  Air  and  Water, 
and  iTill  flronger  in  the  Confine  of  Air  and  com- 
mon Glafs  or  Cryllal,  and  llronger  in  the  Con- 
fine of  Air  and  a  Diamond.  If  any  of  thefe, 
and  fuch  like  tranfparent  Solids,  be  immerged 
in  Water,  its  Reflexion  becomes  much  weak- 
er than  before,  and  Hill  weaker  if  they  be  im- 
merged in  the  more  llrongly  refrading  Liquors 
of  well  rectified  Oil  of  Vitriol  or  Spirit  of  Tur- 
pentine. If  Water  be  diltinguiih'd  into  tw^o 
parts,  by  any  imaginary  Surflice,  the  Reflexion 
in  the  Confine  of  thoie  two  parts  is  none  at  all. 
In  the  Confine  of  Water  and  Ice  'tis  very  little, 
in  that  of  Water  and  Oil  'tis  fomething  greater, 

in 


[  2^2  ] 

in  that  of  Water  and  Sal-gem  flill  greater,  and 
in  that  of  Water  and  Glafs,  orCryftal,  or  other 
denfer  Subilances  ilill  greater,  accordingly  as 
thofe  Mediums  differ  more  or  lefs  in  their  re- 
fra<R:ing  Powers.  Hence  in  the  Confine  of  com- 
mon Glafs  and  Cryftal,  there  ought  to  be  a 
weak  Reflexion,  and  a  flronger  Reflexion  in 
the  Confine  of  common  and  metalline  Glafs, 
though  I  have  not  yet  tried  this.  But,  in  the 
Contine  of  two  GlaiTes  of  equal  denfity,  there 
is  not  any  fenfible  Reflexion,  as  was  fliewn  in 
the  fir  ft  Obfervation.  And  the  fame  may  be 
underflood  of  the  Superficies  interceding  two 
Cryftals ,  or  two  Liquors ,  or  any  other  Sub- 
ilances in  which  no  Refradion  is  caufed.  So 
then  the  reafon  why  uniform  pellucid  Mediums, 
(fuch  as W ater,  Glafs,  orCryftal)  have  no  fen- 
fible Reflexion  but  in  their  external  Superficies^i 
wher^they  are  adjacent  to  other  Mediums  of 
a  difflrent  denfity,  is  becaufe  all  their  conti- 
guous parts  have  one  and  the  fame  degree  of 
denlity. 


R  o  p. 


II. 


The  leap  parts  of  almofl  all  natural  Bodies  are 
in  fome  meafure  tranfparent :  And  the  Opa- 
city of  thofe  Bodies  arifeth  from  the  multi- 
tude of  Reflexions  caufed  in  their  internal 
Tarts. 

TH  AT  this  is  fo  has  been  obferved  by  o- 
thers,  and  will  eafJy  be  granted  by  theni 
that  have  been  converfant  with  Microicopes. 
And  it  may  be  alfo  tried  by  applying  any  lub- 

ftancf' 


r  223 1 

ftance  to  a  hole  through  which  fome  Light  is 
immitted  into  a  dark  Room.  For  how  opake 
foever  that  Subltance  may  feem  in  the  open 
Air,  it  w^ill  by  that  means  appear  very  manifefl- 
ly  tranfparent ,  if  it  be  of  a  fufficient  thinnefs. 
Only  white  metalline  Bodies  mull  be  excepted, 
which  by  reafon  of  their  exceflive  denfity  feem 
to  relied:  almoll  all  the  Light  incident  on  their 
firlt  Superficies ,  unlefs  by  folution  in  Menlbu- 
ums  they  be  reduced  into  very  fmall  Particles, 
and  then  they  become  tranfparent. 

Prop.    HI. 

Between  the  parts  of  opake  and  colour' d  Bodies 
are  many  Spaces^  either  empty  or  replcnifl?  d, 
with  Mediums  of  other  T^cnjities ;  as  Water 
between  the  tinging  Corpufcles  wherewith  a- 
ny  Liquor  is  impregnated ,  Air  between  the 
aqueous  Globules  that  conjiitute  Clouds  or 
Miffs  ;  and  for  the  moft  part  Spaces  void  of 
both  Air  and  JVater^  but  yet  perhaps  not 
wholly  void  of  all  Subjiance ,  between  the 
parts  of  hard  Bodies. 

^  I  ^HE  truth  of  this  is  evinced  by  the  two 
jH^  precedent  Proportions :  For  by  the  fe- 
coud  Propofition  there  are  many  Reflexions 
maue  by  the  internal  parts  of  Bodies ,  which, 
by  the  hrlt  Proportion ,  would  not  happen  if 
the  parts  of  thole  Bodies  were  continued  with- 
out any  luch  Ii^terltices  between  them,  becaule 
Reflexions  are  caufed  only  in  Superficies,  which 
intercede  Mediums  of  a  differing  denfity  by 
Trop.i, 

But 


[  224  ] 


But  farther ,  that  this  difcontinuity  of  parts 
is  the  principal  Caufe  of  the  opacity  of  Bodies, 
will  appear  by  confidering,  that  opake  Subltan- 
ces  become  tranfparent  by  filling  their  Pores 
with  any  Subftance  of  equal  or  almoft  equal  den- 
fity  with  their  parts.  Thus  Paper  dipped  in 
Water  or  Oil ,  the  Oculus  Mundi  Stone  fteep'd 
in  Water,  Linen  Cloth  oiled  or  varnilh'd ,  and 
and  many  other  Subilances  foaked  in  fuch  Li- 
quors as  will  intimately  pervade  their  little 
Pores,  become  by  that  means  more  tranfparent 
than  other  wife ;  fo,  on  the  contrary,  the  moll 
tranfparent  Subilances  may  by  evacuating  their 
Pores,  or  fcparating  their  parts >  be  rendh-'d 
fufficiently  opake,  as  Salts  or  wet  Paper,  or  the 
Oculiis  Mitnd'i  Stone  by  being  dried,  Horn  by 
being  fcraped,  Glafs  by  being  reduced  to  Pow- 
der, or  othervvife  flawed.  Turpentine  by  being 
Itirred  about  with  Water  till  they  mix  im.per- 
fedly,*  and  Water  by  being  form'd  into  many 
fmall  Bubbles,  either  alone  in  the  form  of  Froth, 
or  bylhakingit  together  with  Oil  of  Turpen- 
tine, or  Oil  Olive,  or  with  Ibme  other  conve- 
nient Liquor,  with  which  it  v/ill  not  perfectly 
incorporate.  And  to  the  increafe  of  the  opa- 
city of  thefe  Bodies  it  conduces  fomething,  that 
by  the  x3d  Obfervation  the  Reflexions  of  very 
thin  tranfparent  Subilances  are  confiderably 
ftronger  than  thofe  made  by  the  fame  Subilan- 
ces of  a  greater  thicknefs. 


Prop. 


[  225  ] 

Prop.    IV. 

The  farts  of  Bodies  and  their  Interftices  mufl 
not  be  lefs  than  of  fume  definite  bignefsy  to 
render  them  ofake  and  colour  d. 

FOR  the  opakeft  Bodies,  if 'their  parts  be 
fubtily  divided,  (as  Metals  by  being  diirol- 
ved  in  acid  Menftruums,  C^r.)  become  perfed- 
ly  tranfparent.  And  you  may  alfo  remember, 
that  in  the  eighth  Oblervation  there  was  no 
fenfible  reflexion  at  the  Superficies  of  the  Ob- 
jedt-glafTes  where  they  were  very  near  one  an- 
other, though  they  did  not  abfolutely  touch. 
And  in  the.  17th  Obfervation  the  Reflexion  of 
the  Water-bubble  where  it  became  thinneflwas 
almofl  infenfible,  fo  as  to  caufe  very  black  Spots 
to  appear  on  the  top  of  the  Bubble  by  the  want 
of  refleded  Light. 

On  thefe  grounds  I  perceive  it  is  that  Water, 
Salt,  Glafs,  Stones,  and  fuch  like  Subflances, 
are  tranfparent.  For,  upon  divers  Confidera- 
tions,  they  feem  to  be  as  full  of  Pores  or  Inter- 
laces between  their  parts  as  other  Bodies  are, 
but  yet  their  Parts  and  Interftices  to  be  too 
fmall  to  caufe  Reflexions  in  their  common  Sur- 
faces. 


Prop. 


[    i26  ] 

Prop.     V. 

The  tranjparent  farts  of  Bodies  according-  to 
their  feveral  Jizes  refleB  Rays  of  one  Colour^ 
and  tranfmit  thofe  of  another  ^  on  the  fame 
grounds  that  thin  Tlates  or  Bubbles  do  reflet 
or  tranfmit  thofe  Rays.  And  this  I  take  to 
be  the  ground  of  all  their  Colours. 

FOR  if  a  thinri'd  or  plated  Body,  whiclif 
being  of  an  even  thicknefs,  appears  all  o- 
ver  of  one  uniform  Colour,  Ihould  be  flit  into 
Threds,  or  broken  into  Fragments,  of  the  fame 
thicknefs  with  the  Plate ;  I  fee  no  reafon  why 
every  Thred  or  Fragment  fliould  not  keep  its 
Colour,  and  by  confequence  why  a  heap  of 
thofe  Threds  or  Fragments  Ihould  not  confli- 
tute  a  Maifs  or  Powder  of  the  fame  Colour,' 
which  the  Plate  exhibited  before  it  was  broken.- 
And  the  parts  of  all  natural  Bodies  being  like' 
fo  many  Fragments  of  a  Plate,  mull  on  the  fame 
grounds  exhibit  the  fame  Colours. 

Now  that  they  do  fo>  will  appear  by  the  affi- 
fiity  of  their  Properties.  The  finely  coloured' 
Feathers  of  fome  Birds,  and  particularly  thofe, 
of  Peacocks  Tails,  d.o  in  the  very  fame  part  of 
the  Feather  appear  of  feveral  Colours  in  feveral 
Fofitions  of  the  Eye,  after  the  very  fame  man- 
ner that  thin  Plates  were  found  to  do  in  the 
7th  and  19th  Obfervations,  and  therefore  their 
Colours  arife  from  the  thinnefs  of  the  tranfpa- 
rent  parts  of  the  Feathers ;  that  is,  from  the 
flendernefs  of  the  very  fine  Hairs,  or  Capilla-- 
tnenta^    which  grow  out  of  the  fides  of  the' 

y  groller 


grolTcr  lateral  Branches  or  Fibres  of  thofe  Fea- 
thers.    And  to  the  fame  purpofe  it  is,  that  the 
Webs  of  fome  Spiders  by  being  fpiin  very  fine 
have  appeared  colour'd,  as  fome  have  obferv'd, 
and  that  the  colour'd  Fibres  of  fome  Silks  by 
varying  the  Pofition  of  the  Eye  do  vary  their 
Colour.     Alfo  the  Colours  of  Silks ,   Cloths , 
and  other  Subftances,  which  Water  or  Oil  caii 
mtimately  penetrate,  become  more  faint  and 
obfcure  by  being  immergcd  in  thofe  Liquors , 
and  recover  their  Vigour  again  by  being  dried, 
much  after  the  manner  declared  of  thin  Bodies 
in  the  loth  and  ziil  Obfervations.     Leaf  Gold, 
fome  forts  of  painted  Glafs,   the  hifufion  of 
Lignum  Mephriticiim^  and  fome  other  Subftan- 
ces reflect  one  Colour,  and  tranfmit  another,' 
hke  thill  Bodies  in  the  9th  and  20th  Obferva- 
tions.    And  fome  of  thofe  colour'd  Powders 
which  Painters  ufe,  may  have  their  Colours  a 
little  changed,   by  being  very  elaborately  and 
finely  ground.     \Vhere  I  fee  not  what  can  be 
jullly  pretended  for  thofe  changes,  befides  the 
breaking  of  their  parts  into  lefs  parts  by  that 
contrition  after  the  fame  manner  that  the  Co- 
lour of  a  thin  Plate  is  changed  by  varying  its 
thicknefs.     For  which  reafon  alfo  it  is  that  the 
colour'd  Flowers  of  Plants  and  Vegetables  by 
being  bruifed  ufually  become  more,  tranfparent 
than  before,  or  at  lealf  in  fome  degree  or  o- 
ther  change  their  Colours.    Nor  is  it  much  lefs 
to  my  purpofe ,  that  by  rnixing  divers  Liquors 
very   odd   and    remarkable   Productions   and 
Changes  of  Colours  may  be  effeded;  of  which 
no  caufe  can  be  more  obvious  and  rational  than 

Q  i  that 


I  228  ] 

the  faline  Corpufcles  of  one  Liquor  do  vari- 
oufly  ad  upon  or  unite  with  the  tinging  Cor- 
pufcles of  another,  fo  as  to  make  them  fwell, 
or  ilirink  (whereby  not  only  their  bulk  but  their 
denfity  alfo  may  be  changed)  or  to  divide  them 
into  1  mailer  Corpufcles,  (whereby  a  colour'd 
Liquor  may  become  tranfparent)  or  to  make 
many  of  them  aflbciate  into  one  duller,  where- 
by two  tranfparent  Liquors  may  compofe  a  co- 
lour'd one.  For  we  fee  how  apt  thofe  faline 
Menitruums  are  to  penetrate  and  dilfolve  Sub- 
ftances  to  which  they  are  applied,  and  fome  of 
them  to  precipitate  what  others  dillblve.  In 
like  manner ,  if  we  confider  the  various  Phae- 
nomena  of  the  Atmofphere,  we  may  obferve, 
that  when  \^apours  are  tirit  raifed,  they  hinder 
not  the  tranfparency  of  the  Air,  being  divided 
into  parts  too  fmall  to  caufe  any  Retlexion  in 
their  Superficies.  But  when  in  order  to  com- 
pofe Drops  of  Rain  they  begin  to  coalefce  and 
conilitute  Globules  of  all  intermediate  fizes , ' 
thofe  Globules  when  they  become  of  a  conve- 
nient iize  to  refled  fome  Colours  and  tranfmit 
others,  may  conilitute  Clouds  of  various  Co- 
lours according  to  their  frzcs.  And  I  fee  not 
what  can  be  rationally  conceived  in  fo  tranfpa- 
rent a  Subftance  as  U'ater  for  the  produdion 
of  thcfe  Colours,  bclidcs  the  various  fizes  of  its 
fluid  and  globular  Parcels. 


Prop. 


[  229   ] 

Prop.     VI. 

The  parts  of  Bodies  on  'vuhich  their  Colours  de- 
petid^  are  denfer  thajt  the  Medium,  isjhich per- 
njades  their  Interftices. 

THIS  will  appear  by  confidering,  that  the 
Colour  of  a  Body  depends  not  only  on 
the  Rays  which  are  incident  perpendicularly 
on  its  parts,  but  on  thole  alio  which  are  inci- 
dent at  all  other  Angles.  And  that  according 
to  the  7th  Obfervation ,  a  very  little  variation 
of  obliquity  will  change  the  reflected  Colour 
where  the  thin  Body  or  fmall  Particle  is  rarer 
than  the  ambient  Medium,  infomuch  that  fuch 
a  fmall  Particle  will  at  diverily  oblique  Inci- 
dences refleft  all  forts  of  Colours,  in  lo  great  a 
variety  that  the  Colour  refulting  from  them  all, 
confufcdly  reflected  from  a  heap  of  fuch  Parti- 
cles, muft  rather  be  a  white  or  grey  than  any 
other  Colour ,  or  at  beft  it  muft  be  out  a  very 
imperfeft  and  dirty  Colour.  Whereas  if  the 
thin  Body  or  fmall  Particle  be  much  denfer  than 
the  ambient  Medium,  the  Colours  according  to 
the  19th  Obfervation  are  fo  little  changed  by 
the  variation  of  obliquity,  that  the  Rays  which 
are  reflected  lealt  obHquely  may  predominate 
over  the  reil  fo  much  as  to  caufe  a  heap  of  fuch 
Particles  to  appear  very  intenfly  of  their  Co- 
lour. 

It  conduces  alfo  fomething  to  the  confirma- 
tion of  this  Propolition,  that,  according  to  the 
2,xd  Obfervation,  the  Colours  exhibited  by  the 
denfer  thin  Body  within  the  rarer,  are  more 

Q  3  brisi* 


[  230  ] 

brisk  than  tbofe  exhibited  by  the  rarer  within 
the  denfer.  - 

Prop.    VII. 

The  bignejs  of  the  component  farts  of  natural 
Bodies  may  he  conjeBured  by  their  Colours. 

FOR  fmce  the  parts  of  thefe  Bodies  by 
Trop.  5".  do  moil  probably  exhibit  the 
lame  Colours  with  a  Plate  of  equal  thicknefs, 
provided  they  have  the  fame  refradive  denfity ; 
and  fince  their  parts  feem  for  the  moft  part  to 
h^ve  much  the  fame  denfity  with  Water  or 
Glafs,  as  by  many  circumftances  is  obvious  to 
collect;  to  determine  the  fizes  of  thofe  parts 
you  need  only  have  recourfe  to  the  precedent 
Tables,  in  which  the  thicknefs  of  Water  or 
Glafs  exhibiting  any  Colour  is  exprefled.  Thus 
if  it  be  defired  to  know  the  diameter  of  a  Cor- 
pufcle,  which  being  of  equal  denfity  with  Glafs 
Ihall  reflcd  green  of  the  third  Order ;  the  Num- 

t)er  16-^  fhews  it  to  be  ^^^  parts  of  an  Inch. 

The  greatcft  difficulty  is  here  to  know  of 
what  order  the  Colour  of  any  Body  is.  And 
for  this  end  we  mufl  have  recourfe  to  the  4th 
and  1 8th  Obfervations ,  from  whence  may  be 
collefted  thefe  particulars. 

Scarlets^  and  other  reds^  oranges  and  j)'^/- 
Jowsy' if  they  be  pure  and  intenfe  are  moil  pro- 
bably of -the  fee  on  d  order.  Thofe  of  the  firll 
^nd  thh'd  order  alfo  may  be  pretty  good ,  only 
the  yellow-  of  the  firit  order  is  faint,  and  the 
^>->  .  '  •  •   •    < ••   ■'■ '    -    -      •  orange 


orange  and  red  of  the  third  order  have  a  great 
mixture  of  violet  and  blue. 

There  may  be  good  greens  of  the  fourth  or- 
der, but  the  purell  are  of  the  third.  And  of 
this  order  the  green  of  all  Vegetables  feem  to 
be,  partly  by  reafon  of  the  intenfenefs  of  their 
Colours,  and  partly  becaufe  when  they  wither 
fome  of  them  turn  to  a  greenifli  yellow,  and 
others  to  a  more  perfedl  yellow  or  orange,  or 
perhaps  to  red,  pafling  firll  through  j\ll  the  a- 
forefaid  intermediate  Colours.  Which  Changes 
feem  to  be  effeded  by  the  exhaling  oi  the  moi- 
Iture  which  may  leave  the  tinging  Corpufcles 
more  denfe,  and  fomething  augmented  by  the 
accretion  of  the  oily  and  earthy  part  of  that 
moiflurc.  Now  the  green  without  doubt  is  of 
the  fame  order  with  thofe  Colours  into  which 
it  changeth ,  becaufe  the  Changes  are  gradual, 
and  thole  Colours,  though  ufually  not  very  full, 
yet  are  often  too  full  and  lively  to  be  of  the 
fourth  order. 

Blues  and  purples  may  be  either  of  the  fe- 
cond  or  third  order,  but  the  befl  are  of  the 
third.  Thus  the  Colour  of  violets  feems  to  be 
of  that  order,  becaufe  their  Syrup  by  acid  Li- 
quors turns  red ,  and  by  urinous  and  alcalizate 
turns  green.  For  fmce  it  is  of  the  nattire  of 
Acids  to  diilblve  or  attenuate,  and  of  Alcalies 
to  precipitate  or  incraflate ,  if  the  purple  Co- 
lour of  the  Syrup  was  of  the  fecond  order,  an 
acid  Liquor  by  attenuating  its  tinging  Cor- 
pufcles would  change  it  to  a  red  of  the  nrft  or- 
der, and  an  Alcali  by  incraflating  them  would 
change  it  to  a  green  of  the  lecond  order; 

Q  4  which 


[  232  ] 

which  red  and  green ,  efpecially  the  green , 
feem  too  imperfect  to  be  the  Colours  produ- 
ced by  thcie  Changes.  But  if  the  faid  purple 
be  fuppoied  of  the  third  order,  its  Change  to 
red  of  the  fecond,  and  green  of  the  third,  may 
without  any  inconvenience  be  allow'd. 

If  there  be  found  any  Body  of  a  deeper  and 
lefs  reddiOi  purple  than  that  of  the  violets,  its 
Colour  mod  probably  is  of  the  fecond  order. 
But  yet  there  being  no  Body  commonly  known 
whole  Colour  is  conltantly  more  deep  than 
theirs,  I  have  made  ufe  oif  their  name  to  de- 
note the  deepeft  and  lead  reddifli  purples,  fuch 
as  manifeflly  tranfcend  their  Colour  in  purity. 

The  blue  of  the  tirll  order,  though  very  faint 
and  Uttle,  may  poflibly  be  the  Colour  of  fome 
Subilances ;  and  particularl}'  the  azure  Colour 
of  the  Skies  feems  to  be  of  this  order.  For  all 
^^apo.urs.  when  they  begin  to  condenfe  and  co- 
alei'ce  into  fmall  parcels,  become  firil  of  that 
bignefs  whereby  fuch  an  Azure  muft  be  refledl- 
cd  before  they  can  contlitute  Clouds  of  other 
Colours.  And  fo  this  being  the  firfi:  Colour, 
which  Vapours  begin  to  rcfleCl,  it  ought  to  be 
the  Colour  of  the  hned  and  mod  tranfparent 
Skies  in  which  \'apours  are  not  arrived  to  that 
grofliiefs  rcquifite  to  refled  other  Colours,  as 
we  find,  it  is  by  experience. 

Whit e fiefs  ^  if  mod  intenfe  and  luminous,  is 
tjiat  of  the  fird  order.,  if  Icfs  drong  and  lumi- 
nous a  mixture  of  the  Colours  of  fevcral  or- 
ders. Of  this  lad.  kind  is  the  whirencfs  of 
Froth,  Paper,  Linen,  and  mod  vrhite  Sub- 
ilances; of  the  former  I  reckon  that  of  white 

ivl  ctais 


[  2.33 

Metals  to  be.     For  whilit 


le  denfeft  of  Me- 


tals, Gold,  if  foliated,  is  tranfparent,  and  all  Me- 
tals become  tranfparent  if  dillblved  in  Men- 
flruums  or  vitrified,  the  opacity  of  white  Me- 
tals arifeth  not  from  their  denfity  alone.  They 
being  lefs  dcnfe  than  Gold  would  be  more  tranf- 
parent than  it,  did  not  fome  other  Caufe  con- 
cur with  their  denfity  to  make  them  opake. 
And  this  caufe  I  take  to  be  fuch  a  bignefs  of 
their  Particles  as  fits  them  to  refled  the  white 
of  the  firll  order.  For  if  they  be  of  other  thick- 
nelTes  they  may  refled  other  Colours,  as  is  ma- 
nifell:  by  the  Colours  which  appear  upon  hot 
Steel  in  tempering  it,  and  fometimes  upon  the 
Surface  of  melted  Metals  in  the  Skin  or  Scoria 
which  arifes  upon  them  in  their  coohng.  And 
as  the  white  of  the  firit  order  is  the  Itrongeit 
which  can  be  made  by  Plates  of  tranfparent 
Subltances,  fo  it  ought  to  be  ftronger  in  the 
denfer  Subltances  of  Metals  than  in  the  rarer 
of  Air,  Water  and  Glafs.  Nor  do  I  fee  but 
that  metallic  Subilances  of  fuch  a  tlijcknefs  as 
may  fit  them  to  refled  the  white  of  the  firft  or- 
der, may,  by  reafon  of  their  great  denfity  (ac- 
cording to  the  tenour  of  the  fiiil:  of  thefe  Pro- 
pofitions)  refled;  all  the  Light  incident  upon 
them,  and  fo  be  as  opake  and  fplendent  as  it's 
pofiible  for  any  Body  to  be.  Gold,  or  Copper 
mix'd  wita  lefs  than  half  their  weight  of  Silver, 
or  Tin,  or  Rcgulus  of  Antimony,  in  fufion,  or 
amalgamcd  with  a  very  little  Mercury,  become 
white ;  which  fliews  both  that  the  Particles  of 
\yhite  Metals  have  much  more  Superficies,  and 
fo  are  fmaller,  than  thofe  of  Gold  and  Copper, 

and 


[234] 

and  alfo  that  they  are  fo  opake  as  not  to  fufTer 
the  Particles  of  Gold  or  Copper  to  ftiine  through 
them.     Now  it  is  fcarce  to  be  doubted,  but 
that  the  Colours  of  Gold  and  Copper  are  of 
the  fecond  or  third  order,  and  therefore  the 
Particles  of  white  Metals  cannot  be  much  big- 
ger than  is  requiilre  to  make  them  refleft  the 
white  of  the  firll:  order.  The  volatility  of  Mer-  ' 
cury  argues  that  they  are  not  much  bigger, 
nor  may  they  be  much  lefs,  lelt  they  lofe  their 
opacity,  and  become  either  tranfparent  as  they 
do  when  attenuated  by  vitrification,  or  by  So- 
lution inMenllruums,  or  black  as  they  do  when 
ground  fmaller,  by  rubbing  Silver,  or  Tm,  or 
Lead,  upon  other  Subilances  to  draw  black 
Lines.    The  firlt  and  only  Colour  which  white 
Metals  take  by  grinding  their  Particles  fmaller, 
is  black,  and  therefore  their  white  ought  to  be 
that  which  borders  upon  the  black  Spot  in  the 
center  of  the  Rings  of  Colours,  that  is,  the 
white  of  the  f  rfl  order.    But  if  you  would 
hence  gather  the  bignefs  of  metallic  Particles, 
you  mull  allow  for  their  denfity.     For  were 
Mercury  tranfparent,  its  denlity  is  fuch  that 
the  Sine  of  Incidence  upon  it  (  by  my  compu- 
tation) would  be  to  the  Sine  of  its  Refradion, 
as  71  to  20,  or  7  to  i.     And  therefore  the 
thicknefs  of  its  Particles,  that  they  may  exhibit 
the  fame  Colours  with  thofe  of  Bubbles  of  Wa- 
ter, ought  to  be  lefs  than  the  thicknefs  of  the 
Skin  of  thofe  Bubbles  in  the  proportion  of  x 
to  7.     Whence  it's  pofTible  that  the  Particles 
of  Mercury  may  be  as  Uttle  as  the  Particles  of 

fome 


[235] 

fome  tranfparcnt  and  volatile  Fluids,  and  yet 
refleft  the  white  of  the  firlt  order. 

Lafth',  for  the  produdion  of  blacky  the  Cor- 
pufcles  muft  be  lefs  than  any  of  thofe  which  ex- 
hibit'Colours.     F^or  at  all  greater  iizcs  there  isj 
too  iiiuch  Light  rcfleded  to  conilitute  this  Co- 
lour. '  But  if  they  be  fuppofed  a  little  lefs  than 
is  requifite  to  reflect  the  white  and  very  faint 
blue  bf  the  firlt  order,   they  will,  according  to 
the  4th,  8th,  17th  and  iSthObfervations,  retleft 
fo  very  httle  Light  as  to  appear  intcnfly  black, 
and  yet  may  perhaps  variouily  refract  it  to  and 
frb  within  themfelves  fo  long,   until  it  happen 
to  be  Itifled  and  loll,  by  which  means  they  will 
appear  black  in  all  pofitions  of  the  Eye  without 
any  tranfparency.  And  from  hence  may  be  undcr- 
ftood  why  Fire,  and  the  more  lubtile  dillblver  Pu- 
trefa(5tion,  by  dividing  the  Particles  of  Subltan- 
ces,  turn  them  to  black,  why  fmall  quantities 
of  black  Subilances  ihipart  their  Colour  very 
freely  and  intenily  to  other  Subilances  to  which 
they  are  applied ;  the  minute  Particles  of  thefe, 
by  reafon  of  their  very  great  number,  eafily  o- 
verfpreading  the  grofs  Particles  of  others ;  why 
Glafs  ground  verv  elaborately  with  Sand  on  a 
Copper  Plate,  'till  it  be  well  polifh'd,  makes 
the  Sand,  together  w  ith  what  is  worn  oft'  from 
the  Glafs  and  Copper ,   become   very  black  : 
why  black  Subilances  do  fooncll  of  all  others 
become  hot  in  the  Sun's  Light  and  burn,  (which 
Effeft  may  proceed  partly  from  the  multitude 
of  Refradions  in  a  httle  room,  and  partly  from 
^the   eafy  Commotion  of  fo   very  fmall  Cor- 
pufcle^ ;)  and  \yhy  blacks  are  ufually  a  httle  in- 
clined 


[236] 

clined  to  a  bluifli  Colour.  For  that  they  are  fo 
may  be  fcen  by  illuminatmg  white  Paper  by 
Light  refleded  from  black  Subflances.  For 
the  Paper  will  ufually  appear  of  a  bluifli  white ; 
and  the  reafon  is,  that  black  Borders  on  the  ob- 
fcure  blue  of  the  firft  order  defcribed  in  the 
1 8th  Obfervation,  and  therefore  relieds  more 
Rays  of  that  Colour  than  of"  any  other. 

In  thcfe  Defcriptions  I  have  been  the  more 
particular,  becaule  it  is  not  impoffible  but  that 
jViicrorcopcs  may  at  length  be  improved  to  the 
difcovery  of  the  Particles  of  Bodies  on  which 
their  Colours  depend,  if  they  are  not  already  in 
fome  meaiure  arrived  to  that  degree  of  per- 
fection.  For  if  thofe  Inftruments  are  or  can  be 
ip  far  improved  as  with  fufficient  diltindlnefs 
to  reprefent  Objeds  five  or  fix  hundred  times 
bigger  than  at  a  Foot  diflance  they  appear  to 
our  naked  Eyes,  I  Ihould  hope  that  we  might 
be  able  to  dilcover  fome  of  the  greatelt  of  thofe 
Corpufcles.  And  by  one  that  would  magnify 
three  or  four  thouland  times  perhaps  they  might 
all  be  diicovcr'd ,  but  thofe  which  produce 
blacknefs.  In  the  mean  while  I  fee  nothing  ma- 
terial in  this  Difcourie  that  may  rationally  be 
doubted  of,  excepting  this  Pofition.  That  tranf- 
parent  Corpufcles  of  the  fame  thicknefs  and 
dcnfity  with  a  Plate,  do  exhibit  the  fame  Co- 
lour. And  this  1  would  have  underflood  not 
without  fome  Latitude,  as  well  bccaufe  thofe 
Corpufcles  may  be  of  irregular  Figures,  and 
many  Pvavs  niuil  be  obliquely  incident  on  them, 
and  fo  have  a  Ihortcr  way  through  them  than 
the  length  of  their  Diameters,  as  becaufe  the 

Itraitnefs 


[  237  ] 


ftraitnefs  of  the  Medium  pent  in  on  all  fides 
within  luch  Corpufcles  may  a  little  alter  its  Mo- 
tions or  other  qualities  on  which  the  Reflexion 
depends.  But  yet  I  cannot  much  fufped  the 
lall,  becaufe  I  have  obferved  of  fome  fmall 
Plates  of  Mufcovy  Glafs  which  were  of  an  even 
thicknefs,  that  through  a  Microfcope  they  have 
appeared  of  the  fame  Colour  at  their  edges  and 
corners  where  the  included  Medium  was  ter- 
minated, which  they  appeared  of  in  other  pla- 
ces. However  it  will  add  much  to  our  Satif- 
fadion ,  if  thofe  Corpufcles  can  be  difcover'd 
with  Microfcopes ;  which  if  we  Ihall  at  length 
attain  to,  I  fear  it  will  be  the  utmoll  improve- 
ment of  this  Senfe.  For  it  fcems  impoilible 
to  fee  the  more  fecret  and  noble  Works  of  Na- 
ture within  the  Corpufcles  by  reafon  of  their 
tranfparency. 


R  O   p. 


VIII. 


The  Cditfe  of  Reflex  mi  is  not  the  impinging  of 
Light  on  the  fo lid  or  impervious  parts  of  Bo^ 
dies,  as  is  commonly  believed. 

THIS  will  appear  by  the  following  Confi- 
derations.  Firll,  That  in  the  palfage  of 
Light  out  of  Glafs  into  Air  there  is  a  Reflexion 
as  Ih'ong  as  in  its  pafliige  out  of  Air  into  Glafs, 
or  rather  a  little  flronger,  and  by  maiiy  degrees 
ftronger  than  in  its  pallage  out  of  Glafs  into 
Water.  And  it  feems  not  probable  that  Air 
fliould  have  more  refleding  parts  than  Water 
or  Glafs.  But  if  that  fliould  poITibly  be  fuppo- 
fed,  yet  it  will  avail  nothing;  for  the  Reflexion 

is 


[  23§  ] 

is  as  flrong  or  ftronger  when  the  Air  is  drawfi 
away  from  the  Glais^  (fuppofe  in  the  Air-Pump 
invented  by  Mr.  Boyle)  as  when  it  is  adjacent 
to  it.    Secondly,  If  Light  in  its  paflage  out  of 
Glafs  into  Air  be  incident  more  obliquely  than 
at  an  Angle  of  40  or  41  Degi^ees  it  is  wholly 
refle(5i:cd,  if  lefs  obliquely  it  is  in  great  mea- 
fure  tranfmitted.    Now  it  is  not  to  be  imagined 
that  Light  at  one  degree  of  obliquity  flioiild 
meet  with  Pores  enough  in  the  Air  to  tranfmit, 
the  greater  part  of  it,  and  at  another  degree  of 
obliquity  iliould  meet  with  nothing  but  parts 
to  relied  it  wholly,  efpeeially  confidering  that 
in  its  paiTagc  out  of  Air  into  Glafs,  how  ob- 
lique foever  be  its  hicidence,  it  finds  Pores  e- 
nough  in  the  Glafs  to  tranfmit  a  great  part  of 
it.     If  any  Man  fuppofe  that  it  is  not  reflected 
by  the  Air,  but  by  the  outmoil:  fuperficial  parts 
of  the  Glafs  j   there  is  Hill  the  lame  difficulty  : 
Befides,  that  fuch  a  Suppofiiion  is  unintelligi- 
ble, and  will  alfo  appear  to  be  falfe  by  applying 
Water  behind  fome  part  of  the  Glafs  initead  of 
Air.     For  fo  in  a  convenient  obliquity  of  the 
Rays,  fuppofe  of  45*  or  46  Degrees ,  at  which 
they  are  all  refleded  where  the  Air  is  adjacent 
to  the  Glafs,  they  iliall  be  in  great  meafure  tranf- 
mitted where  the  Water  is  adjacent  to  it ;  which 
argues ,   that  their  Reflexion  or  Tranfmilliori 
depends  on  the  conflitution  of  the  Air  and  Wa- 
ter behind  the  Glafs,  and  not  on  the  Ih-iking  of 
the  Rays  upon  the  parts  of  the  Glafs.    Third- 
ly, If  the  Colours  made  by  a  Prifm  placed  at 
the  entrance  of  a  Beam  of  Light  into  a  darken'd 
Room  be  fuccellively  caft  on  a  fecond  Prifm 

placed 


[   239   ] 

placed  at  a  greater  diltance  from  the  former^ 
in  fuch  manner  that  they  are  all  alike  incident 
upon  it,  the  fecond  Prifm  may  be  io  inclined  to 
the  incident  Rays ,  that  thofe  which  are  of  a 
blue  Colour  fhall  be  all  refleded  by  it,  and, yet 
thofe  of  a  red  Colour  pretty  copioufly  tranfmit- 
ted.  Now  if  the  Reflexion  be  caul'cd  by  the 
parts  of  Air  or  Glafs,  I  would  ask,  why  at  the 
fame  Obliquity  of  Incidence  the  blue  fliould 
wholly  impinge  on  thole  parts  lb  as  to  be  all 
reflected,  and  yet  the  red  find  Pores  enough 
to  be  in  a  great  meafure  tranfmitted.  Fourth- 
ly, Where  two  GlafFes  touch  one  another,  there 
is  no  fenfible  Reflexion  as  was  declared  in  the 
firll:  Obfervation;  and  yet  I  fee  no  reaibn  why, 
the  Rays  fliould  not  impinge  on  the  parts  of 
Glafs  as  much  when  contiguous  to  other  Glafs 
as  when  contiguous  to  Air.  Fifthly,  When 
the  top  of  a  Water-Bubble  (in  the  17th  Obfer- 
vation) by  the  continual  fubfiding  and  exha-. 
ling  of  the  Water  grew  very  thin,  there  was 
fuch  a  Uttle  and  almoli:  infeniible  quantity  of 
Light  refle61ed  from  it,  that  it  appeared  in- 
tenlly  black ;  whereas  round  about  that  black 
Spot,  where  the  Water  was  thicker,  the  Refle- 
xion was  fo  flrong  as  to  make  the  Water  feem 
verf  white.  Nor  is  it  only  at  the  lead  thick- 
nefs  of  thin  Plates  or  Bubbles,  that  there  is  no 
fnanifefl:  Reflexiofi ,  but  at  many  other  thick- 
nelfes  continually  greater  and  greater.  For  in 
the  i^th'  Obfervation  the  Rays  of  the  fame  Co- 
four  were  by  turns  tranfmitted  at  one  thicknefs, 
and  refleded  at  another  thicknefs ,  for  an  in- 
determinate number  of  Succeflions.    And  yet 

ill 


[  240  ] 

in  the  Superficies  of  the  thinned  Body,  where 
it  is  of  any  one  thicknefs ,  there  are  as  many 
parts  for  the  Rays  to  impinge  on ,  as  where  ic 
is  of  any  other  thicknefs.  Sixthly,  If  Reflexion 
were  cauled  by  the  parts  of  refleding  Bodies, 
it  would  be  impofTible  for  thin  Plates  or  Bub- 
bles at  one  and  the  fame  place  to  refleft  the 
Rays  of  one  Colour  and  tranfmit  thofe  of  ano- 
ther, as  they  do  according  to  tiie  13th  and  15th 
Obfervations.  For  it  is  not  to  be  imagined 
that  at  one  place  the  Rays  which  for  inllance 
exhibit  a  blue  Colour,  fhould  have  the  fortune 
to  dafh  upon  the  parts,  and  thole  which  exhi- 
bit a  red  to  hit  upon  the  Pores  of  the  Body ; 
and  then  at  another  place,  where  the  Body  is 
either  a  little  thicker,  or  a  httle  thinner,  that 
on  the  contrary  the  blue  lliould  hit  upon  its 
pores,  and  the  red  upon  its  parts.  LaiUy,  were 
the  Rays  of  Light  reflected  by  impinging  on 
the  folid  parts  of  Bodies,  their  Reflexions  from 
poliih'd  Bodies  could  not  be  fo  regular  as  they 
are.  For  in  poUiliing  Glafs  with  Sand,  Putty  or 
Tripoly,  it  is  not  to  be  imagined  that  thofe 
Subitances  can  bv  grating  and  fretting  the  Glafs 
bring  all  its  leaft  Particles  to  an  accurate  Polifh; 
fo  that  all  their  Surfaces  lliall  be  truly  plain  or 
truly  fpherical,  and  look  all  the  fame  way,  fo 
as  together  to  compofe  one  even  Surface.  The 
fmaller  the  Particles  of  thofe  Subitances  are, 
thefmaller  will  be  the  Scratches  by  which  they 
continually  fret  and  wear  away  the  Glafs  unti] 
it  be  poliih'd ,  but  be  they  never  fo  fmall  they 
can  wear  away  the  Glafs  no  otherwife  than  by 
grating  and  icratching  it,  and  breaking  the 

Protu- 


[2+I] 

!?rotuberances ,  and  therefore  poliili  it  no  o- 
therwile  than  by  bringing  its  roughnefs  to  a  ve- 
ry fine  Grain,  fo  that  the  Scratches  and  Fret- 
tings  of  the  Surface  become  too  fmali  to  be 
vifible.  And  therefore  if  Light  were  refleded 
by  impinging  upon  the  folid  parts  of  the  Glafs^ 
it  would  be  fcatter'd  as  much  by  the  mofl  po- 
lifli'd  Glafs  as  by  the  roughelt.  So  then  it  re- 
mains a  Problem,  how^  Glafs  poUlli'd  by  fretting 
Subllances  can  reflect  Light  fo  regularly  as  it 
does.  And  this  Problem  is  fcarce  otherwife  to 
be  folved  than  by  faying,  that  the  Reflexion  of 
a  Ray  is  eftefted,  not  by  a  Tingle  point  of  the 
reflecling  Body,  but  by  fome  power  of  the  Bo- 
dy which  is  evenly  dittufed  all  over  its  Surface, 
and  by  which  it  afts  upon  the  Ray  without  im- 
mediate ContacI:!:.  For  that  the  parts  of  Bodies 
do  ad  upon  Light  at  a  diilance  fliall  be  Ihewa 
hereafter. 

Now  if  Light  be  reflcded  not  by  impinging 
on  the  folid  parts  of  Bodies,  but  by  fome  otnef 
principle  ;  it's  probable  that  as  many  of  its  Rays 
as  impinge  on  the  folid  parts  of  Bodies  are  not 
refledled  but  ftifled  and  loll  in  the  Bodies.  For 
otherwife  we  mufl:  allow  two  forts  of  Refle-» 
xions.  Should  all  the  Pvays  be  refleded  which 
impinge  on  the  internal  parts  of  clear  Water  or 
Cryflal,  thofe  Subltances  would  rather  have  a 
cloudy  Colour  than  a  clear  Tranfparency.  To 
make  Bodies  look  black,  it's  neceilary  that  ma- 
ny Rays  be  flopp'd,  retained  and  loii  in  them, 
and  it  feems  not  probable  that  any  Rays  can  be 
flopp'd  and  flifled  in  them  which  do  not  im- 
pinge on  their  parts, 

R  And 


[    242  ] 

And  hence  we  may  underfland  that  Bodies 
are  much  more  rare  and  porous  than  is  com- 
monly believed.  Water  is  nineteen  times  hght- 
er,  and  by  confequence  nineteen  times  rarer 
than  Gold,  and  Gold  is  fo  rare  as  very  readily 
and  without  the  leafl  oppofition  to  tranlmit  the 
magnetick  Effluvia,  and  eafily  to  admit  Quick- 
iilver  into  its  Pores,  and  to  let  Water  pafs 
through  it-.  For  a  concave  Sphere  of  Gold  fil- 
led with  Water,  and  foder'd  up,  has  upon  pref- 
fmg  the  Sphere  with  great  force,  let  the  Water 
fqueeze  through  it ,  and  iland  all  over  its  out- 
fide  in  multitudes  of  fmall  Drops,  Uke  Dew, 
without  burfling  or  cracking  the  Body  of  the 
Gold  as  I  have  been  inform'd  by  an  Eye  wit- 
nefs.  From  all  which  we  may  conclude,  that 
Gold  has  more  Pores  than  folid  parts,  and  by 
confequence  that  Water  has  above  forty  times 
more  Pores  that  Parts.  And  he  that  lliall  find 
out  an  Hypothefis,  by  which  Water  may  be  fo 
rare,  and  yet  not  be  capable  of  compreflion  by 
force,  may  doubtlefs  by  the  fame  Hypothefis 
make  Gold  and  Water,  and  all  other  Bodies  as 
much  rarer  as  he  pleafes,  fo  that  Light  may 
find  a  ready  pafTage  through  tranfparent  Sub- 
fiances. 

Tile  Magnet  a^lsupon  Iron  through  all  denfe 
Bodies  not  magnetick  nor  red  hot,  without  a- 
ny  diminution  of  its  virtue ;  as  for  inllance , 
through  Gold,  Silver,  Lead,  Glafs,  Water. 
The  gravitating  Power  of  the  Sun  is  tranfmit- 
ted  through  the  vaft  Bodies  of  the  Planets  with- 
out any  diminution,  fo  as  to  aft  upon  all  their 
parts  to  their  very  centers  with  the  fame  Force 

and 


[  H3  ] 

and  according  to  the  fame  Laws  d5  if  (he  part 
Upon  which  it  ads  were  not  furrounded  with 
the  Body  of  the  Planet.    The  Rays  of  Light 
whether  they  be  very  fmall  Bodies  projeded, 
or  only  Motion  or  Force  propagated,  are  mo- 
ved in  right  Lines;    and  whenever  a  Ray  of 
Light  is  by  any  Obliacle  turned  out  of  its  redi- 
linear  way,  it  will  never  retm'n  into  the  fiime 
redilinear  way*  unlefs  perhaps  by  very  great  ac- 
cident.    And  yet  Light  is  tranfmitted  through 
pellucid  folid  Bodies  in  right  Lines  to  very  great 
diflances.     How  Bodies  can  have  a  futiicient 
quantity  of  Pores  for  producing  thefe  Effeds  is 
very  difficult  to  conceive ,   but  perhaps  not  al- 
tdgether  impoirible.     For  the  Colours  of  Bodies 
arife  from  the  Magnitudes  of  the  Particles  which 
retled  them,  as  was  explained  above.    Now  if 
lye  conceive  thefe  Particles  of  Bodies  to  be  fa 
difpofed  amonglt  themfelves,  that  the  Intervals 
or  empty  Spaces  between  them  may  be  equal  in 
magnitude  to  them  all ;    and  that  thefe  Parti- 
cles may  be  compofed  of  other  Particles  much 
fmaller,  which  have  as  much  empty  Space  be- 
tween them  as  equals  all  the  Magnitudes  of 
thefe  fmaller  Particles :    And  that  in  hke  man- 
ner thefe  fmaller  Particles  are  again  compofed 
of  others  much  fmaller,  all  which  together  are 
equal  to  all  the  Pores  or  empty  Spaces  betweeni 
them ;   and  fo  on  perpetually  till  you  come  to 
folid  Particles,  fuch  as  have  no  Pores  or  empty 
Spaces  within  them :  And  if  in  any  grofs  Body 
there  be,  for  infiance,  three  fuch  degrees  of 
Particles,  the  lead  of  which  are  foiid ;  this  Bo- 
dy will  have  feven  times  more  Pores  than, folid 

R  X  Parts, 


[  244  1 

Parts.  But  if  there  be  four  fuch  degrees  of 
Particles,  the  lead  of  which  are  folid,  the  Bo- 
dy will  have  fifteen  times  more  Pores  than  fo- 
lid Parts.  If  there  be  five  degrees ,  the  Body 
will  have  orfe-  and  thirty  times  more  Pores  than 
folid  Parts.  If  fix  degrees,  the  Body  will  have 
fixty  and  three  times  more  Pores  than  folid 
Parts.  And  fo  on  perpetually.  And  there  are 
other  ways  of  conceiving  how  Bodies  may  be 
exceeding  porous.  But  what  is  really  their  in- 
ward Frame  is  not  yet  known  to  us. 

Prop.    IX. 

Bodies  rejleVt  and  refra6f  Light  by  one  and  the 
fame  po'uuer  'varioujly  exercifed  in  various  Cir^ 
cumfiances. 

THIS  appears  by  feveral  Confiderations, 
Firff ,  Becaufe  when  Light  goes  out  of 
Glafs  into  Air,  as  obliquely  as  it  can  poffibly 
do,  if  its  Incidence  be  made  ftill  more  oblique, 
it  becomes  totally  reflefted.  For  the  power  of 
the  Glafs  after  it  has  refrafted  the  Light  as  ob- 
liquely as  is  pofTible  if  the  Incidence  be  ftill 
made  more  oblique,  becomes  too  flrong  to  let 
any  of  its  Rays  go  through,  and  by  confequence 
caufes  total  Reflexions.  Secondly,  Becaufe 
Light  is  alternately  reflected  and  and  tranfmit- 
ted  by  thin  Plates  of  Glafs  for  many  Succeflions 
accordingly  as  the  thicknefs  of  the  Plate  increa- 
fes  in  an  arithmetical  Progreflion.  For  here 
the  thicknefs  of  the  Glafs  determines  whether 
that  Power  by  which  Glafs  a6fs  upon  Light 
Ihall  cauie  it  to  be  retieded,  or  fufier  it  to  be 

tranf- 


[245  ] 

tranfmitted.  And,  Thirdly,  becaufe  thofe  Sur- 
faces of  tranfparent  Bodies  which  have  the  great- 
eft  refrafting  Power,  refled  the  greateit  quan- 
tity of  Light,  as  was  iliew'd  in  the  firil  Propo- 
fition. 


Pr 


o  p. 


X. 


If  Light  be  f-jDifter  in  Bodies  thmi  in  Vacuo  in 
the  proportion  of  the  Sines  iz'hich  me  a  Jure  the 
Refraition  of  the  Bodies  ^  the  Forces  of  the 
Bodies  to  refleB  and  refraB  Lights  are  very 
nearly  proportional  'to  the  denfities  of  the 
fame  Bodies^  excepting  that  unBuous  and  ful- 
phureous  Bodies  refra6i  more  than  others  of 
this  fame  denfity. 

LE  T  AB  reprefent  the  refracting  plane  Sur- 
face of  any  Body,  and  IC  a  Ray  incident 
very  obliquely  upon  the  Body  in  C,  fo  that  the 


^ 


Angle  AC  I  may  be  infinitely  little,  and  letCR 
be  the  refrafted  Ray.  From  a  given  Point  B 
perpendicular  to  the  refrad ing  Surface  ereft  BR 
meeting  with  the  refraded  Ray  C  R  in  R,  and 
if  CR  reprefent  the  Motion  of  the  refrafted 
Ra}^  and  this  Motion  be  diftinguifli'd  into  two 
Motions  CB  and  BR,  whereof  CB  is  paral- 

R  3^  lei 


I  2+^  ] 

iel  to  the  refra61ing  Plane,  and  B  R  perpendi- 
cular to  it :    C  B  fliall  reprefent  the  Motion  of 
the  incident  Ray,  and  B  R  the  Motion  genera- 
ted by  the  Refraftioii,  as  Opticians  have  of  late      , 
explain'd.  I 

Now  if  any  Body  or  thing,  in  moving  through 
any  Space  of  a  given  breadth  terminated  on 
both  lides  by  two  parallel  Planes,  be  urged  for^? 
ward  in  all  parts  of  that  Space  by  Forces  tend- 
ing direftly  forwards  towards  the  latl  Plane,  and 
before  its  Incidence  on  the  iirfl  Plane ,  had  no 
Motion  towards  it,   or  but  an  infinitely  little 
one ;  and  if  the  Forces  in  all  parts  of  that  Space, 
between  the  Planes  be  at  equal  diftances  from 
ithe  Planes  equal  to  one  another,  but  at  leveral 
diitances  be  bigger  or  lefs  in  any  given  Propor- 
tion, the  Motion  generated  by  the  Forces  in 
the  whole  pafiage  of  the  Body  or  thing  through 
that  Space  lliall  be  in  a  fubdupHcate  Proportion 
of  the  Forces,   as  Mathematicians   will  eafily 
underftand.  And  therefore  if  the  Space  of  acti- 
vity of  the  refrading  Superficies  of  the  Body 
be  confider'd  as  fuch  a  Space,    the  Motion  of 
the  Ray  generated  by  the  refracting  Force  of 
the  Body,  during  its  pafiage  through  that  Space, 
that  is  the  Motion  B  R,  muft  be  in  a  fubdupli- 
cate  Proportion  of  that  refrading  Force.    I  fay 
therefore  that  the  Square  of  the  Line  B  R,  and 
by  confequence  the  refrafting  Force  of  the  J^o-  £ 
dy  is  very  nearly  as  the  denfityof  the  fame  Bo-  ^ 
dy.    For  this  will  appear  by  the  following  Ta- 
ble, wherein  the  Proportion  of  the  Sines  which 
meafure  the  Refractions  of  feveral  Bodies,  the 
Square  of  B  R  fuppofing  C  B  an  unite,  the  Den- 

fitics 


[  247 

fitics  of  the  Bodies  elliPxiatec 
gravities,  and  their  refradive  Power  in  re.p.d   # 
of  their  denfities  are  fet  down  in  feveral  Co- 
lumns. 


by  their  fpecifick 


The  Proporf.ii^ 

rheS.juare 

Lhi   den- 

l,?e   rc- 

of  the  Sines  of 

OfbRytO 

ftty    ami 

fraciivt 

Incidence 

a77d 

xuhich 

fpecificK 

PvWer 

The  refracfting  Bo- 

Refraclion   of 

the  refra- 

gnavitj 

of  the 

dies. 

yellozv  Li 

Sht. 

tlingjorci. 

oftheBo- 

Body   in 

of  the  Bo- 

dy. 

reffect 

dy  is  pro 

of  id 

portiunaie 

denftiy. 

A  Pleudo-Topazius, 

being    a    natural , 

pellucid  ,    britt  e , 

12  to 

14 

I  '6()<) 

4'i7 

3979 

hairy  Stone,  of  a 

yellow  Colour. 

Air. 

3ZOI  to  3 

20c  000062  5 

0'C0I2 

5208 

Glafs  of  Antimony, 

17  to 

pli'S^S 

5-28 

4864 

\  Se'enitis. 

6i  to 

4J 

r2i3 

2-252 

5386 

GUIs  vulvar. 

31  to 

20 

l'402J 

2-58 

S436 

Cryltal  of  the  Rock. 

IS  to 

16 

t'44S 

2-6  J 

5450 

Illand  Cryllal. 

5  to 

3 

i'778 

2'72 

6536 

Sal  Gemma;.' 

17  to 

11 

■•388 

2-143' 

^477 

\lurae. 

3i  fo 

i4 

t'1267 

i"7i4 

6570 

3orax. 

22,  to 

IS 

I'lSii 

i'7i4 

6716 

Nicer. 

32,  to 

2ir34s 

I '9 

7079 

Danr^,ick  Vitriol. 

303  to 

2oO|r'295 

i'7rs 

7S5t 

Oil  of  Vitriol. 

ro  to 

7  I '04: 

i'7 

6124 

Rain  Wa.er. 

S29  to 

396o'7845 

i' 

7845 

Gum  Arabick. 

31  to 

2i>'i79 

i'37J 

8S74 

>pirit  of  Win€  well 
reftified. 

100  to 

73o'8765 

0^66 

I0I2I 

"amphire. 

3.  fo 

2  I'lj 

9996 

12551 

Oil  Olive. 

21  to 

15  I'isii 

6'9i3 

.  12607 

Linfeed  Oil. 

40  to 

27i'i948 

0-932 

I2819 

>piric  of  Turpentine. 

25  to 

17  i':626 

o'874 

13222 

\mbar. 

14  to 

9  ''42- 

ro4 

n^s4 

\  Diamond. 

100  to 

41  4'049 

V4         '   U^S*^  ( 

The  ReR-aftion  of  the  Air  in  this  Table  is  de- 
termin'd  by  that  of  the  Atmofphere  obferved 

R  4  by 


[  248  ] 

by  Aftronomers.  For  if  Light  pafs  through 
many  refracting  Subftances  or  Mediums  gradu- 
ally denfer  and  denfer,  and  terminated  with 
parallel  Surfaces,  the  fum  of  all  the  Refractions 
will  be  equal  to  the  fingle  Refradion  which  it 
would  have  fuffer'd  in  pafling  immediately  out 
of  the  tirft  Medium  into  the  lall.  And  this  holds 
true,  though  the  number  of  the  refracting  bub- 
fiances  be  increafed  to  infinity,  and  the  dilian^ 
ces  from  onp  another  as  much  decreaied ,  fo 
that  the  Light  may  be  refracted  in  every  point 
of  its  PafTage,  and  by  continual  Pvefra'R:ions  bent 
into  a  curve  Line.  ■  And  therefore  the  whole 
Rcfradion  of  Light  in  palTing  through  the  At- 
moiphere  from  the  highell  and  rareit  part  there- 
of dov/n  to  the  low  ell  and  denfefl  part,  muit 
be  equal  to  the  Refraftion  which  it  would  fuf- 
fer  in  pafling  at  Hke  obliquity  out  of  a  Vacuum 
immediately  into  Air  of  equal  denfity  with  that 
in  the  Igwefl  part  of  the  Atmofphere. 

Now,  although  a  Pfeudo-Topaz,  a  Selenitis, 
Rock  Cryital,  Ifland  Cryflal,  Vulgar  Glafs 
(that  is,  Sand  melted  together)  and  Glafs  of 
Antimony,  which  are  terrcllrial  flony  alcalizate 
Concretes,  and  Air  which  probably  arifes  from 
fuch  Subllances  by  FermaCntation,  be  Subftan- 
ces  very  differing  from  one  another  in  denfity, 
yet  by  this  Table ,  they  have  their  rcfradive 
Powers  almoil  in  the  fame  proportion  to  one 
another  as  their  denfities  are,  excepting  that 
the  Refradion  of  that  llrange  Subllance  Illand 
Cryital  is  a  little  bigger  than  the  relt.  And 
particularly  Air,  which  is  3500  times  rarer  than 
the  Pfeudo-Topaz,  and  4400  times  rarer  than 

Glafs 


[24-9  ] 

Glafs  of  Antimony,  and  2000  times  rarer  than 
the  Selenitis ,  Glafs  vulgar ,  or  Cryllal  of  the 
Rock,  has  notwithitanding  its  rarity  the  fame 
rcfradive  Power  in  refpet^t  of  its  denlity  which 
thoie  very  dcnle  Suitances  have  in  relped  of 
theirs,  excepting  fo  far  as  thofe  differ  from  one 
another. 

Again,  theRefradion  of  Camphn-e,  Oil  Olive, 
Linfeed  Oil,  Spirit  of  Turpentine  andAmbar, 
which  are  fat  fulphureous  unctuous  Bodies,  and 
a  Diamond,  which  probably  is  an  unduousSub- 
llance  coagulated,  have  their  refraftive  Powers 
in  proportion  to  one  another  as  their  denfities 
without  any  confiderable  variation.  But  the 
refradive  Powers  of  thefe  unduous  Subftances 
are  two  or  three  times  greater  in  refped  of  their 
denfities  than  the  refractive  Powers  of  the  for- 
mer Subilances  in  refpeft  of  theirs. 

Water  has  a  refra(!:iive  Power  in  a  middle  de- 
gree between  thofe  two  forts  of  Subilances, 
and  probably  is  of  a  middle  nature.  For  out 
of  it  grow  all  vegetable  and  animal  Subftances, 
which  confift  as  well  of  fulphureous  fat  and  in- 
flamable  parts,  as  of  earthy  lean  and  alcalizate 
ones. 

Salts  and  Vitriols  have  rcfradive  Powers  in  a 
middle  degree  betw^een  thofe  of  earthy  Sub- 
ftances and  Water,  and  accordingly  are  com- 
pofed  of  thofe  two  forts  of  Subflances.  For 
by  diftillation  and  rcdiHcation  of  their  Spirits  a 
great  part  of  them  goes  into  Water,  and  a  great 
part  remains  behind  in  the  form  of  a  dry  fix'd 
Earth  capable  of  vitritication. 

Spirit 


[25o] 


Spirit  of  Wine  has  a  refraclive  Power  in  a 
middle  degree  between  thofe  of  Water  and 
oily  Subtlances,  and  accordingly  feems  to  be 
compofed  of  both,  united  by  Fermentation; 
the  Water,  by  means  of  ibme  laline  Spirits  with 
which  'tis  impregnated,  dilFolving  the  Oil,  and 
volatizing  it  by  the  adion.  For  Spirit  of  Wine 
is  intlamable  by  means  of  its  oily  parts,  and  be- 
ing dillilled  often  from  Salt  of  Tartar,  grows 
by  every  dillillation  more  and  more  aqueous 
and  phlegmatick.  And  Chymifrs  obierve,  that 
Vegetables  (as  Lavender,  Rue,  Marjoram,  &c.) 
diftillcd/^ry?,  before  fermentation  yield  Oils 
without  any  burning  Spirits,  but  after  fermen- 
tation yield  ardent  Spirits  without  Oils:  Which 
ihews,  that  their  Oil  is  by  fermentation  con- 
verted into  Spirit.  They  find  alfo,  that  if  Oils 
be  poured  in  fmall  quantity  upon  fermentating 
Vegetables,  they  diitil  over  after  fermentation 
in  the  form  of  Spirits. 

So  then,  by  the  foregoing  Table,  all  Bodies 
feem  to  have  their  refractive  Powers  propor- 
tional to  their  denfities,  ( or  very  nearly ; )  ex- 
cepting fo  far  as  they  partake  more  or  lefs  of 
fulphureous  oily  Particles,  and  thereby  have  their 
refradive  Power  made  greater  or  lefs.  Whence 
it  feems  rational  to  attribute  the  refradive  Pow- 
er of  all  Bodies  chiefly,  if  not  wholly,  to  the 
fulphureous  parts  with  which  they  abound.  For 
it's  probable  that  all  Bodies  abound  more  or  lefs 
with  Sulphurs.  And  as  Light  congregated  by 
a  Burning-glafs  a6ts  moll  upon  fulphureous  Bo- 
dies, to  turn  them  into  Fire  and  Flame ;  fo, 
lince  all  aftion  is  mutual,  Sulphurs  ought  to  aft 

moll 


[  251  ] 
iiioft  upon  Light.  For  that  the  adion  between 
Light  and  Bodies  is  mutual,  may  appear  from 
this  Confideration ;  That  the  denfell  Bodies 
which  refrad:!:  and  refleCl  Light  molt  ftrongly 
grow  hottelt  in  the  Summer  Sun,  by  the  adipn 
of  the  refrafted  or  refleftcd  Light. 

I  have'  hitherto  explained  the  Power  of  Bo- 
dies to  refled  and  refrac!:!:,  and  fliew'd,  that  thin 
tranfparent  "Plates,  Fibres  and  Particles  do,  ac- 
cording to  their  feveral  thicknelles  and  denfl- 
ties,  refleft  feveral  forts  of  Rays,  and  thereby 
appear  of  feveral  Colours,  and  by  confequence 
that  nothing  more  is  rcquifite  for  producing  all 
the  Colours  of  natural  Bodies  than  the  feveral 
fizesand  denfities  of  their  tranfparent  Particles. 
But  whence  it  is  that  thefe  Plates,  Fibres  and 
Particles  do,  according  to  their  feveral  thick- 
neifes  and  deniities,  retiecl:  feveral  forts  of  Rays, 
I  have  not  yet  explain'd.  To  give  fome  infighc 
into  this  matter,  and  make  way  for  underlland- 
ing  the  next  part  of  this  Book,  I  iliall  conclude 
this  Part  with  a  few  more  Propofitions.  Thofc 
which  preceded  refpc61  the  nature  of  Bodies, 
thefe  the  nature  of  Light:  For  both  mull:  be 
underdood  before  the  reafon  of  their  actions 
upon  one  another  can  be  known.  And  becaufe 
the  lailPropofition  depended  upon  the  velocity 
of  Light,  I  will  begin  with  a  Propofition  of  that 
kind. 


Pro 


p. 


[252] 

Prop.     XL 

Light  is  propagated  from  luminom  Bodies  in 
time  ^  and  fp ends  about  fev en  or  eight  Mi- 
nutes of  an  Hcnir  in  pafjing  from  the  Sun  to 

'  the  Earth. 

THIS  was  obferved  firfl  by /^i^fp^^T,  and 
and  then  by  others,  by  means  of  the  E- 
clipies  of  the  Satellites  oi  Jupiter.  For  thefe 
Eclipfes,  wiien  the  Earth  is  between  the  Sun 
and  Jupiter.,  happen  about  feven  or  eight  Mi- 
nutes fooner  than  they  ought  to  do  by  the  Ta- 
bles ,  and  when  the  Earth  is  beyond  the  Sun 
they  happen  about  feven  or  eight  Minutes  later 
than  they  ought  to  do  ;  the  reafon  being,  that 
the  Light  of  the  Satellites  has  farther  to  go  in 
the  latter  cafe  than  in  the  former  by  the  Dia- 
meter of  the  Earth's  Orbit.  Some  inequalities 
of  time  may  arife  from  theExcentricities  of  the 
Orbs  of  the  Satellites ;  but  thofe  cannot  anfwer 
in  all  the  SateUites,  and  at  all  times  to  the  po- 
fition  and  diftance  of  the  Earth  from  the  Sun. 
The  mean  motions  of  Jupiter\  Satellites  is  alfo 
fwifter  in  his  defcent  from  his  Aphelium  to  his 
Perihelium,  than  in  his  afcent  in  the  other  half 
of  his  Orb :  But  this  inequality  has  no  refpeft 
to  the  pofition  of  the  Earth ,  and  in  the  three 
interior  Satellites  is  infenfible,  as  I  find  by  com- 
putation from  the  Theory  of  their  gravity. 


Prop. 


[  253  ] 

Prop.     XH. 

Every  Ray  of  Light  in  its  ^ajfage  through  any 
refraBing  Surface  is  put  into  a  certain  tran-^ 
Jient  Conftitution  or  StatCy  ijuhich  in  the  pro- 
grej^  of  the  Ray  returns  at  equal  Intervals,, 
and  difpofes  the  Ray  at  every  return  to  be 
eajily  tranfmitted  through  the  next  refradiing 
Surface^  and  between  the  returns  to  be  eajily 
reflected  by  it. 

THIS  is  manifeft  by  the  5-111,  yth,  nth, 
and  i^thObfervations.  For  by  thole  Ob- 
fervations  it  appears,  that  one  and  the  fame 
fort  of  Rays  at  equal  Angles  of  Incidence  on  a- 
ny  thin  tranfparent  Plate,  is  alternately  reflect- 
ed and  tranfmitted  for  many  Succellions  accor- 
dingly as  the  thicknefs  of  the  Plate  increafes 
in  arithmetical  Progreflion  of  the  Numbers,  o, 

I,  2,  3,  4,  5",  6,  7,  8,  ^c.  fo  that  if  the  firft  Re- 
flexion ( that  which  makes  the  firll  or  inner- 
moft  of  the  Rings  of  Colours  there  defcribed) 
be  made  at  the  thicknefs  i,  the  Rays  fliall  be 
tranfmitted  at  the  thickneffes  o,  2,  4,  6,  8,  10, 
12,  ^c.  and  thereby  make  the  central  Spot  and 
Rings  of  Light ,  which  appear  by  tranfmifhon, 
and  be  reflected  at  the  thicknefs  i,  3,  $,  7,  9, 

II,  ^c.  and  thereby  make  the  Rings  which 
appear  by  Reflexion.  And  this  alternate  Re- 
flexion andTranfmiffion,  as  I  gather  by  the  24th 
Obfervation ,  continues  for  above  an  hundred 
viciflitudes,  and  by  the  Obfervations  in  the  next 
part  of  this  Book,  for  many  thoufands,  being 
propagated  from  one  Surface  of  a  Glafs  Plate  to 

the 


[254] 

the  other,  though  the  thicknefs  of  the  Plate  be 
a  quarter  of  an  Inch  or  above  :    So  that  this  al- 
ternation feems  to  be  propagated  from  every 
refracting  Surface  to  all  dillances  without  end. 
or  limitation. 

This  alternate  Reflexion  and  Refraction  de- 
pends on  both  the  Surfaces  of  every  thin  Plate, 
becaufe  it  depends  on  their  dillance.  By  the 
21ft  Obfervation,  if  either  Surface  of  a  thin 
Plate  of  Mufcovy  Glafs  be  wetted,  the  Colours 
caufed  by  the  alternate  Reflexion  and  Refra- 
ction grow  faint ,  and  therefore  it  depends  on 
them  both. 

.  It  is  therefore  performed  at  the  fecond  Sur- 
face; for  if  it  were  pcrform'd  at  the  firft,  be- 
fore the  Rays  arrive  at  the  fecond,  it  would 
not  depend  on  the  fecond. 

It  is  alfo  influenced  by  fome  aftioil  or  difpo- 
fition,  propagated  from  the  firft  to  the  fecond, 
becaufe  otherwife  at  the  fecond  it  would  not 
depend  on  the  firfh  And  this  aftion  or  difpo- 
fition,  in  its  propagation,  intermits  and  returns 
by  equal  Intervals,  becaufe  in  all  its  progrefs  it 
inclines  the  Ray  at  one  diilance  from  the  tirll 
Surface  to  be  refleCled  by  the  fecond ,  at  ano- 
ther to  be  tranfmitted  by  it,  and  that  by  equal 
Intervals  for  innumerable  viciffitudes.  And  be- 
caufe the  Ray  is  difpofed  to  Reflexion  at  the 
dillances  i,  3,  5-,  7,  9,  ^c  and  to  TranfmilTion 
at  the  difl:ances  o,  i,  4,  6,  8,  10,  ^c.  (for  its 
tranfmilFion  through  the  firlt  Surface,  is  at  the 
diilance  o,  and  it  is  tranfmitted  through  both 
together,  if  their  diilance  be  infinitely  little  or 
much  lefs  than  i )  the  difpofition  to  be  tranf- 
mitted 


.[255] 

mitted  at  the  diflances  2,  4,  6,  8,  lo,  ^r.  is  to 
be  accounted  a  return  of  the  fame  dilpofitioii 
which  the  Ray  firft  had  at  the  diilance  c,  that  is 
at  its  tranfniiilion  through  the  tirll  refracting 
Surface.  All  which  is  the  :hing  I  would  prove. 
What  kind  of  a^Hon  or  dilpofuion  this  is; 
Whether  it  confifrs  in  a  circulating  or  a  vibra- 
ting motion  of  the  Ray,  or  of  the  Medium,  or 
fomething  elfe,  I  do  not  here  enquire.  Thofe 
that  are  averfe  from  aOenting  to  any  new  Dif- 
coveries,  but  fuch  as  they  can  explain  by  an 
Hypothecs,  may  for  the  prefcnt  fuppofe,  that 
as  Stones  by  falling  upon  Water  put  the  Water 
into  an  undulating  Motion,  and  all  Bodies  by 
percuilion  excite  vibrations  in  the  Air;  fo  the 
Rays  of  Light,  by  impinging  on  any  refrading 
or  reflec^Ung  Surface ,  excite  vibrations  in  the 
refracting  or  refledting  Medium  or  Subllance, 
and  by  exciting  them  agitate  the  folid  parts  of 
the  refrading  or  refleding  Bodv,  and  by  agita- 
ting them  caufe  the  Body  to  grow  warm  or 
hot;  that  the  vibrations  thus  excited  are  pro- 
pagated in  the  refracting  or  reile^ting  Medium 
or  Subftance,  much  after  the  manner  that  vibra- 
tions are  propagated  in  the  Air  for  caufmg 
Sound,  and  move  filter  than  the  Rays  fo  as  to 
overtake  them ;  and  that  when  any  Ray  is  in 
that  part  of  the  vibration  which  confpires  with 
its  Motion,  it  eafily  breaks  through  a  refradting 
Surface,  but  when  it  is  in  the  contrary  part  of 
the  vibration  which  impedes  its  Motion,  it  is 
eafily  refleded ;  and,  by  confequence,  that  e- 
very  Ray  is  fuccellively  difpofed  to  be  eafily  re- 
flected J  or  eafily  tranfmitted ,  by  every  vibra- 
tion 


[256] 


tion  which  overtakes  it.  But  whether  this  Fly^ 

Fothefis  be  true  or  falfe  I  do  not  here  conlider. 
content  my  felf  with  the  bare  Difcovery,  that 
the  Rays  of  Light  are  by  fome  caufe  or  other 
alternately  difpofed  to  be  refleded  or  refrad- 
ed  for  many  viciflitudes. 

D  E  F  I  N  I  T  I  O  NT. 

The  returns,  of  the  dlfpofitton  of  any  Ray  to 
be  reflected  I  will  call  its  Fits  of  eafy  Re- 
flexion, and  thofe  of  its  difpofition  to  be 
tranfmitted  its  Fits  of  eafy  Tranfmiflion, 
ajid  the  Jpace  it  pafes  betijueen  every  re^ 
turn  and  the  next  return^  the  Interval  of 
its  Fits. 


R  O   p. 


XIII. 


The  reafon  why  the  Surfaces  of  all  thick  tranf 
parent  Bodies  refleci  part  of  the  Light  itici- 
dent  on  them^  and  refraEl  the  reft,  is,  that 
fome  Rays  at  their  Incidence  are  in  Fits  of 
eafy  Reflexion,  and  others  in  Fits  of  eajy 
Tranfmifflon. 

THIS  may  be  gathered  from  the  14th  Ob- 
fervation,  where  the  Light  refleded  by 
thin  Plates  of  Air  and  Glafs,  which  to  the  naked 
Eye  appear'd  evenly  white  all  over  the  Plate, 
did  through  a  Prifm  appear  waved  with  many 
Succeffions  of  Light  and  Darknefs  made  by  al- 
ternate Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion  and  eafy  Tranf- 
milTion,  the  Prifm  fevering  and  diitinguiihing 
the  Waves  of  which  the  white  refleded  Light 
was  compofed,  as  was  explain'd  above. 

And 


[257] 

And  hence  Light  is  in  Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion 
and  eafy  TranfmiiEon,  before  its  Incidence  on 
tranfparent  Bodies.  And  probably  it  is  put  in- 
to fuch  Fits  at  its  firll  emiiiion  from  luminous 
Bodies,  and  continues  in  them  during  all  its 
progrefs.  For  thefe  Fits  are  of  a  lalling  nature, 
as  will  appear  by  the  next  part  of  this  Book. 

In  this  Propofition  I  fuppofe  the  tranfparent 
Bodies  to  be  thick,  becauie  if  the  thicknefs  of 
the  Body  be  much  lefs  than  the  Interval  of  the 
Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion  and  Tranfmidion  of  the 
Rays,  the  Body  lofeth  its  reflecting  power.  For 
if  the  Rays ,  which  at  their  entering  into  the 
Body  are  put  into  Fits  of  eafy  Tranfmiilion,  ar- 
rive at  the  fartheit  Surface  of  the  Body  before 
they  be  out  of  thofe  Fits  they  mufl  be  tranfmit- 
ted.  And  this  is  the  reafon  why  Bubbles  of 
Water  lofe  their  refledling  power  when  they 
grow  very  thin,  and  why  all  opaivC  Bodies  when 
reduced  into  very  fmall  parts  become  tranfpa- 
rent. 

Prop.    XIV, 

Thofe  Surfaces  of  tranfparent  Bodies^  which  if 
the  Ray  be  in  a  Fit  of  Refratfion  do  refraif 
it  moft  firongly^  if  the  Ray  be  in  a  Fit  ofRe-y 
flexion  do  reflet  it  moft  eafily, 

FOR  we  fhewed  above  mTrop.  8.  that  the 
caufe  of  Reflexion  is  not  the'impin  ingof 
Light  on  the  iolid  impervious  parts  of  Bodies, 
but  fome  other  Power  by  which  thofe  loKd 
parts  act  on  Light  at  a  diilance.  We  Ihewed 
alfo  in  Trojf,  9.  that  Bodies  refled  ^d  refraitt 

S  Ligat 


[258] 

Light  by  one  and  the  fame  Power  varioiiflyex- 
ercifed  in  various  circumitances,  andin'Pr^/.i. 
that  the  moft  ftrongly  refrading  Surfaces  refledl 
the  moft  Light :  All  which  compared  together 
evince  and  ratify  both  this  and  the  lail  Propo- 
fition. 

Prop.     XV. 

In  any  one  and  the  fame  fort  of  Rays  emerging 
in  any  Angle  out  of  any  re  framing  Surface  in- 
to one  and  the  fame  Medium^  the  Interval  of 
the  follo'wing  Fits  of  eaf^  Reflexion  andTranf 
mifjion  are  either  accurately  or  very  nearly^ 
as  the  Re 61  angle  of  the  Secant  of  the  Angle  of 
RefraBion,  and  of  the  Secant  of  another  An- 
gle^ 'whofe  Sine  is  the  fir  ft  of  \o6  arithmetical 
mean  Proportionals^  between  the  Sines  of  In- 
cidence and  Ref  ration  counted  from  the  Sine 
of  Refra^ion. 


T 


HIS  is  manifefl  by  the  7th  and  19th  Ob- 
fervations. 


Prop. 


i 


[  259  ] 

Prop.     XVI. 

In  fever al  forts  of  Rays  emerging  in  equal  An- 
gles out  of  any  refrafling  Surface  into  the 
fame  Medium^  the  Intervals  of  the  following 
Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion  and  eajy  Tranfrnifflon 
are  either  accurately^  or  very  nearly -^  as  the 
Cube-Roots  of  the  Squares  of  the  lengths  of  a, 
Chord  y  which  found  the  Notes  in  an  Eighty 
fol,  la,  fa,  fol,  la,  mi,  fa,  fol,  with  all  their 
intermediate  degrees  anfwering  to  the  Colours 
of  thofe  Rays,  according  to  the  Analogy  de- 
fer ibed  in  the  feventh  Experiment  of  the  fe^ 
■  cond  I^art  of  the  firfl  Book. 

HIS  is  manifeft  by  the  13th and  i4thOb'^ 

fervatioiis. 

Prop.     XVH. 

If  Rays  of  any  fort  pafs  perpendicularly  into 
fever  al  Mediums  ,  the  Intervals  of  the  Fits 
of  eafy  Reflexion  and  Tranfrnifflon  in  any  one 
Medium^  are  to  thofe  Intervals  in  any  other 
as  the  Sine  of  Incidence  to  the  Sine  of  Re f ra- 
tion, when  the  Rays  paj^  out  of  the  firfl  of 
thofe  two  Mediums  into  the  fecond, 

This  is  manifeil  by  the  lothObferv^tion, 


T 


P  R  O  P^ 


[  2^0 1 

Prop.    XVffl. 

If  the  Rays  which  faint  the  Colour  in  the  Con- 
fine of  yellow  arid  orange  fafs  perpendicularly 
out  of  any  Medium  into  Air^  the  Intervals  of 

their  Fits  of  eaCy  Reflexion  are  the th 

J      -^      J  89000 

fart  of  an  Inch.     And  of  the  fame  length  are 

the  Intervals  of  their  Fits  of  eajy  Tranfmif 

Jion. 

THIS  is  manifeft  by  the  6th  Obfervation. 
From  thefe  Propofitions  it  is  eafy  to  col- 
lect the  Intervals  of  the  Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion 
and  eafy  Tranfmiflion  of  any  fort  of  Rays  re- 
framed  in  any  Angle  into  any  Medium ,  and 
thence  to  know,  whether  the  Kays  ihall  be  re- 
flected or  tranfmitted  at  their  fubfequent  Inci- 
dence upon  any  other  pellucid  Medium.  Which 
thing  being  ufeful  for  underftanding,  the  next 
part  of  this  Book  was  here  to  be  fet  down.  And 
for  the  fame  reafon  I  add  the  two  following 
Propofitions,    . 


P  R  O  P« 


[26l] 

Prop.    XIX. 

If  any  fort  of  Rays  falling  on  the  -polite  Surface 
of  any  pellucid  Medium  be  rejle&ed  hack^  the 
Fits  of  eajy  Reflexion  'u;hich  they  have  at  the 
^oint  of  Reflexion  y  jh  all  ft  ill  continue  to  re* 
turn,  and  the  returns  Jhall  be  at  diftance^ 
from  the  point  of  Reflexion  in  the  arithmetic 
cal  progreflion  of  the  Numbers  1,  4,  6,  8,  10, 
12,  d:G.  and  befjuecn  thefe  Fits  the  Rays  fl? all 
be  in  Fits  of  eajy  Tranfmiffion. 

17^ OR  fmce  the  Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion  and 
^  cafy  Tranfmiflioii  are  of  a  returning  na- 
ture, there  is  no  reafon  why  thefe  Fits,  which 
continued  till  the  Ray  arrived  at  the  refleding 
Medium,  and  there  inclined  the  Ray  to  Refle- 
xion, fliould  there  ceafe.  And  if  the  Ray  at 
the  point  of  Reflexion  was  in  a  Fit  of  eafy  Re- 
flexionj  the  progreflion  of  the  difl:ances  of  thefe 
Fits  from  that  point  mult  begin  from  o,  and  fo 
be  of  the  Numbers  o,  2,  4,  6,  8,  ^c.  And 
therefore  the  jprogreflLion  of  the  diftances  of  the 
intermediate  Fits  of  eafy  Tranfmiflion  reckon'd 
from  the  fame  point,  mufl:  be  in  the  progreflion 
of  the  odd  Numbers  i,  3,  5-,  7,  9,  iSc.  contra- 
ry to  what  happens  when  the  fits  are  propaga- 
ted from  points  of  Refradion. 


Pro  p. 


[  2^2  1 


Prop.     XX. 

The  Intervals  of  the  Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion  and 
eajy  TranfmiJ/Ioji^  propagated  from  points  of 
Reflexion  into  any  Medium^  are  equal  to  the 
Intervals  of  the  like  Fits  which  the  fame 
Rays  would  have^  if  refracted  into  the  fame 
Medium  in  Angles  ofRefradlion  equal  to  their 
Jingles  of  Reflexion. 

FOR  when  Light  is  refiedcd  by  the  fecond 
Surface  of  thin  Plates,  it  goes  out  after- 
wards freely  at  the  firft  Surface  to  make  the 
Rings  of  Colours  which  appear  by  Reflexion, 
and  by  the  freedom  of  its  egrefs ,  makes  the 
Colours  of  thefe  Rings  more  vivid  and  ftrong 
than  thofe  which  appear  on  the  other  fide  of 
the  Plates  by  the  tranlmitted  Light.  The  re- 
flc^ied  Rays  arc  therefore  in  Fits  of  cafy  Trarif- 
niillion  at  their  egrefs ;  which  would  not  always 
happen,  if  the  Intervals  of  the  Fits  within  the 
Plate  after  Reflexion  were  not  equal  both  in 
length  and  number  to  their  hitcrvals  before  it. 
And  this  confirms  alio  the  Proportions  let  down 
in  the  former  Propoiition.  For  if  the  Rays 
both  in  going  in  and  out  at  .the  firll  Surface  be 
in  Fits  of  caly  Tranfmiflion ,  and  the  hitervals 
and  Numbers  of  thofe  Fits  between  the  firil 
and  fecond  Surface,  before  and  after  Reflexion, 
be  equal  ;  the  diihmces  of  the  Fits  of  eafy 
TranimilTion  from  either  Surface,  mull  be  in 
the  fame  progrefFion  after  Reflexion  as  before  ; 
that  is,  from  the  firft  Surface  which  tranfmit- 
ted  them,  in  the  progreilion  of  the  even  Num- 
bers 


[2^3] 


bers  o,  2,  4,  6,  8,  ^c.  and  from  the  fecond 
which  reflected  them,  in  that  of  the  odd  Num- 
bers I,  3,  5",  7,  ^r.  But  thefe  two  Propo- 
fitions  will  become  much  more  evident  by  the 
Oblervations  in  the  following  part  of  this 
Book. 


THE 


[2^4] 


THE 

SECOND  BOOK 

OPTIC  KS. 

PART    IV. 

Obfervatwns  concerning  the  Reflexions  and  Co- 
lours  of  thick  tr  an  [par  ent  ^olijy  delates. 

jHERE  is  no  Glafs  or  Speculum  how 
well  foevcr  polifh'd,  buc,  befides  the 
Light,  which  it  refracts  or  refleds  re- 
gularly, fcatters  every  way  irregularly 
a  faint  Light ,  by  means  of  which  the  polilh'd 
Surface,  w  hen  illuminated  in  a  dark  room'  by  a 

beam 


beam  of  the  Sun's  Light ,  may  be  eafily  feen  in 
all  politions  of  the  Eye.  There  are  certain 
Phasnomena  of  this  fcatter'd  Light,  which  when 
I  firil  obferved  them,  feem'd  veryilrange  and 
furprifmg  to  me.  My  Obfervations  w^ere  as  fol- 
lows. 

Obf.i.  T*he  Sun  fliining  into  my  darkened 
Chamber  through  a  hole  one  third  of  an  Inch 
wide,  I  let  the  intromitted  beam  of  Light  fall 
perpendicularly  upon  a  Glafs  Speculum  ground 
concave  on  one  fide  and  convex  on  the  other, 
to  a  Sphere  of  five  Feet  and  eleven  Inches  Ra- 
dius, and  Quick-filver'd  over  on  the  convex 
fide.  And  holding  a  white  opake  Chart,  or  a 
Quire  of  Paper  at  the  center  of  the  Spheres  to 
which  the  Speculum  was  ground,  that  is,  at  the 
diltance  of  about  five  Feet  and  eleven  Inches 
from  the  Speculum,  in  fuch  manner,  that  the 
beam  of  Light  might  pafs  through  a  little  hole 
made  in  the  middle  of  the  Chart  to  the  Specu- 
lum, and  thence  be  reflc61ed  back  to  the  fame 
hole :  I  obferved  upon  the  Chart  four  or  five 
concentric  Irifes  or  Rings  of  Colours,  like  Rain- 
bows, encompafling  the  hole  much  after  the 
manner  that  thofe,  which  in  the  fourth  and  fol- 
lowing Obfervations  of  the  firfl  part  of  this  third 
Book  appear'd  between  the  Objedt-glafTes ,  en- 
compafled  the  black  Spot,  but  yet  larger  and 
fainter  than  thofe.  Thefe  Rings  as  they  grew 
larger  and  larger  became  diluter  and  fainter,  fo 
that  the  fifth  was  fcarce  vifible.  Yet  fome- 
times,  when  the  Sun  flione  very  clear,  there 
appear'd  faint  Lineaments  of  a  fixth  and  fe- 
venth.    If  the  diflance  of  the  Chart  from  the 

Specu- 


[  2^^  ] 

Speculum  was  much  greater  or  much  lefs  than 
that  of  fix  Feet ,  the  Rings  became  dilute  and 
vanilli'd.     And  if  the  diitance  of  the  Speculum 
from  the  Window  was  much  greater  than  that 
of  fix  Feet,  the  refleded  beam  of  Light  would 
be  fo  broad  at  the  diffance  of  lix  Feet  from  the' 
Speculum  where  the  Rings  appear'd,  as  to  ob- 
fcure  one  or  two  of  the  innermolt  Rings.  And 
therefore  I  ufually  placed  the  Speculum  at  a-  ^ 
bout  fix  Feet  from  the  Windov\^;  fo  that  its 
Focus  might  there  fall  in  with  the  center  of  its 
concavity  at  the  Rings  upon  the  Chart.    And. 
this  Poilure  is  always  to  be  underltood  in  the 
following  Obfervations  where  no  other  is .  ex- 
prefs'd. 

Obf.  1/  The  Colours  of  thefe  Rain-bows 
fuccecded  one  another  from  the  center  out- 
wards, in  the  fame  form  and  order  with  thofe 
which  were  made  in  the  ninth  Obfcrvation  of 
the  liril  Part  of  this  Book  by  Light  not  refled- 
ed,  but  tranfmit-ted  through  the  two  Obje<ft- 
glalFes.  For,  tirit,  there  was  in  their  common 
center  a  white  round  Spot  of  faint  Light,  fome- 
thing  broader  than  the  reflccfcd  beam  of  Light, 
which  beam  fometimes  fell  upon  the  middle  of 
the  Spot,  and  fometimes  by  a  little  incUnation 
of  the  Speculum  receded  from  the  middle,  and 
left  the  Spot  white  to  the  center. 

This  white  Spot  was  immediately  encompaf- 
fed  with  a  dark  grey  or  ruilet,  and  that  dark  grey 
with  the  Colours  of  the  hrlUris ;  which  Colour 
on  the  infide  next  the  dark  grey  were  a  little 
violet  and  indigo,  and  next  to  that  a  blue,  which' 
on  the  outildc  grew  pale,  and  th:n  lucceeded  a 

little 


[  2^7  ] 

little  grecnifh  yellow,  and  after  that  a  brighter 
yellow,  and  then  on  the  outward  edge  of  the 
Iris  a  red  which  on  the  outlide  inclined  to  pur- 
ple. 

This  Iris  was  immediately  encompafTed  with 
a  fecond,  whofe  Colours  were  in  order  from 
the  inlide  outwards,  purple,  blue,  green,  yel- 
low, light  red,  a  red  mix'd  with  purple. 

Then  immediately  foUow'd  the  Colours  of 
the  third  Iris,  \^^hich  were  in  order  outwards  a 
green  inclining  to  purple,  a  good  green,  and 
a  red  more  bright  than  that  of  the  former  Iris. 

The  fourth  and  fifth  Iris  feem'd  of  a  bluiih 
green  within ,  and  red  without ,  but  fo  faintly 
that  it  was  difficult  to  difcern  the  Colours. 

Obf.  3.  Meafuring  the  Diameters  of  thefe 
Rings  upon  the  Chart  as  accurately  as  I  could, 
I  found  them  alio  in  the  fame  proportion  to 
one  another  with  the  Rings  made  .by  Light 
tranfmitted  through  the  two  Objed-glallcs.  For 
the  Diameters  of  the  four  firll  of  the  bright 
Rings  meafured  between  the  brightelt  parts  of 
their  Orbits,  at  the  dillance  of  fix  Feet  from  the 
Speculum  were  it~,  24?  2,44,  34  Inches,  whofe 
Squares  are  in  arithmetical  progrellion  of  the 
numbers  i,  2,  3,  4.  If  the  white  circular  Spot 
in  the  middle  be  reckoned  amongft  the  Rings, 
and  its  central  Light,  where  it  feems  to  be  rhofl 
luminous,  be  put  equipollent  to  an  infinitely 
little  Ring ;  the  Squares  of  the  Diameters  of  the 
Rings  will  be  in  the  progrellion  o,  i,  2,  3,  4, 
^c.  I  meafured  alfo  the  Diameters  of  the  dark 
Circles  between  thefe  luminous  ones,  and  found 
their  Squares  in  the  progrellion  of  the  num- 
bers 


[  2^S   ] 


befs  4,  I',  ii,  3-',  &c.  the  Diameters  of  th^' 
lirll  four  at  the  diftance  of  fix  Feet  from  the 
Speculum,  being  i-V,  i-r^i  2,4,  3^^  Inches.  If 
the  diftance  of  the  Chart  from  the  Speculum 
was  increafed  or  diminiflied,  the  Diameters  of 
the  Circles  were  increafed  or  diminilhed  pro- 
portionally. 

OifJ^  4.  By  the  analogy  between  thefe  Rings 
and  thofe  defcribed  in  the  Obfervations  of  the 
liril  Part  of  this  Book,  I  fufpeded  that  there 
WTre  many  more  of  them  which  fpread  into 
one  another,  and  by  interfering  mix'd  their  Co- 
lours, and  diluted  one  another  fo  that  they 
could  not  be  feen  apart.  I  viewed  them  there- 
fore through  a  Prifm,  as  I  did  thofe  in  the  i4th 
Obfervation  of  the  firlt  Part  of  this  Book.  And 
when  the  Prifm  was  fo  placed  as  by  refrafting 
the  Light  of  their  mix'd  Colours  to  feparate 
them,  and  diflinguiih  the  Rings  from  one  ano- 
ther, as  it  did  thofe  in  that  Obfervation,  I  could 
then  fee  them  diilinder  than  before,  and  eafily 
number  eight  or  nine  of  them ,  and  fometimes 
twelve  or  thirteen.  And  had  not  their  Light 
been  fo  very  faint,  I  queftion  not  but  that  I 
might  have  feen  many  more. 

O^/?  5-.  Placing  a  Prifm  at  the  Window  to 
refraft  the  intromitted  beam  of  Lights  and  cafl 
the  oblong  Spedrum  of  Colours  on  the  Specu- 
lum :  I  covered  the  Speculum  with  a  black  Pa- 
per which  had  in  the  middle  of  it  a  hole  to  let 
any  one  of  the  Colours  pafs  through  to  the 
Speculum ,  whilfl  the  rell  were  intercepted  by 
the  Paper.  And  now  I  found  Rings  of  that  Co- 
lour only  which  fell  upon  the  Speculum.    If 

the' 


I  2^9  ] 


the  Speculum  was  illuminated  with  red,  the 
Rings  were  totally  red  with  dark  Intervals,  if 
with  blue  they  were  totally  blue,  and  fo  of  the 
other  Colours.  And  when  they  were  illumi- 
nated with  any  one  Colour,  the  Squares  of  their 
Diameters  mealured  between  their  mofl  lumi- 
nous parts,  were  in  the  arithmetical  progreiiion 
of  the  numbers  o,  i,  i,  3,  4,  and  the  Squares 
of  the  Diameters  of  their  dark  Intervals  in  the 
progreflion  of  t  e  intermediate  numbers  4,  i4, 
2,4,  34.  But  if  the  Colour  was  varied  they  va- 
ried their  magnitude.  In  the  red  they  were  lar- 
geft,  in  the  indigo  and  violet  lead,  and  in  the 
intermediate  Colours  yellow,  green  and  blue , 
they  were  of  feveral  intermediate  bignefles  an- 
fwering  to  the  Colour,  that  is,  greater  in  yel- 
low than  in  green,  and  greater  in  green  than  in 
blue,  And  hence  I  knew  that  when  the  Spe- 
culum was  illuminated  with  white  Light,  the 
^•ed  and  yellow  on  the  outfide  of  the  Rings  were 
produced  by  the  leati  refrangible  Rays,  and  the 
blue  and  violet  by  the  molt  refrangible,  and  that 
the  Colours  of  each  Ring  fpread  into  the  Co- 
lours of  the  neighbouring  Rings  on  either  fide, 
after  the  manner  explain'd  in  the  lirll  and  fe- 
cond  Part  of  this  Book,  and  by  mixing  diluted 
one  another  fo  that  they  could  not  be  diiiin- 
guiili'd,  unlefs  near  the  center  where  they  were 
lead  mix  d.  For  in  this  Obfervation  I  could 
fee  the  Rings  more  dillindly,  and  to  a  greater 
number  than  before,  being  able  in  the  yellow 
Light  to  number  eight  or  nine  of  them,  be- 
fides  a  faint  ihadow  of  a  tenth.  To  fatisfy  my 
lelf  ho\v  much  the  Colouvs  of  the  feveral  Rings 

1  fpread 


[  270  ] 


fprcad  into  one  another ,  I  meafured  the  Dia- 
meters of  the  fecond  and  third  Rings,  and  found 
them  when  made  by  the  Confine  of  the  red  and 
orange  to  be  to  the  fame  Diameters  when  made 
by  the  Confine  of  blue  and  indigo,  as  9  to  8, 
or  thereabouts.  For  it  was  hard  to  determine 
this  Proportion  accurately.  Alfo  the  Circles 
made  fucceflively  by  the  red,  yellow  and  green, 
differed  more  from  one  another  than  thofe  made 
fuccellivcly  by  the  green,  blue  and  indigo.  For 
the  Circle  made  by  the  violet  was  too  dark  to 
be  feen.  To  carry  on  the  computation,  let  us 
therefore  fuppofe  that  the  difierences  of  the 
Diameters  of  the  Circles  made  by  the  outmofl 
red,  the  Confine  of  red  and  orange,  the  Confine 
of  orange  and  yellow,  the  Confine  of  yellow 
and  green,  the^  Confine  of  green  and  blue,  the 
Confine  of  blue  and  indigo,  the  Confine  of  in- 
digo and  violet,  and  outmoit  violet,  are  in  pro- 
portion as  the  differences  of  the  lengths  of  a 
Monochord  which  found  the  Tones  in  an  Eight ; 
/?/,  la^  fa^  Jol,  la^  mi,  fa,  fol,  that  is ,  as  the 
numbers  -;,  —,  tV,  tt,  -^tVj  ^V?  tV.  And  if  the 
Diameter  of  the  Circle  made  by  the  Confine  of 
red  and  orange  be  9  A,  and  that  of  the  Circle 
made  by  the  Confine  of  blue  and  indigo  be  8  A 
as  above ;  their  difference  9  A — 8  A  will  be 
to  the  difference  of  the  Diameters  of  the  Cir- 
cles made  by  the  outniofl  red,  and  by  the  Con- 
fine of  red  and  orange,  as  -V  4-  V.-  4-  -V  +  -^Vto 
V,  that  is  as  4^  to  ^,  or  8  to  3,  and  to  the  diffe- 
rence of  the  Circles  made  by  the  out  moll  vio- 
let, and  by  the  Confine  of  blue  and  indigo,  as 
ttV  -i--'r  \--\  -f  ^V  ^o-V  -1-  ^o  that  is,  as  VT  to -^, 

or 


[271] 

or  as  1 6  to  y.  And  therefore  thefe  differences 
will  be  4  A  and  tV  A.  Add  the  firll  to  9  A  and 
fubdud  the  lall  from  8  A,  and  you  will  have  the 
Diameters  of  the  Circles  made  by  the  lealt  and 

mofi  refrangible  Rays  ^  A  and  -^  A.    Thefe 

Diametei's  are  therefore  to  one  another  as  75: 
to  6h  or  5*0  to  41,  and  their  Squares  as  zfoo 
to  1 68 1,. that  is,  as  3  to  x  very  nearly.  Which 
proportion  differs  not  much  from  the  propor- 
tion of  the  Diameters  of  the  Circles  made  by 
the  outmoll  red  and  outmoit  violet  in  the  13th 
Obfervation  of  the  lirlt  Part  of  this  Book. 

Oi^/^  6.  Placing  my  Eye  where  thefe  Rings 
appear'd  plaineil,  I  faw  the  Speculum  tinged  all 
over  withWaves  of  Colours  (red,  yellow,  green, 
blue ; )  hke  thofe  which  in  the  Obfervations  of 
the  firft  Part  of  this  Book  appeared  between 
the  Objed-glafles  and  upon  Bubbles  of  Water, 
but  much  larger.  And  after  the  manner  of  thofe, 
they  werp  of  various  Magnitudes  in  various  Po- 
fitions  of  the  Eye ,  fwelling  and  flirinking  as  I 
moved  my  Eye  this  way  and  that  way.  They 
were  formed  like  Arcs  of  concentrick  Circles  as 
thofe  were,  and  when  my  Eye  was  over  againll 
the  center  of  the  concavity  of  the  Speculum  (that 
IS,  5  Feet  and  lohiches  dillant  from  the  Specu- 
lum) their  common  center  was  in  a  right  Line 
with  that  center  of  concavity ,  and  with  the 
hole  in  the  Window..  But  in  other  poilures  of 
my  Eye  their  center  had  other  pofitions.  They 
appear'd  by  the  Light  of  the  Clouds  propagated 
to  the  Speculum  through  the  hole  in  the  Win- 
dow, and  when  the  Sun  ihone  through  that 
hole  upon  the  Speculum,  his  Light  upon  it 

was 


[272] 

was  of  the  Colour  of  the  Ring  whereon  it  felU 
but  by  its  iplendor  oblcured  the  Rings  made  by 
the  Light  of  the  Clouds,  unlefs  when  the  Spe- 
culum was  removed  to  a  great  diftance  from 
the  Window,  lo  that  his  Light  upon  it  might 
be  broad  and  faint.  By  varying  the  pofition  of 
my  Eye,  and  moving  it  nearer  to  or  farther 
from  the  dired  beam  of  the  bun's  Light,  the 
Colour  of  the  Sun's  refieded  Light  conltantly 
varied  upon  the  Speculum,  as  it  did  upon  my 
Eye,  the  fame  Colour  always  appearing  to  a 
By-llander  upon  my  Eye  which  to  me  appear'4 
upon  the  Speculum.  And  thence  I  knew  that 
the  Rings  of  Colours  upon  the  Chart  were  made 
by  thele  retleded  Colours  propagated  thither 
from  the  Speculum  in  feveral  Angles,  and  that 
their  production  depended  not  upon  the  ter- 
mination of  Light  and  Shadow. 

Obf.  7.  By  tiie  Analogy  of  all  thefe  Phaeno- 
mena  with  thole  of  the  like  Rings  of  Colours 
deicribed  in  the  firit  Part  of  this  Book,  it  feem- 
ed  to  me  that  thele  Colours  were  produced  by 
this  thick  Plate  of  Glais,  much  after  the  manner 
that  thofe  were  produced  bv  very  thin  Plates. 
For,  upon  tryal ,  I  found  that  if  the  Quick-lil* 
ver  were  ruBb'd  olf  from  the  backfide  of  th^ 
Speculum,  the  Glafs  alone  would  caui'e  the 
fgme  Rings  of  Colours,  but  much  more  faint 
than  before;  and  therefore  the  Phaenomenon 
depends  not  upon  the  Quick-lilver,  unlefs  fo  far 
as  the  Quick-lilver  by  increafmg  the  Reflexion 
of  the  backfide  of  the  Glafs  increaies  the  Light 
of  the  Rings  of  Colours,  I  found  alfo  that  ^ 
Speculum  of  Metal  without  Glais  made  lome 

Ye^rs 


[  273  ] 


Years  fince  for  optical  ufes,  and  very  well 
wrought,  produced  none  of  thofe  Rings ;  and 
thence  I  underitood  that  thefe  Rings  arife  not 
from  one  fpecular  Surface  alone,  but  depend 
upon  the  two  Surfaces  of  the  Plate  of  Glafs 
whereof  the  Speculum  was  made,  and  upon  the 
thicknefs  of  the  Glafs  between  them.  For 
as  in  the  7th  and  i9thObfervations  of  the  lirll 
Part  of  this  Book  a  thin  Plate  of  Air,  Water, 
or  Glafs  of  an  even  thicknefs  appeared  of  one 
Colour  when  the  Rays  were  perpendicular  to 
it,  of  another  when  they  were  a  little  oblique, 
of  another  when  more  oblique,  of  another  when 
ftill  more  oblique,  and  fo  on;  fo  here,  in  the 
fixth  Obfervation,  the  Lis:ht  which  emerged 
out  of  the  Glafs  in  feveral  Obliquities,  made  the' 
Glafs  appear  of  feveral  Colours,  and  being  pro- 
pagated in  thofe  Obliquities  to  the  Chart,  there 
painted  Rings  of  thofe  Colours.  And  as  the 
reafon  why  a  thin  Plate  appeared  of  feveral  Co- 
lours in  feveral  Obliquities  of  the  Rays,  was, 
that  the  Rays  of  one  and  the  fame  fort  are  re- 
fleded  by  the  thin  Plate  at  one  obliquity  and 
tranfmitted  at  another^  and  thofe  of  other  forts 
tranfmitted  where  thefe  are  refleded,  and  re- 
flefted  where  thefe  are  tranfmitted:'  So  the 
reafon  why  the  thick  Plate  of  Glafs  whereof 
the  Speculum  was  made  did  appear  of  various 
Colours  in  various  Obliquities ,  and  m  thofe 
Obliquities  propagated  thole  Colours  to  the 
Chart,  was,  that  the  Rays  of  one  and  the 
fame  fort  did  .at  one  Obliquity  emerge  out 
of  the  Glafs,  at  another  did  not  emerge  but 
were  reflcdkd  back  towards  the  Quick-filver 

1  E?y 


[  274  1 

by  the  hither  Surface  of  the  Glafs,  and  according- 
ly as  the  Obhquity  became  greater  and  greater 
emerged  and  were  refleded  alternately  for  ma- 
ny Succeflions,  and  that  in  one  and  the  fame 
Obliquity  the  Rays  of  one  fort  were  refleded, 
and  thoie  of  another  tranfmitted.  This  is  ma- 
nifcd  by  the  fifth  Obfervation  of  this  Part  of  this 
Book.  For  in  that  Obfervation,  when  the  Spe- 
culum was  illuminated  by  any  one  of  the  prif- 
matick  Colours,  that  Light  made  many  Rings 
of  the  fam^e  Colour  upon  the  Chart  with  dark 
Intervals,  and  therefore  at  its  emergence  out  of 
the  Speculum  was  alternately  tranfmitted  and 
not  tranfmitted  from  the  Speculum  to  the  Chart 
for  many  Succeflions,  according  to  tlie  various 
ObUquities  of  its  Emergence.  And  when  the 
Colour  call  on  the  Speculum  by  the  Prifm  was 
varied,  the  Rings  became  of  the  Colour  caflon 
it,  and  varied  their  bignefs  with  their  Colour, 
and  therefore  the  Light  was  now  alternately 
tranfmitted  and  not  tranfmitted  from^the  Spe- 
culum to  the  Chart  at  other  Obliquities  than 
before.  It  ieemcd  to  me  therefore  that  thefe 
Rings  were  of  one  and  the  fame  original  with 
thofe.of  thin  Plates,  but  yet  with  this  difference, 
that  thofe  of  thin  Plates  are  made  by  the  alter- 
nate Reflexions  and  Tranfmifllons  of  the  Rays 
at  the  fecond  Surface  of  the  Plate  after  one  paf- 
fage  through  it,  but  here  the  Rays  go  twice 
through  the  Plate  before  they  are  alternately  re- 
flefted  and  tranfmitted.  Firfl,  they  go  through 
it  from  the  firfl  Surface  to  the  Quick-filvcr,  and 
then  return  through  it  from  the  Quick-filver 
to  the  firfl  Surface,  and  there  are  either  tranf-- 

mi:tted 


[275  ] 

mitted  to  the  Chart  or  refleded  back  to  the 
Quick-filver ,  accordingly  a^  they  are  in  their 
Fits  of  eafy  Reflexion  or  Tranimiilion  when 
they  arrive  at  that  Surface.     For  the  Intervals 
of  the  Fits  of  the  Rays  which  fall  perpendicu- 
larly on  the  Speculum,  and  are  retlcctcd  back 
in  the  fame  perpendicular  Lines,  by  realon  of 
the  equality  of  thefe  Angles  and  Lines ,  are  of 
the  fame  length  and  number  within  the  Glafs 
after  Reflexion  as  before  by  the  19th  Propor- 
tion of  the  third  Part  of  this  Book.  And  there- 
fore fmce  all  the  Rays  that  enter  through  the 
firft  Surface  are  in  their  Fits  of  eafy  Tranfmif- 
lion  at  their  entrance,  and  as  many  of  thefe  as 
are  reflected  by  the  fecond  are  in  their  Fits  of 
eafy  Reflexion  there,  all  thefe  muft  be  again  in 
their  Fits  of  eafy  Tranfmiflion  at  their  return 
to  the  firft,  and  by  confcquence  there  go  out 
of  the  Glafs  to  the  Chart,  and  form  upon  it  the 
white  Spot  of  Light  in  the  center  of  the  Rings. 
For  the  reafon  holds  good  in  all  forts  of  Rays, 
and  therefore  all  forts  muft  go  out  promilcu- 
oufly  to  that  Spot,  and  by  their  mixture  caufe 
it  to  be  white.     But  the  Intervals  of  the  Fits  of 
thofe  Rays  which  are  reflected  more  obliquely 
than  they  enter,  muft  be  greater  after  Reflexion 
than  before  by  the  i^th  and  ioth  Propofitions. 
And  tnence  it  may  happen  that  the  Rays  at  their 
return  to  the  firft  Surface,  may  in  certain  Ob- 
liquities be  in  Fits  of  eaiy  Reflexion,  and  return 
back  to  the  Quick-filver,  and  in  other  interme- 
diate Obhquities  be  again  in  Fits  of  eafy  Tranf- 
miflion, and  fo  go  out  to  the  Chart,  and  paint 
on  it  the  Rings  of  Colours  about  the  white  Spot. 

T  2.  And 


[270 

And  becaufe  the  Intervals  of  the  Pits  at  equal 
Obliquities  are  greater  and  fewer  in  the  lefs  re- 
frangible Rays,  and  lefs  and  more  numerous 
in  the  more  refrangible ,  therefore  the  lefs  re- 
frangible at  equal  Obliquities  fliall  make  fewer 
Rings  than  the  more  refrangible,  and  the  Rings 
made  by  thofe  fliall  be  larger  than  the  Hke 
number  of  Rings  made  by  thefe ;  that  is,  the 
red  Rings  fliall  be  larger  than  the  yellow,  the 
yellow  than  the  green,  the  green  than  the  blue, 
and  the  blue  than  the  violet,  as  they  were  real- 
ly found  to  be  in  the  fifth  Obfervation.  And 
therefore  the  firlt  Ring  of  all  Colours  encom- 
pafling  the  white  Spot  of  Light  fliall  be  red 
without  any  violet  within,  and  yellow  and 
green  and  blue  in  the  middle,  as  it  was  found 
in  the  fecond  Obfervation ;  and  thefe  Colours 
in  the  fecond  Ring,  and  thofe  that  follow  fliall 
be  more  expanded  till  they  fpread  into  one  a- 
nother,  and  blend  one  another  by  interfering. 

Thefe  fcem  to  be  the  Pvcafons  of  thefe  Rings 
in  general ;  and  this  put  me  upon  obferving  the 
thicknefs  of  the  Glafs,  and  confidering  whether 
the  Dimenfions  and  Proportions  of  the  Rings 
may  be  truly  derived  from  it  by  computation. 

ObJ.  8.  I  meafured  therefore  the  thicknefs  of 
this  concavo-convex  Plate  of  Glafs,  and  found  it 
every  where  ^  of  an  Inch  precifely.  Now,  by 
the  fixth  Obfervation  of  the  firft  Part  of  this 
Book,  a  thin  Plate  of  Air  tranfmits  the  brightelt 
Light  of  the  firft  Ring,  that  is  the  bright  yel- 
low, when  its  thicknefs  is  the  g^th  part  of  an 

Inch,  and  by  the  tenth  Obfervation  of  the  fame 

Part, 


[  277  ] 

Part,  a  thin  Plate  of  Glafs  tranfmits  the  fame 
Light  of  the  fame  Ring  when  its  thicknefs  is 
lefs  in  proportion  of  the  Sine  of  Refraction  to 
the  Sine  of  Incidence ,.  that  is,  when  its  thick- 

^^^^  ''  ^^^TFli^o^^  °^il7S5^^  P^'^  ""^  "^^  ^^^^' 
fuppofing  the  Sines  are  as  ii  to  17.  And  if  this 
thicknefs  be  doubled  it  tranfmits  the  fame  bright 
Light  of  the  fecond  Ring,  if  trippled  it  tranf- 
mits that  of  the  third,  and  fo  on,  the  bright 
yellow  Light  in  all  thefe  cafes  being  in  its  Fits 
of  TranfmiHion.  And  therefore  if  its  thicknefs 
be  multiplied  34386  times  fo  as  to  become  ^  of 
an  hich  it  tranfmits  the  fame  bright  Light  of 
the  34386th  Ring.  Suppofe  this  be  the  bright 
yellow  Light  tranfmitted  perpendicularly  from 
the  receding  convex  fide  of  the  Glafs  through 
the  concave  fide  to  the  white  Spot  in  the  cen- 
ter of  the  Rings  of  Colours  on  the  Chart :  And 
by  a  Rule  in  the  7th  and  19th  Obfervations  in 
the  firil  Part  of  this  Book,  and  by  the  i^th  and 
ioth  Propoiitions  of  the  third  Part  of  this  Book, 
if  the  Rays  be  made  oblique  to  the  Glafs,  the 
thicknefs  of  the  Glafs  requifite  to  tranfmit  the 
fame  bright  Light  of  the  fame  Ring  in  any  Ob- 
liquity is  to  this  thicknefs  of  ^  of  an  hich,  as  the 
Secant  of  a  certain  Angle  to  the  Radius,  the 
Sine  of  which  Angle  is  the  firlt  of  an  hundred 
and  fix  arithmetical  Means  between  the  Sines 
of  Incidence  and  Refradion,  counted  from  the 
Sine  of  Incidence  when  the  Refraction  is  made 
out  of  any  plated  Body  into  any  Medium  en- 
compafling  it,  that  is,  in  this  cafe,  out  of  Glafs 
into  Air.    Now  if  the  thicknefs  of  the  Glafs  be 

T  3  increafed 


[278] 


jincreafed  by  degrees ,   fo  as  to  bear  to  its  firfl 
thickneft,   (viz,  that  of  a  quarter  of  an  Inch) 
the  Proportions  which  34306  (the  number  of 
Fits  of  the  perpendicular  Rays  in  going  through 
the  Glafs  towards  the  white  Spot  in  the  center 
of  the  Rings,)  hath  to  34385",  343 B4,  343 B3  and 
343 8x  (the  numbers  of  the  Fits  of  the  oblique 
Rays  in  going  through  the  Glafs  towards  the 
firlt,  fecond,  third  and  fourth  Rings  of  Co- 
lours,) and  if  the  firft  thicknefs  be  divided  in- 
to 1 00000000  equal  parts,  the  increafed  thick- 
nelTeswillbe  100001908,  ioooo5'8r6, 100008725 
and  100011633,  and  the  Angles  of  which  thefe 
thickneffes  are  fecants  will  be  26'  13",  3/  $'\ 
45"'  6"  and  52' 26",  the  Radius  being  loooooooo; 
and  the  Sines  of  thefe  Angles  are  762,  1079, 
1 321  and  1525-,  and  the  proportional  vSines  of 
Refradion  11 72,  1659,  2031  and  2345-,  the  Ra- 
dius being  1 00000.    For  fmce  the  Sines  of  In- 
cidence out  of  Glafs  into  Air  are  to  the  Sines 
of  Refradion  as  11  to  17,  and  to  the  above- 
mentioned  Secants  as  11  to  the  firft  of  ic6  arith- 
metical Means  between  11  and  17,  that  is,  as 

J I  to  II  j-^,  thofe  Secants  will  be  to  the  Sines 

of  Refrai^Hon  as  11  ^-^  to  17,  and  by  this  Ana- 
logy u^ill  give  thefe  Sines.  So  then  if  the  Ob- 
liquities of  the  Rays  to  the  concave  Surface  of 
the  Glafs  be  fuch  that  the  Sines  of  their  Refra- 
dion  in  paiTmg  out  of  the  Glafs  through  that 
Surface  into  the  Air  be  1172,  165-9,  ^"^Bi?  2.345-, 
the  bright  Light  of  the  34386th  Ring  Ihail  e- 
merge  at  the  tiiickneiles  of  the  Glai's  which  are 

to 


[  279  ] 

to-^  of  an  Inch  as  34386  to  34385-,  34384, 34383, 
34381,  refpedlivcly.  And  therefore  if  thethick- 
nefs  in  all  thefe  cafes  be  i  of  an  Inch  (as  it  is  in 
the  Glafs  of  which  the  Speculum  was  made) 
the  bright  Light  of  the  34385'th  Ring  fliall  e- 
merge  where  the  Sine  of  Refraction  is  1171, 
and  that  of  the  34384th,  384383th  and  34381th 
Ring  where  the  Sine  is  165-9,  2.031,  and  1345' 
refpedlively.  And  in  thefe  Angles  of  Refra- 
dion  the  Light  of  thefe  Rings  fhall  be  propaga- 
ted from  the  Speculum  to  the  Chart,  and  there 
paint  Rings  about  the  white  central  round  Spot 
of  Light  which  we  (aid  was  the  Lighi  of  the 
34386th  Ring.  And  the  Semidiametcrs  of  thefe 
Rings  Ihall  fubtend  the  Angles  of  Refracftion 
made  at  the  concave  Surface  of  the  Speculum, 
and  by  confequence  their  Diameters  fliall  be  to 
the  dillance  of  the  Chart  from  the  Speculum  as 
thofe  Sines  of  Refraction  doubled  are  to  the 
Radius,  that  is,  asiiji,  165-9,  2.031,  and  1345-, 
doubled  are  to  1 00000.  And  therefore  if  the 
diitance  of  the  Chart  from  the  concave  Surfice 
of  the  Speculum  be  fix  Feet  (as  it  was  in  the 
thir^.'  of  thefe  Obfervations)  the  Diameters  of 
the  Rings  of  this  bright  yellow  Light  upon  the 
Chmt  fliall  be  i'688,  1*389,  i'9i5',  3'375' Inches: 
For  thefe  Diameters  are  to  fix  Feet,  as  the  a- 
bovemention'd  Sines  doubled  are  to  the  Ra- 
dius. Now  thefe  Diameters  of  the  bright  yel- 
low Rings,  thus  found  by  computation  are  the 
very  fame  with  thofe  found  in  the  third  of  thefe 
Obfervations  by  meafuring  them,  viz.  with 
It-,  ^■i,  i4'-,  and  s-l-  Inches,  and  therefore  the 
Theory  of  deriving  thefe  Rings  from  the  thick- 

T  4  nefs 


[  28o  ] 

nefs  of  the  Plate  of  Glafs  of  which  the  Specu- 
lum was  made ,  and  from  the  Obliquity  of  the 
emerging  Rays  agrees  with  the  Oblervation.  In 
this  computation  I  have  equalled  the  Diameters 
of  the  bright  Rings  made  by  Light  of  all  Co- 
lours, to  the  Diameters  of  the  Rings  made  by 
the  bright  yellow.  For  this  yellow  makes  the 
brighteft  part  of  the  Rings  of  all  Colours.  If  you 
defu'e  the  Diameters  of  the  Rings  made  by  the 
Light  of  any  other  unmix  d  Colours  you  may  find 
them  readily  by  putting  them  to  the  Diameters 
of  the  bright  yellow  ones  in  a  fubduplicate  pro- 
portion of  the  Intervals  of  the  Fits  of  the  Rays 
of  thofe  Colours  when  equally  inclined  to  the 
refracting  or  refleding  Surface  which  caufed 
thofe  Fits,  that  is,  by  putting  the  Diameters  of 
the  Rings  made  by  the  Rays  in  the  Exremities 
and  Limits  of  the  feven  Colours,  red,  orange, 
yellovA',  green,  blue,  indigo,  viqlet,  proportio- 
nal to  the  Cube-roots  of  the  Numbers,  i,  ^,  4, 
4>  T»  T>  -rv,  4,  which. exprefs  the  lengths  of  a 
Monochord  founding  the  Notes  in  an  Eighth  : 
For  by  this  means  the  Diameters  of  the  Rings 
of  thefe  Colours  will  be  found  pretty  nearly  in 
the  fame  proportion  to  one  another,  which 
they  ought  to  have  by  the  fifth  of  thefe  Obfer- 
yations. 

And  thus  I  fatisfv'd  my  felf  that  thefe  Rings 
were  of  the  fame  kind  and  original  with  thofe 
of  thin  Plates,  and  by  confequence  that  the  Fits 
.  or  alternate  Difpofitions  of  the  Rays  to  be 
refleded  and  tranfmitted  are  propagated  to 
great  diflances  from  every  reflecting  and  re- 
frading  Swfece.  But  yet  to  put  the  mat- 
ter 


[28l] 

ter  out  of  doubt,  I  added  the  following  OIv 
fervation. 

Obf.  9.  If  thefe  Rings  thus  depend  on  the 
ihickneis  of  the  Plate  of  Glafs,  their  Diameters 
at  equal  dilbnces  from  feveral  Speculums  made 
of  fuch  concavo-convex  i^lates  of  Glais  as  are 
ground  on  the  fame  Sphere,  ought  to  be  reci- 
procally in  a  fubduplicate  proportion  of  the 
thicknelles  of  the  Piates  of  Glais.  And  if  this 
Proportion  be  found  true  by  experience  it  will 
amount  to  a  demonlbation  that  thele  Rings 
(like  thofe  formed  in  thin  Plates)  do  depend 
on  the  thicknefs  of  the  Glafs.  I  procured  there- 
fore another  concavo-convex  Plate  of  Glafs 
ground  on  both  fides  to  the  fame  Sphere  with 
the  former  Plate.  Irs  thicknefs  was  -V  parts  of 
an  Inch ;  and  the  Diameters  of  the  three  tirll 
bright  Rings  meafured  between  the  brightelt 
parts  of  their  Orbits  at  the  diitance  of  fix  I  eet 
from  the  Glafs  were  3.  44.  s^-  Inches.  Now 
the  thicknefs  of  the  other  Glafs  being  -^  of  an 
Inch  was  to  the  thicknefs  of  this  Glafs  as  ^  to  A, 
that  is  as  31  to  10,  or  310000000  to  loooooooo, 
and  the  Roots  of  thefc  Numbers  are  17607  and 
loooo,  and  \x\  the  proportion  of  the  firil  of 
thefe  Roots  to  the  fecond  are  the  Diameters  of 
the  bright  Rings  made  in  this  Obfervation  by 
the  thinner  Glais,  3.  4^.  5-4,  to  the  Diameters  of 
the  fame  Rings  made  in  the  third  of  thefe  Ob- 
fervations  by  the  thicker  Glafs  i4t.  i^\.  2.44,  that 
is,  the  Diameters  of  the  Rings  are  reciprocally 
in  a  fubduplicate  proportion  of  the  thicknelfes 
of  the  Plates  of  Glafs. 

So  then  in  Plates  of  Glafs  which  are  alike 

con- 


[282] 

concave  on  one  fide,  and  alike  convex  on  the 
other  fide,  and  alike  quick-lilver'd  on  the  con- 
vex lides,  and  differ  in  nothing  but  their  thick- 
nefs,  the  Diameters  of  the  Rings  are  recipro- 
cally in  a  fubduplicate  proportion  of  the  thick- 
nelTes  of  the  Plates.  And  this  flievvs  fufficient- 
ly  that  the  Rings  depend  on  both  the  Surfaces 
of  the  Glafs.  They  depend  on  the  convex  Sur- 
face bccaufe  they  are  more  luminous  when  that 
Surface  is  quick-filver'd  over  than  when  it  is 
without  Quick-iilver.  They  depend  alio  upon 
the  concave  Surface,  becaufe  without  that  Sur- 
face a  Speculum  makes  them  not.  They  de- 
pend on  both  Surfaces  and  on  the  diftances  be- 
tween them,  becaufe  their  bignefs  is  varied  by 
varying  only  that  diftance.  And  this  depen- 
dance  is  of  the  fame  kind  with  that  which  the 
Colours  of  thin  Plates  have  on  the  diflance  of 
the  Surfaces  of  thofe  Plates,  becaufe  the  big- 
nefs of  the  Rings  and  their  proportion  to  one 
another,  and  the  variation  of  their  bignefs  ari- 
fmg  from  the  variation  of  the  thickncfs  of  the 
Glafs,  and  the  orders  of  their  Colours,  is  fuch 
as  ought  to  refult  from  the  Proportions  in  the 
end  of  the  third  Part  of  this  Book,  derived 
from  the  Phaenomena  of  the  Colours  of  thin 
Plates  fet  down  in  the  firil  Part. 

There  are  yet  other  Phaenomena  of  thcfe 
Rings  of  Colours  but  fuch  as  follow  from  the 
fame  Propofitions,  and  therefore  confirm  both 
the  truth  of  thofe  Propofitions,  and  the  Analo- 
gy  between  thefe  Rings  and  the  Rings  of  Co- 
lours made  by  very  tliin  Plates.  I  fliall  fubjoin 
feme  of  them. 


[283] 

Obf.  lo.  When  the  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light 
was  refkrted  back  from  the  Speculum  not  di- 
redly  to  the  hole  in  the  Window,  but  to  a  place 
a  little  diltant  from  it,  the  common  center  of 
that  Spot,  and  of  all  the  Rings  of  Colours  fell 
in  the  middle  way  between  the  beam  of  the  in- 
cident Light,  and  the  beam  of  the  rcfledcd 
Light,  and  by  coniequence  in  the  center  of  the 
fpherical  concavity  of  the  Speculum,  whenever 
the  Chart  on  which  the  Rings  of  Colours  fell 
was  placed  at  that  center.  And  as  the  beam  of 
refledted  Light  by  inclining  the  Speculum  re- 
ceded more  and  more  from  the  beam  of  inci- 
dent Light  and  from  the  common  center  of  the 
colour'd  Rings  between  them,  thofe  Rings  grew 
bigger  and  bigger,  and  fo  alfo  did  the  white 
round  Spot,  and  new  Rings  of  Colours  emer- 
ged fucceilively  out  of  their  common  center, 
and  the  white  Spot  becam.c  a  white  Ring  en- 
compailing  them ;  and  the  incident  and  reced- 
ed beams  of  Light  always  fell  iipon  the  oppo- 
fite  parts  of  this  white  Ring,  illuminating  its 
Perimeter  like  two  mock  Suns  in  the  oppofite 
parts  of  an  Iris.  So  then  the  Diameter  of  this 
Ring,  meafurcd  from  the  middle  of  its  Light 
on  one  fide  to  the  middle  of  its  Light  on  the 
other  fide,  was  always  equal  to  the  diflance  be- 
tween the  middle  of  the  incident  beam  of 
Light,  and  the  middle  of  the  reflefted  beam 
fneafured  at  the  Chart  on  which  the  Rings  ap- 
peared :  And  the  Rays  which  form'd  this  Ring 
were  refleded  by  the  Speculum  in  Angles  equal 
to  their  Angles  of  Incidence,  and  by  confe- 
quence  to  their  Angles  of  Refradion  at  their 

entrance 


[  284  ] 

entrance  into  theGlafs,_but  yet  their  Angles  of 
Reflexion  were  not  in  the  fame  Planes  with 
their  Angles  of  Licidence. 

Obf.  1 1 .  The  Colours  of  the  new  Rings  were 
in  a  contraiy  order  to  thofe  of  the  former,  and 
arofe  after  this  manner.  The  white'round  Spot 
of  Light  in  the  middle  of  the  Rings  continued 
white  to  the  center  till  the  dilknce  of  the  in- 
cident and  rellcc^ted  beams  at  the  Chart  was  a- 
bout  ^  parts  of  an  Inch,  and  then  it  began  to 
grow  dark  in  the  middle.  And  when  that  di- 
llance  was  about  It^  of  an  Inch,  the  white  Spot 
was  become  a  Ring  encompafling  a  dark  round 
Spot  which  in  the  middle  inclined  to  violet  and 
indigo.  And  the  luminous  Rings  encompafling 
it  were  grown  equal  to  thofe  dark  ones  which 
in  the  four  firlt  Obfervations  encompailed  them, 
that  is  to  fay,  the  white  Spot  was  grown  a 
white  Ring  equal  to  the  firll"  of -thofe  dark 
Rings,  and  the  tiril:  of  thofe  luminous  Rings  was 
now  grown  equal  to  the  fecond-of  thofe  dark 
ones,  and  the  fecond  of  thofe  luminous  ones  to 
the  third  of  thofe  dark  ones,  and  fo  on.  For 
the  Diameters  of  the  luminous  Rings  were  now 
i-r^.,  1-'-,  27,  s-T-,  ^c.  Inches. 

When  the  dilhncc  between  the  incident  and 
refleded  beams  of  Light  became  a  little  big- 
ger, there  emerged  out  of  the  middle  of  the 
dark  Spot  after  the  indigo  a  blue,  and  then  out 
of  that  blue  a  pale  green,  and  foon  after  a  yel- 
low and  red.  And  when  the.  Colour  at  the 
center  was  brightelf,  being  between  yellow  and 
red,  the  bright  Rings  were  grown  equal  to  thofe 
Rings  which  in  the  four  firll  Obfervations  next 

encom- 


[285] 

encompafTed  them ;  that  is  to  fliy,  the  white 
Spot  in  the  middle  of  thole  Rings  was  now  be- 
come a  white  Ring  equal  to  the  fiiil  of  thofe 
bright  Rings,  and  the  tirlt  of  thofe  bright  ones 
was  now  become  equal  to  the  fecond  of  thofe, 
and  fo  on.  For  the  Diameters  of  the  white 
Ring,  and  of  the  other  luminous  Rings  encom- 
palling  it,  were  now  i-^-t,  2,4?  2.44,  34,  &c.  or 
thereabouts. 

•  When  the  dillance  of  the  two  beams  of 
Light  at  the  Chart  was  a  little  more  increafed, 
there  emerged  out  of  the  middle  in  order  after 
the  red,  a  'purple,  a  blue,  a  green,  a  yellow, 
and  a  red  inclining  much  to  purple,  and  when 
the  Colour  was  brightelt  being  between  yellow 
and  red,  the  former  indigo,  blue,  green,  yel- 
low and  red ,  were  become  an  Iris  or  Ring  of 
Colours  equal  to  the  firlt  of  thofe  luminous 
Rings  which  appeared  in  the  four  firft  Obfer- 
vations,  and  the  white  Rin?  which  was  now 
become  the  fecond  of  the  luminous  Rings  was 
grown  equal  to  the  iecond  of  thofe,  and  the 
firil  of  thofe  which  was  now  become  the  third 
Ring  was  become  equal  to  the  third  of  thofe, 
and  fo  on.  For  their  Diameters  were  i-f4,  2.4, 
2-44,  34  Inches ,  the  diltance  of  the  two  beams 
of  Light,  and  the  Diameter  of  the  white  Ring 
being  24  Inches. ' 

When  thefe  two  beams  became  more  diflant 
there  emerged  out  of  the  middle  of  the  pur- 
plilh  red,  hrit  a  darker  round  Spot,  and  then 
out  of  the  middle  of  that  Spot  a  brighter.  And 
now  the  former  Colours  (purple,  blue,  green, 
yellow,  and  purplish  red)  were  become  a  Ring 

equal 


[  2S6  ] 

equal  to  the  firft  of  the  bright  Rings  mention- 
ed in  the  four  tirftObfervations,  and  the  Rings 
about  this  Ring  were  grown  equal  to  the  Rings 
about  that  refpe6tively ;  the  diftance  between 
the  two  beams  of  Light  and  the  Diameter  of 
the  white  Ring  (which  was  now  become  the 
third  Ring)  being  about  3  Inches. 

The  Colours  of  the  Rings  in  the  middle  be- 
gan now  to  grow  very  dilute,  and  if  the  di- 
Itance  between  the  two  Beams  was  increafed 
half  an  Inch,  or  an  Inch  more,  they  van iih'd 
whilll  the  white  Ring,  with  one  or  two  of  the 
Rings  next  it  on  either  fide,  contirtued  itill  vi- 
fible.  But  if  the  diltance  of  the  two  beams  of 
Light  was  Hill  more  increafed,  thefe  alfo  va- 
niihed:  For  the  Light  which  coming  from  fe- 
veral  parts  of  the  hole  in  the  \\  indow  fell  up- 
on the  Speculum  in  feveral  Angles  of  Incidence, 
made  Rings  of  feveral  bignefFcs,  which  diluted 
and  blotted  out  one  another,  as  I  knew  byin- 
tercepring  fomc  part  of  that  Light.  For  if  I 
intercepted  that  part  which  was  neareft  to  the 
Axis  of  the  Speculum  the  Rings  would  be  lefs, 
if  the  other  part  which  was  remoteil  from  it 
they  Vv;puld  be  bigger. 

Oi^f  iz.  When  the  Colours  of  the  Prifm 
were  call  fuccellively  on  the  Speculum,  that 
RinJ:^  wiiich  in  the  two  lalt  Obfervations  was 
white,  was  of  the  fame  bigncfs  in  all  the  Co- 
lours, but  the  Rings  without  it  were  greater  in 
the  green  than  in  the  blue,  and  Itill  greater  in 
the  yellow,  and  greateilin  the  red.  And,  on  the 
contrary,  the  Rings  within  that  white  Circle 
were  Icfs  in  the  green  than  in  the  blue,  and  ftill 

lefs 


[287] 

lefs  in  the  yellow,  and  leall  in  the  red.  For 
the  Angles  of  Reflexion  of  thofe  Rays  which 
made  this  Ring,  being  equal  to  their  Angles  of 
Incidence,  the  Fits  of  every  refleded  Ray  within 
the  Glafs  after  Reflexion  are  equal  in-  length 
and  number  to  the  Fits  of  the  fame  Ray  with- 
in the  Glafs  before  its  hicidence  on  the  reflect- 
ing Surface.  And  therefore  iince  all  the  Rays 
r'^  '"  brts  at  their  entrance  into  the  Glais  were 
of  Franfmiflion,  they  were  alfo  in  a  Fit 
o.  limiilion  at  their  returning  to  the  fame 

Su.uc  after  Reflexion;  and  by  confcquence 
were  tranfmitted  and  went  out  to  the  white 
Ring  on  the  Chart.  This  is  the»reafon  why 
thai  Ring  was  of  the  fame  bignefs  in  all  the  Co- 
lours, and  why  in  a  mixture  of  all  it  appears 
white.  But  in  Rays  which  arc  refledcd  in  o- 
ther  Angles,  the  Intervals  of  the  Fits  of  the, 
leait  refrangible  being  grcatelt,  make  the  Rings 
of  their  Colour  in  their  progreisfrom  this  white 
Ring,  either  outwards  or  inwards,  increafe  or 
decreafe  by  the  greatell  Iteps ;  fo  that  the  Rings 
of  this  Colour  without  are  greatefl,  and  within 
leafl:.  And  this  is  the  reafon  why  in  the  lal!: 
Obfervation,  when  the  Speculum  was  illumina- 
ted with  white  Light,  the  exterior  Rings  made 
by  all  Colours  appeared  red  without  and  blue 
within,  and  the  interior  blue  without  and  red 
within. 

Thefe  are  the  Phaenomena  of  thick  convexo- 
concave  Plates  of  Glafs,  which  are  every  where 
of  the  fame  thicknefs.  There  are  yet  other 
Phaenomena  when  thcfe  Plates  are  a  little  thick- 
er on  one  fide  than  on  the  other,   and  others 


[288] 


when  the  Plates  are  more  or  lefs  conc.ave  thail^ 
convex,  or  plano-convex,  or  double-convex. 
For  in  all  thele  cafes  the  Plates  make  Rings  of 
Colours,  but  after  various  manners ;  all  which, 
fo  far  aS  I  have  yet  obferved ,  follow  from  the 
Propoiitions  in  the  end  of  the  third  part  of  this 
Book,  and  fo  confpire  to  confirm  the  truth  6f 
thofe  Propoiitions.  But  the  IMiaenomena  arc 
too  various,  and  the  Calculations  whereby  they 
follow  from  thofe  Proportions  too  intricate  to 
be  here  profccuted.  I  content  my  felf  with  ha- 
ving profecuted  this  kind  of  Phaenomena  fo  far 
as  to  difcover  their  Caufe,  and  by  difcovering 
it  to  ratify  t\m  Propofitions  in  the  third  Part  of 
this  Book. 

0/y."  13.  As  Light  rcfleded  by  aLensquick- 
filver'd  on  the  backfide  makes  the  Rings  of  Co- 
lours above  defcribed,  fo  it  ought  to  make  the 
like  Rings  of  Colours  in  palling  through  a  drop 
of  Water.  At  the  firll  Rciiexion  of  the  Rays 
witnin  the  drop,  fome  Colours  ought  to  be 
tranfmittcd,  as  in  the  cafe  of  a  Lens,  and  others* 
to  be  resetted  back  to  the  Eye.  Forinilance, 
if  the  Diameter  of  a  fmall  drop  or  globule  of 
Water  be  about  the  focth  part  of  an  Lich,  fo 
that  a  red-making  Ray  in  palling  through  the 
middle  of  this  globule  has  250  Fits  of  eafy 
Tranlmidion  within  the  globule,  and  that  all 
the  red-making  Rays  which  are  at  a  cert-ain  di-^ 
llance  from  this  middle  Ray  round  about  it 
have  249  Fits  within  the  globule^  and  all  the 
like  Rays  at  a  certain  farther  diilance  round  a- 
bout  it  have  248  Fits,  and  all  thofe  at  a  cer- 
tain farther  diilance  247  Fits,  and  fo  on-;  thefe 

conccn- 


[289] 


concentrick  Circles  of  Rays  after  their  tranf- 
miflion,  tailing  on  a  white  Paper,  will  make 
concentrick  Rings  of  red  upon  the  Paper,  fup- 
pofing  the  Light  \^'hich  pallcs  through  one  Tin- 
gle globule,  Ih'ong  enough  to  bcfcnliblc.  And, 
in  like  manner,  the  Rays  of  other  Colours  will 
make  Rings  of  other  Colours.  Suppofe  now 
that  in  a  fair  Day  the  Sun  Ihines  through  a  thin 
Cloud  of  fuch  globules  of  W  ater  or  Hail,  and 
that  the  globules  arc  all  of  the  fame  bignefs ; 
and  the  Sun  fcen  through  this  Cloud  iliall  ap- 
pear cncompailed  with  the  like  concentrick 
Rings  of  Colours,  and  the  Diameter  of  the  firil 
Ring  of  red  ihall  be  7.;^  Degrees,  that  of  the  fe- 
cond  icv  Degrees,  that  of  the  third  11  Degrees 
33  Minutes.  And  accordingly  as  the  Globules 
of  Water  are  bigger  or  Icfs,  the  Rings  iliall  be 
lefs  or  bigger.  This  is  the  Theory,  and  Expe- 
rience anlwers  it.  For  in  June  1692.  I  f\w  by 
reflexion  in  a  Vellel  of  itagnating  Water  three 
Halos,  Crowns,  or  Rings  of  Colours  about  the 
Sun,  like  three  little  Rain-bows,  concentrick 
to  !iis  Body.  The  Colours  of  the  firll  or  in- 
nermolt  Crown  were  blue  next  the  Sun,  red 
without,  and  white  in  the  middle  between  the 
blue  and  red.  Thole  of  the  fecond  Crown 
were  purple  and  blue  within,  and  pale  red  with- 
out ,  and  green  in  the  middle.  And  thofe  of 
the  third  were  pale  blue  within,  and  pale  red 
without;  thefe  Crowns  enclofed  one  another 
immediately,  fo  that  their  Colours  proceeded 
in  this  continual  order  from  the  Sun  outward : 
blue,  white,  red;    purple,  blue,  green,  pale 

U  yellow 


[  290  ] 

yellow  and  red ;  pale  blue,  pale  red.  The  Di- 
ameter of  the  fecond  Crown  meafured  from 
the  middle  of  the  yellow  and  red  on  one  fide 
of  the  Sun,  to  the  middle  of  the  fame  Colour 
on  the  other  fide  was  9^  Degrees ,  or  therea- 
bouts. The  Diameters  of  the  liril  and  third 
I  had  not  time  to  meafure,  but  that  of  the  firft 
feemed  to  be  about  five  or  fix  Degrees ,  and 
that  of  the  third  about  twelve.  The  like 
Crowns  appear  fometimes  about  the  Moon  5 
for  in  the  beginning  of  the  Year  1664,  Febr, 
19th  at  Night,  I  faw  two  fuch  Crowns  about 
her.  The  Diameter  of  the  firft  or  innermofl 
was  about  three  Degrees,  and  "that  of  the  fe- 
cond about  five  Degrees  and  an  half  Next  ^^. 
bout  the  Moon  was  a  Circle  of  white,  and  next 
about  that  the  inner  Crown  which  was  of  a 
bluifh  green  within  next  the  white ,  and  of  a 
yellow  and  red  without,  and  next  about  thefe 
Colours  wTre  blue  and  green  on  the  infide  of 
the  outward  Crown,  and  red  on  the  outfide  of 
it.  At  the  fame  time  there  appear'd  a  Halo  a- 
bout  2i  Degrees  35"'  dillant  from  the  center  of 
the  Moon.  It  was  elliptical,  and  its  long  Dia- 
nieter  was  perpendicular  to  the  Horizon,  verg- 
ing below  farthefl  from  the  Moon.  I  am  told 
that  the  Moon  has  fometimes  three  or  more 
concentrick'  Crowns  of  Colours  encompafling 
one  another  next  about  her  Body.  The  more 
equal  the  globules  of  Water  or  Ice  are  to  one 
another,  the  more  Crowns  of  Colours  will  ap- 
pear, and  the  Colours  will  be  the  more  hvely. 
The  Halo  at  the  diftance  of  z-L-i  Degrees  fron^ 

the 


Kg.  2 . 

L«.«"«' " rr''''''''''**'/^''/^,,,^ 

tl-#" ' 'f*«'*%%j% 


_bookll  Flatel 


cat  jy^ t^ ^nrup^ r.7t-uxyz 


Wl     Is     Rl     g 

-^  E  1?    ^ 


fell  J  l^liJIj 


is  ^S^     ^     S     'S     f^ 


©■■ 


lU.kll.Plalcn. 


■^f        3|N' 


^-.    7 


7^0:  s.  I 


"BC       D        E        F      G  H 


[  291  ] 

the  Moon  is  of  another  fort.  By  its  being  oval 
and  remoter  from  the  Moon  below  than  above, 
I  conclude ,  that  it  was  made  by  Refradioh  in 
fome  fort  of  Hail  or  Snow  floating  in  the  Air 
in  an  horizontal  pollure,  the  refrading  Angle 
teing  about  58  or  ($0  Degrees. 


U  % 


THE 


t  2^2  ] 


M 

p 

M 

M 

^^ 

^m 

^^ 

THE 

THIRD  BOO 


OF 


OPTICKS 


•. 


^k  r^,  ^   ^  ^  ^   &    ^   ^   ^   ^.   ^   gk   ^   &  ^-.   &   ^''^\'l'   ^   r^   p 

PART   I. 

•g?  ^  ^  #  ^  #  ^^^^^(^^^•^■^^•jp^'^^^^^'ii? 

Qbfervations  concerning   the  Inflexions  of  the, 
Rays  of  Light,  and  the  Colours  made  thereby. 

IRIMAL'DO  has  inform'd  us,  that 
ff^l  ^  W&  if  a  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light  be  let  in- 
P  to  a  dark  Room  through  a  very  fmali 
i  hole,  "the  Shadows  of  things  in  this 
Light  will  be  larger  than  they  ought  to  be  if 
^he  Rays  went  on  'py  the  Bodies  in  f trait  Lines, 

and 


[  253  ] 

and  that  thefe  Shadows  have  three  parallel 
Fringes,  Bands  or  Ranks  of  colour'd  Light  ad- 
jacent to  them.  But  if  the  Hole  be  enlarged 
the  Fringes  grow  broad  and  run  into  one  ano- 
ther, fo  that  they  cannot  be  diflinguifli'd.  Thefe 
broad  Shadows  and  Fringes  have  been  rcckon'd 
by  fonie  to  proceed  from  the  ordinary  refra- 
ction of  the  Air,  but  without  due  examination 
of  the  Matter.  For  the  circumftances  of  tha 
Phaenomenon ,  fo  far  as  I  have  obferved  them, 
are  as  follows. 

Obf.  I.  I  made  in  a  piece  of  Lead  a  fmall 
Hole  with  a  Pin,  whofe  breadth  was  the  42d 
part  of  an  Inch.  For  21  of  thofe  Pins  laid  to- 
gether took  up  the  breadth  of  half  an  Inch. 
Through  this  Hole  I  let  into  my  darken'd 
Chamber  a  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light,  and  found 
that  the  Shadows  of  Hairs,  Thred,  Pins,  Straws, 
and  fuch  Uke  llender  Subftances  placed  in  this 
beam  of  Light,  were  confiderably  broader  than 
they  ought  to  be  ,  if  the  Rays  of  Light  pafTed 
on  by  thefe  Bodies  in  right  Lines.  And  parti- 
cularly a  Hair  of  a  Man's  Head,  whofe  breadth 
was  but  the  280th  part  of  an  Inch,  being  held 
in  this  Light ,  at  the  diltance  of  about  twelve 
Feet  from  the  Hole,  did  call  a  Shadow  which 
at  the  diilance  of  four  Inches  from  the  Hair 
was  the  fixtieth  part  of  an  Inch  broad,  that  is, 
above  four  times  broader  than  the  Hair,  and  at 
the  diilance  of  two  Feet  from  the  Flair  was  a- 
bout  the  eight  and  twentieth  part  of  an  Inch 
broad,  that  is,  ten  times  broader  than  the  Hair, 
and  at  the  diilance  of  ten  Feet  was  the  eighth 
part  of  an  Inch  broad,  that  is  35- times  broader* . 

U  3  Nor 


[  294  ] 

Nor  is  it  material  whether  the  Hair  be  en- 
compaiTed  with  Air,  or  with  any  other  pellucid 
Subliance.  For  I  wetted  a  polilh'd  Plate  af 
Glais,  and  laid  the  Hair  in  the  Water  upon  the 
Glafs,,  and  then  laying  another  polifli'd  Plate  of 
Glais  upon  it,  fo  that  the  Water  might  fill  up 
the  fpace  between  the  Glafles ,  I  held  them  in 
the  aforefaid  beam  of  Light,  (o  that  the  Light 
might  pais  through  them  perpendicularly,  and 
t;he  Shadow  of  the  Hair  w^as  at  the  fame  di- 
itances  as  big  as  before.  The  Shadows  of 
Scratches  made  in  polilli'd  Plates  of  Glafs  were 
alio  much  broader  than  they  ought  to  be ,  and 
the  Veins  in  polifh'd  Plates  of  Glafs  did  alfo  caft 
the  like  broad  Shadows.  And  therefore  the 
great  breadth  of  thefe  Shadows  proceeds  from 
fome  other  caufe  than  the  Refradion  of  the 
Air. 

Let  the  Circle  X  [in  Fig.  i.1  reprefent  the 
middle  of  the  Hair;  ADG,  BEH,  CFl, 
three  Rays  pafling  by  one  fide  of  the  Hair  at 
feveral  diitances;  KNQ,  LOR,  MPS,  three 
other  Rays  palFmg  by  the  other  fide  of  the  Hair 
at  the  like  diitances ;  D,E,F,  and  N,  O,  P,  the 
places  where  the  Rays  are  bent  in  their  paf- 
fage  by  the  Hair;  G,  H,  I  and  Q,  R,  S,  the 

r laces  where  the  Rays  fall  on  a  Paper  GQ; 
S  the  breadth  of  the  Shadow  of  the  Hair  call 
on  the  Paper,  and  TI,  VS,  two  Rays  pafTing 
to  the  Points  I  and  S  without  bending  when 
the  Hair  is  taken  away.  And  it's  manifeft  that 
all  the  Light  between  thefe  two  Rays  TI  and 
.  VS  is  bent  in  pafling  by  the  Hair,  and  turned 
ofide  from  the  Shadow  I S,  becaufe  if  any  part 

of 


[  295  ] 

df  this  Light  were  not  bent  it  would  fall  on  the 
Paper  within  the  Shadow,  and  there  illuminate 
the  Papers  .contrary  to  experience.  And  be- 
caufe  when  the  Paper  is  at  a  great  diltance  from 
the  Hair,  the  Shadow  is  broad,  and  therefore 
the  Rays  TI  and  VS  are  at  a  great  dif lance 
from  one  another,  it  follows  that  the  Hair  aCls 
upon  the  Rays  of  Light  at  a  good  -diftance  iit 
their  pafling  by  it.  But  the  adion  is  Itrongell 
on  the  Rays  which  pafs  by  at  leaft  dillances, 
and  grows  weaker  and  weaker  accordingly  as 
the  Rays  pafs  by  at  diftances  greater  and  great- 
er, as  is  reprefented  in  the  Scheme :  For  thence 
it  comes  to  pafs,  that  the  Shadow  of  the  Hair 
is  much  broader  in  proportion  to  the  diltance 
of  the  Paper  from  the  Hair,  when  the  Paper  is 
nearer  the  Hair,  than  when  it  is  at  a  great  di- 
fiance  from  it. 

Obf,  1.  The  Shadows  of  all  Bodies  (Metals^ 
Stones,  Glafs,  Wood,  Horn,  Ice,  ^c.J  in  this 
Light  were  border'd  with  three  parallel  Fringes 
or  Bands  of  colour'd  Light,  whereof  that  which 
was  contiguous  to  the  Shadow  was  broadeft 
and  moll  luminous,  and  that  which  was  remo- 
tell  from  it  was  narrowell,  and  fo  faint,  as  not 
eafily  to  be  vifible.  It  was  difficult  to  dillinguilh 
the  Colours  unlefs  when  the  Light  fell  very  ob- 
liquely upon  a  fmooth  Paper,  or  fome  other 
fmooth  white  Body,  fo  as  to  make  them  appear 
much  broader  than  they  would  otherwife  do. 
And  then  the  Colours  were  plainly  vifible  in 
this  Order :  The  firlt  or  innermoft  Fringe  was 
violet  and  deep  blue  next  the  Shadow,  and  then 
light  blue,  green  and  yellow  in  the  middle,  and 

U  4  red 


[  ^96  ] 

red  without.    The  fecond  Fringe  was  almoft 
contiguous  to  the  fiiit,  and  the  third  to  the  fe- 
cond ,  and  both  were  blue  within  and  yellow 
and  red  without,  but  their  Colours  were  very 
faint,  efpecially  thole  of  the  third.     The  Co- 
lours therefore  proceeded  in  this  order  from 
the  Shadow ;   violet,  indigo,  pale  blue,  green, 
yellow,  red  ;  blue,  yellow,  red  ;  pale  blue,  pale 
yellow  and  red.  The  Shadows  made  by  Scratches 
and  Bubbles  in  poliih'd  Plates  of  Glais  were 
border'd  with  the  like  Fringes  of  coloured  Light. 
And  if  Plates  of  Looking-glafs  lloop'd  off  near 
the  edges  with  a  Diamond-cut,  be  held  in  the 
fame  beam  of  Light,  the  Light  which  pailes 
through  the  parallel  Planes  of  the  Glafs  will  be 
border'd  with  the  like  Fringes  of  Colours  where 
thofe  Planes  meet  with  the  Diamond-cut,  and 
by  this  means  there  will  fometimes  appear  four 
or  five  Fringes  of  Colours.     Let  AB,  C  D  [in 
Fig.  2.]  reprefent  the  parallel  Planes  of  a  Look- 
ing-glafs, and  BD  the  Plane  of  the  Diamond- 
cut,  making  at  B  a  very  obtufe  Angle  with  the 
Plane  A  B.    And  let  all  the  Light  between  the 
Rays  EN  I  and  FBM  pals  directly  through  the 
•parallel  Planes  of  the  Glafs,   and  fall  upon  the 
Paper  between  I  and  M,  and  all  the  Light  be- 
tween the  Rays  G  O  and  H  D  be  refraded  by 
the  oblique  Plane  of  the  Diamond-cut  B  D,  and 
fall  upon  the  Paper  between  K  and  L ;  and  the 
Light  which  pafles  direftly  through  the  parallel 
Planes  of  the  Glafs ,  and  falls  upon  the  Paper 
between  I  and  M,  will  be  border'd  with  three 
or  more  Fringes  at  M. 

3  So 


[  297  ] 

So  by  looking  on  the  Sun  through  a  Feather 
or  black  Riband  held  clofe  to  the  Eye,  leveral 
Rain-bows  will  appear ;  the  Shadows  which  the 
Fibres  orThreds  call  on  the  Tunica  Retina,  be- 
ing border'd  with  the  like  Fringes  of  Colours. 

Obf  3.  When  the  Hair  was  twelve  Feet  di- 
Itant  from  this  Hole,  and  its  Shadow  fell  ob- 
liquely upon  a  flat  white  Scale  of  Inches  and 
parts  of  an  Inch  placed  half  a  Foot  beyond  it, 
and  alfo  when  the  Shadow  fell  perpendicularly 
upon  the  fame  Scale  placed  nine  Feet  beyond 
it ;  I  meafured  the  breadth  of  the  Shadow  and 
Fringes  as  accurately  as  I  could,  and  found 
them  in  parts  of  an  Inch  as  follows. 


The 


[298] 


At  the  dtfiance  of 

i 

half  a  nine 
Foot  -Feet 

The  breadth  of  the  Shadow 

r 

"* 

The  breadth  between  the  Middles  of 
the  brightefl:  Light  of  the  innermoft 
Fringes  on  either  fide  the  Shadow 

tVoiV/  t^ 

The  breadth  between  the  Middles  of 
the  brightefl:  Light  of  the  raiddle- 
mofl:  Fringes  on  cither  fide  the  Sha- 
dow 

I 

4 

The  breadth  between  the  Middles  of 
the  brightefl  Light  of  the  outmofl: 
Fringes  on  either  fide  the  Shadow 

I       I 

The  diftance  between  the  Middles 
of  the  brightefl:  Light  of  the  firfl: 
aiid  fecond  Fringes. 

I 

t 

The  diftance  between  the  Middles 
of  the  brightefl  Light  of  the  fe- 
cond and  third  Fringes 

t 

1 
1 

7' 

The  breadth  of  the  luminous  part 
(green,  white,  yellow  and  red)  of 
the  firft  Fringe 

t 
X  7  »' 

f 

The  breadth  of  the  darker  Space  be- 
tween the  firft  and  lecond  Fringes 

1 

The  breadth  of  the  luminous  part  of 
the  fecond  Fringe 

I 

»  TT 

The  breadth  of  the  darker  Space  be- 
tween the  lecond  and  third  Fring;es 

*7q:-r 

"*T 

Theie 


[  299  ] 

Thefe  Mcafurcs  I  took  by  letting  the  Shadow 
of  the  Hair  at  half  a  Foot  diilance  fall  fo  ob- 
liquely on  the  Scale  as  to  appear  twelve  times 
broader  than  when  it  fell  perpendicularly  on  it 
at  the  fame  dilbnce,  and  fetting  down  in  this 
Table  the  twelfth  part  of  the  Meafures  I  then 
took. 

Obf.  4.  When  the  Shadow  and  Fringes  were 
call  obliquely  upon  a  fmooth  white  Body?  and 
that  Body  was  removed  farther  and  farther 
from  the  Hair,  the  firft  Fringe  began  to  aippear 
and  look  brighter  than  the  reil  of  the  Light 
at  the  diftance  of  lefs  than  a  quarter  of  an  hicli 
from  the  Hair,  and  the  dark  Line  or  Shadow 
between  that  and  the  fecond  Fringe  began  to 
appear  at  a  lefs  diilance  from  the  Hair  than  that 
of  the  third  part  of  an  hich.  The  fecond  Fringe 
began  to  appear  at  a  diilance  from  the  Hair  of 
lefs  than  half  an  Inch,  and  the  Shadow  bet\^^een 
that  and  the  third  Fringe  at  a  diftance  lefs  than 
an  Inch,  and  the  third  Fringe  at  a  diilance  lefs 
than  three  Inches.  At  greater  diitances  they 
became  muci»  more  feniible,  but  kept  very 
nearly  the  fime  proportion  of  their  breadths 
and  intervals  which  they  had  at  their  firil  ap- 
pearing. For  the  diilance  between  the  middle 
of  the  iirit  and  middle  of  the  fecond  Frinee, 
was  to  the  diilance  between  the  middle  of  the 
fecond  and  middle  of  the  third  Fringe,  as  three 
to  two,  or  ten  to  feven.  And  the  lail  of  thefe 
two  diilances  was  equal  to  the  bread t4i  of  the 
bright  Light  or  luminous  part  of  the  firil  Fringe. 
And  this  breadth  was  to  the  breadth  of  the 
bright  Light  of  the  fecond  Fringe  as  feven  to 

four. 


[  300  ] 

four,  atid  to  the  dark  Interval  of  the  firfl  arid 
fecond  Fringe  as  three  to  two,  and  to  the  Hke 
dark  Interval  between  the  fecond  and  third  as 
two  to  one.  For  the  breadths  of  the  Fringes 
feem'd  to  be  in  the  progrcilion  of  the  Numbers 
I,  v"  -} ,  y^-i  ,  and  their  Intervals  to  be  in  the 
fame  progrcilion  with  them;  that  is,  the  Frin- 
ges and  theit'  Intervals  together  to  be  in  the 
continual  progrellion  of  the  Numbers  i,  -v/^,  V-f,- 
'^■\-,  v^Tj  or  thereabouts.  And  thefe  Propor- 
tions held  the  fame  Very  nearly  at  all  diflances- 
from  the  Hair ;  the  dark  Intervals  of  the  Fringes 
being  as  broad  in  proportion  to  the  breadth  of 
the  Fringes  at  their. tirft  appearance  as  after- 
wards at  great  di fiances  from  the  Hair,  though 
not  fo  dark  and  dillind. 

01^/^  5".  The  h'\Tn  finning  into  my  darken'd 
Chamber  through  a  Hole  a  quarter  of  an  Inch 
broad  ;  I  placed  at  the  diilance  of  two  or  three 
Feet  from  the  Hole  a  Sheet  of  Paftboard,  which 
was  black'd  all  over  on  both  fides,  and  in  the 
middle  of  it  had  a  Hole  about  three  quarters 
of  an  Inch  fquare  for  the  Light  to  pafs  tlu-ough. 
And  behind  the  Hole  I  falllen'd  to  the  Pad- 
board  with  Pitch  the  Blade  of  a  iharp  Knife,  to 
intercept  fome  part  of  the  Light  which  pafTed 
through  the  Hole.  The  Planes  of  the  Paft* 
board  and  Blade  of  the  Knife  were  parallel  to 
one  another,  and  perpendicular  to  the  Rays. 
And  when  they  were  fo  placed  that  none  of 
the  Sun's  Light  fell  on  the  Paftboard,  but  all  of 
it  palled  through  the  Hole  to  the  Knife,  and  there 
part  of  it  fell  upon  the  Blade  of  the  Knife,  and 
part  of  it  paiTed  bv  its  edge :   I  .let  this  part  of 

the 


[  301  ] 

the  Light  which  pailed  by,  fall  on  a  white  Pa- 
per two  or  three  Feet  beyond  the  Knife,  and 
there  faw  two  ilrcams  of  faint  Light  fhoot  out 
both  w^ays  from  the  beam  of  Light  into  the  flia- 
dow  like  the  Tails  of  Comets.  But  becaufe  the 
Sun's  diredl  Light  by  its  brightnefs  upon  the 
Paper  obfcured  thefe  fliint  llreams,  lo  that  I 
could  fcarce  fee  them',  I  made  a,  little  hole  in 
the  midil  of  the  Paper  for  that  Light  to  pafs 
through  and  fall  on  a  black  Cloth  behind  it ; 
and  then  I  fiw  the  two  llreams  plainly.  They 
were  like  one  another,  and  pretty  nearly  equal 
in  length  and  breadth,  and  quantity  of  Light. 
Their  Light  at  that  end  next  the  Sun's  dired: 
Light  was  pretty  ftrong  for  the  fpace  of  about 
a  quarter  of  an  Inch,  or  half  an  Inch,  and  in  all 
its  progrefs  from  that  dire(^t  Light  decreafed 
gradually  till  it  became  infenfible.  The  whole 
length  of  either  of  thefe  llreams  m^afured  up- 
on the  Paper  at  the  diltance  of  three  Feet  from 
the  Knife  was  about  fix  or  eight  Inches ;  fo  that 
it  fubtended  an  Angle  at  the  edge  of  the  Knife 
of  about  lo  or  ii,  or  at  molt  14  Degrees.  Yet 
fometimes  I  thought  I  law  it  llioot  three  or  four 
]3egrees  fnther,  but  with  a  Light  fo  very  faint 
that  I  could  fcarce  perceive  it,  and  fufpeaed  it 
might  (in  fome  meafure  at  leall)  arife  from 
fome  other  caufe  than  the  two  ftreams  did.  For 
placing  my  Eye  in  that  Light  beyond  the  end 
of  that  Ib'eam  which  was  behind  the  Knife,  and 
looking  towards  the  Knife,  I  could  fee  a  line  of 
Light  upon  its  edge ,  and  that  not  only  when 
my  Eye  was  in  the  line  of  the  Streams,  but  al- 
fo  when  it  was  without  that  line  either  towards 

the 


[   302   ] 


the  point  of  the  Knife,  or  towards  the  handle. 
This  hne  of  Light  appear'd  contiguous  to  the 
edge  of  the  Knife,  and  was  narrower  than  the 
Light  of  the  innermoll  Fringe,  and  narroweft 
when  myEye  was  farthefl  from  the  dired  Light, 
and  therefore  feem'd  to  pafs  between  the  Light 
of  that  Fringe  and  the  edge  of  the  Knife,  and 
that  which  palTcd  neareit  the  edge  to  be  moil 
bent,  though  not  all  of  it. 

Obf.  6.  I  placed  another  Knife  by  this,  fo 
that  their  edges  might  be  parallel  and  look  to- 
wards one  another,  and  that  the  beam  of  Light 
might  fall  upon  both  the  Knives,  and  fome  part 
of  it  pafs  between  their  edges.  And  when  the 
diftance  of  their  edges  was  about  the  400th 
part  of  an  Inch  the  ih*eam  parted  in  the  mid- 
dle, and  left  a  Shadow  between  the  two  parts. 
This  Shadow  w^as  fo  black  and  dark  that  all  the 
Light  which  palTed  between  the  Knives  feem'd 
to  be  bent,  and  turn'd  afide  to  the  one  hand 
or  to  the  other.  And  as  the  Knives  ilill  ap- 
proached one  another  the  Shadow  grew  broad- 
er, and  the  Streams  iliorter  at  their  inward 
ends  which  were  next  the  Shadow,  until  upon 
the  contad  of  the  Knives  the  whole  Light  va- 
nifli'd  leaving  its  place  to  the  Shadow. 

And  hence  I  gather  that  the  Light  which  is 
lead:  bent,  and  goes  to  the  inward  ends  of  the 
Streams,  palfes  by  the  edges  of  the  Knives  at 
the  greatcll  diilance,  and  this  diftance  when 
the  Shadow  begins  to  appear  between  the 
Streams  is  about  the  800  part  of  an  Inch.  And 
the  Light  which  pafTes  by  the  edges  of  the 
Knives  at  diftances  ftill  lefs  and  lefs  is  more  and 
f  more 


[  303  ] 

more  bent,  and  goes  to  thofe  parts  of  the 
Streams  which  are  farther  and  farther  from  the 
dired  Light,  becaufe  when  the  Knives  approach 
one  another  till  they  touch,  thofe  parts  of  the 
Streams  vanifli  lail  which  are  farthell  from  the 
dired  Light. 

Oif/^  7.  In  the  fifth  Obfervation  the  Fringes 
did  not  appear,  but  by  reafon  of  the  breadth  of 
the  hole  in  theWindow  became  fo  broad  as  to  run  ^ 
into  one  another,  and  by  joining,  to  make  one 
continued  Light  in  the  beginning  of  the  Streams. 
But  in  the  iixth,  as  the  Knives  approached  one 
another,  a  little  before  the  Shadow  appear 'd 
between  the  two  Streams,  the  Fringes  began 
to  appear  on  the  inner  ends  of  the  Streams  on 
either  lide  of  the  dired  Light ,  three  on  one 
/  fide  made  by  the  edge  of  one  Knife,  and  three 
/on  the  other  fide  made  by  the  edge  of  the  o- 
f  ther  Knife.  They  were  diltinc^tell  when  the 
Knives  were  placed  at  the  greatell  diftance  from 
the  hole  in  the  Window,  and  Itill  became  more 
dillindt  by  making  the  hole  lefs,  infomuch  that 
I  could  fometimes  fee  a  faint  Lineament  of  a 
fourth  Fringe  beyond  the  three  above  men- 
tion'd.  And  as  the  Knives  continually  ap- 
proached one  another,  the  Fringes  grew  di- 
ilinder  and  larger  until  they  vaniih'd.  The 
outmoil  Fringe  vaniih'd  firil,  and  the  middle- 
moll:  next,  and  the  innermoll  lall.  And  after 
they  were  all  vaniili'd ,  and  the  Hne  of  Light 
which  was  in  the  middle  between  them  was 
grown  very  broad,  enlarging  it  felf  on  both  fides 
into  the  Streams  of  Light  defcribed  in  the  fifth 
Obfervation,  the  above  mentioned  Shadow  be- 
gan 


[304] 

gan  to  appear  in  the  middle  of  this  line ,  and 
divide  it  along  the  middle  into  two  lines  of 
Light,  and  increafed  until  the  whole  Light  va- 
niili'd.  This  enlargement  of  the  Fringes  was 
fo  great  that  the  Rays  which  go  to  the  inner- 
molt  Fringe  feem'd  to  be  bent  above  twentv 
times  more  when  this  Frijige  was  ready  to  va- 
niih,  than  when  one  of  the  Knives  was  taken 
away. 

And  from  this  and  the  former  Obfervation 
compared,  I  gather,  that  the  Light  of  the  firit 
Fringe  palled  by  the  edge  of  the  Knife  at  a  di- 
llance  greater  than  the  ^ooth  part  of  an  Inch, 
and  the  Light  of  the  fecond  Fringe  palled  by 
the  edge  of  the  Knife  at  a  greater  diflance  than 
the  Light  of  the  lirll:  Fringe  did ,  and  that  of 
the  third  at  a  greater  diflance  than  that  of  the 
fecond ,  and  that  of  the  Streams  of  Light  de- 
fcribed  in  the  fifth  and  fixth  Obfervations  paf- 
fed  by  the  edges  of  the  Knives  at  lefs  diflances 
than  that  of  any  of  the  Fringes. 

Obf.%.  I  caufed  the  edges  of  two  Knives 
to  be  ground  truly  ftrait ,  and  pricking  their 
points  into  a  Board  fo  that  their  edges  might 
look  towards  one  another,  and  meeting  near 
their  points  contain  a  redilinear  Angle,  I  f  iften'd 
their  Handles  together  with  Pitch  to  make  this 
Angle  invariable.  The  diflance  of  the  edges  of 
the  Knives  from  one  another  at  the  diflance  of 
four  Inches  from  the  angular  Point,  where  the 
edges  of  the  Knives  met ,  was  the  eighth  part 
of  an  Inch,  and  therefore  the  Angle  contain'd 
by  the  edges,  was  about  i  Degree  5-4 ,  The 
Knives  thus  fix'd  together  I  placed  in  a  beam 

of 


[  305  ] 

of  the  Sun's  Light,  let  into  my  darkened  Cham- 
ber through  a  hole  the  4id  part  of  an  Inch 
wide,  at  the  diltance  of  loor  15-  Feet  from  the 
hole,  and  Tet  the  Light  which  palled  between 
their  edges  fall  very  obliquely  upon  a  imooth 
white  Ruler  at  the  diilance  of  hair  an  Inch,  or 
an  Inch  from  the  Knives,  and  there  law  the 
Fringes  made  by  the  two  edges  of  the  Knives 
run  along  the  edges  of  the  Shadows  of  the 
Knives  in  lines  parallel  to  thofe  edges  without 
growing  fenfibly  broader ,  till  they  met  in  An- 
gles equal  to  the  Angle  contained  by  the  edges 
.of  the  Knives,  and  where  they  met  and  joined 
they  ended  without  eroding  one  another,  but 
if  the  Ruler  was  held  at  a  much  greater  di- 
ltance from  the  Knives,  the  Fringes  where  they 
were  farther  from  the  place  of  their  meetings 
were  a  little  narrower,  and  became  fomcthing 
broader  and  broader  as  they  approach'd  nearer 
and  nearer  to  one  another,  and  after  they  met 
they  crofs'd  one  another,  and  then  became  much 
broader  than  before. 

Whence  I  gather  that  the  diftances  at  which 
the  Fringes  pafs  by  the  Knives  are  not  increa- 
fed  nor  alter'd  by  the  approach  of  the  KniveSji 
but  the  Angles  in  which  the  Rays  are  there  bent 
are  much  increafed  by  that  approach ;  and  that 
the  Knife  which  is  neareft  any  Ray  determines 
which  way  the  Ray  Ihall  be  bent,  and  the  other 
Knife  increafes  the  bent. 

Obf.  <).  When  the  Rays  fell  very  obliqueiy 
upon  the  Ruler  at  the  dillance  of  the  third  part' 
of  an  Inch  from  the  Knives ,  the  dark  line  be- 
tween the  tirit  and  fecond  Fringe  of  the  Sha- 

X-  dovr 


k 


[  3o^] 

dovv  of  one  Knife,  and  the  dark  line  between 
the  fiiit  and  fecond  Fringe  of  the  Shadow  of 
the  other  Knife  met  with  one  another,  at  the 
diltance  of  the  fifth  part  of  an  Inch  from  the 
end  of  the  Light  which  palfed  between  the 
Knives  at  the  concourfe  of  their  edges.     And 
therefore  the  dilfance  of  the  edges  of  the  Knives 
at  the  meeting  of  thefe  dark  lines  was  the  i6oth 
part  of  an  Inch.     For  as  four  Inches  to   the 
eighth  part  of  an  Inch ,  fo  is  any  length  of  the 
edges  of  the  Knives  meafured  from  the  point 
of  their  concourfe  to  the  diftance  of  the  edges 
of  the  Knives  at  the  end  of  that  length,  and  fO' 
is  the  fifth  part  of  an  Inch  to  the  i6oth  part. 
So  then  the  dark  lines  above  mention'd  meet 
in  the  middle  of  the  Light  which  palfes  be- 
tween the  Knives  where  they  are  diftant  the 
i6oth  part  of  an  Inch,  and  the  one  half  of  that 
Light  palFes  by  the  edge  of  one  Knife  at  a  di- 
ftance not  greater  than  the  3ioth  part  of  an 
Inch,   and  falling  upon  the  Paper  makes  the 
Fringes  of  the  Shadow  of  that  Knife,  and  the 
other  half  pafTes  by  the  edge  of  the  other  Knife, 
at  a  diltance  not  greater  than  the  310th  part  of 
an  Inch,  and  falling  upon  the  Paper  makes  the 
Fringes  of  the  Shadow  of  the  other  Knife.     But 
if  the  Paper  be  held  at  a  dillance  from  the 
Knives  greater  than  the  third  part  of  an  Inch, 
the  dark  lines  above  mention'd  meet  at  a  great- 
er dillance  than  the  fifth  part  of  an  Inch  from 
the  end  of  the  Light  which  pafled  between  the 
knives  at  the  concourfe  of  their  edges ;   and 
therefore  the  Light  which  falls  upon  the  Paper 
where  thofe  dark  lines  meet  palles  between  the 

Knives 


[  307  ] 

Knives  where  their  edges  are  diitant  above  the 
i6oth  part  of  an  Inch. 

For  at  another  time  vi^hen  the  two  Knives 
were  diflant  eight  Feet  and  five  Inches  from 
the  Httle  hole  in  the  Window,  made  Vvith  a 
fmall  Pin  as  above,  the  Light  which  fell  upon 
the  Paper  where  the  aforefaid  dark  lines'  met, 
pafled  between  the  Knives,  where  the  diilance 
between  their  edges  was  as  in  the  following 
Table ,  when  the  diliance  of  the  Paper  from 
the  Knives  was  alfo  as  follows. 


"DiJIances  of  theTaJ^er  T>ijiances  bet^^xjeen  the 

edges  of  the  Knives 
in  mi  lie  Jim  al  parts  of 
an  Inch. 


from  the  Knives  in 
Inches. 


O  OIX 
0'020 

o'o34 
ooSJ 
o'o8i 
o'o87 


And  hence  I  gather  that  the  Light  which 
makes  the  Fringes  upon  the  Paper  is  not  the 
fame  Light  at  all  diitances  of  the  Paper  from 
the  Knives,  but  when  the  Paper  is  held  near 
the  Knives,  the  Fringes  are  made  by  Light 
which  paffes  by  the  edges  of  the  Knives  at  a 
lefs  diilance,  and  is  more  bent  than  when  the 
Paper  is  held  at  a  greater  diftance  from  the 
Knives. 

X  X  Obf 


[  3o8  1 

Obf.  lo.  When  the  Fringes  of  the  Shadows 
of  the  Knives  fell  perpendicularly  upon  a  Paper 
at  a  great  diilance  from  the  Knives,  they  were 
in  the  form  of  Hyperbolas,  and  their  Dimen- 
fions  wTre  as  follows.  Let  C  A,  C  B  [in  Fig.  3.] 
reprefent  lines  drawn  upon  the  Paper  parallel 
to  the  edges  of  the  Knives,  and  between  which 
all  the  Light  would  fall,  if  it  palled  between 
the  edges  of  the  Knives  without  inflexion  ;  DE 
a  right  hne  drawn  through  C  making  the  An- 
gles A  CD,  BCE,  equal  to  one  another,  and 
terminating  all  the  Light  which  falls  upon  the 
Paper  from  the  point  where  the  edges  of  the 
Knives  meet ;  e  i  s,  f  k  t,  and  g  I  v.,  three  hy- 
perbolical lines  reprefenting  the  Terminus  of 
the  Shadow  of  one  of  the  Knives,  the  dark  line 
between  the  firil  and  fecond  Fringes  of  that 
Shadow,  and  the  dark  hne  between  the  fecond 
and  third  Fringes  of  the  fame  Shadow  ;  x  i/,jy  k  q 
and%/r,  three  other  hyperbolical  lines  repre- 
fenting theTerminus  of  the  Shadow  of  the  other 
Knife,  the  dark  line  between  the  firft  and  fecond 
Fringes  of  that  Shadow,  and  the  dark  Hne  be- 
tween the  fecond  and  third  Fringes  of  the  fame 
Shadow.  And  conceive  that  theie  three  Hyper- 
bolas are  like  and  equal  to  the  former  three,  and 
crofs  them  in  the  points  /,  k  and  /,  and  that  the 
Shadows  of  the  Knives  are  terminated  and  diilin- 
guifh'd  from  the  firit  luminous  Fringes  by  the 
lines  ei  s  and  x i/,  until  the  meeting  and  crof- 
fing  of  the  Fringes,  and  then  thofe  lines  crofs 
the  Fringes  in  the  form  of  dark  lines,  termina- 
ting the  firft  luminous  Fringes  within  fide,  and 
diftinguifliing  them  from  another  Light  which 

begins 


[309] 

begins  to  appear  at  /',  and  illuminates  all  the 
triarlgular  ipace  //DE  s  comprehended  by  thcfe 
dark  lines,  and  the  ri- ht  hne  D  E.  Of  theie 
Hyperbolas  one  Alymptote  is  the  lineDE,  and 
their  other  Al'ymptotes  are  parallel  to  the  lines 
C  A  and  CB.  Let  rv  rcprefent  a  Hne  drawn 
any  where  upon  the  Paper  parallel  to  the  Alym- 
ptote DE,  and  let  this  line  crofs  the  right  lines 
AC  in  ?«  and  BC  in  //,  and  the. fix  dark  hy- 
perbolical lines  in  />,  ^,  r ;  s,f,v;  and  bv  mea- 
suring; the  diilances/j-,  qt,  rv  ^  and  thence 
collecting  the  lengths  of  the  Ordinates ;//,  //  q, 
nr  or  ms,  mt^  mv,  and  doing  this  at  feveral 
diltances  of  the  line  r  v  from  the  Afymptote 
DD,  you  may  find  as  many  points  of  thefe  Hy- 
perbolas as  you  plcafe,  and  thereby  know  that 
thcfe  curve  lines  are  Hyperbolas  differing  little 
from  the  conical  Hyperbola.  And  by  meafur- 
ing  the  lines  C  /',  Ci,  C/,  you  may  find  other 
points  of  thefe  Curves. 

For  inftance,  when  the  Knives  were  diftant 
from  the  hole  in  theWindovv  ten  Feet,  and  the 
Paper  from  the  Knives  nine  Feet,  and  the  An- 
gle contained  by  the  edges  of  the  Knives  to 
which  the  Angle  ACB  is  equal,  was  lubrend- 
ed  by  a  Chord  which  was  to  the  Radius  as  i 
to  32,  and  the  dillance  of  the  line  r.v  from  the 
Afymptote  DE  was  half  an  Inch:  I  mcafured 
the  lines  / J- ,  qt^  rv,  and  found  them  o'35', 
0*65',  o'9 8  Inches  refpedively,  and  by  adding 
to  their  halfs  the  line  \mn  { which  here  wa? 
the  ixSthpart  of  an  Inch,  or  o'oojS  Inches)  the 
Sums  ;//,  nq^  nr,  were  o'i8x8,  o'3328,  0*4978 
Inches.    I  meafured  alfo  the  diitances  of  the 

X  3  brighteft 


[  3IO  ] 

brightefl  parts  of  the  Fringes  which  run  be- 
tween / q  and  st^  qr  and  t v,  and  next  beyond 
r  and  ^',  and  found  them  oV,  o'8,  and  I'l 7  Inches. 
Obf.  II.     The  Sun  ihining  into  my  darken'd 
Room  through  a  fraall  round  hole  made  in  a 
Plate  of  Lead  with  a  flender  Pin  as  above ;  I 
placed  at  the  hole  a  Prifm  to  refract  the  Light, 
and  form  on  the  oppofite  Wall  the  Spedrum 
of  Colours,   defcribed  in  the  third  Experiment 
of  the  firfl  Book.     And  then  1  found  that  the 
Shadows  of  all  Bodies  held  in  the  colour'd 
Light  between  the  Prifm  and  the  Wall,  were 
border'd  with  Fringes  of  the  Colour  of  that 
Light  in  which  they  were  held.  In  the  full  red 
Light  they  were  totally  red  without  any  fenfi- 
ble  blue  or  violet ,   and  in  the  deep  blue  Light 
they  w^ere  totally  blue  without  any  feniible  red 
or  yellow  ;  and  lb  in  the  green  Light  they  ^ere 
totally  green,  excepting  a  little  yellow  and  blue, 
which  were  mix'd  in  the  green  Light  of  the 
Prifm.     And  comparing  the  Fringes  made  in 
the  feveral  colour'd  Lights,  I  found  that  thofe 
made  in  the  red  Light  where  largeit,   thofe 
made  in  the  violet  were  leafl,  and  tho:e  made 
in  the  green  were  of  a  middle  bignefs.     lor 
the  Fringes  with  which  the  Shadow  of  a  Man's 
Hair  were  border'd,  being  meaiured  crofs  the 
Shadow  at  the  diflance  of  fix  Inches  from  the 
Hair ;  the  diflance  between  the  middle  and  molt 
luminous  part  of  the  firft  or  innermolf  Fringe 
on  one  fide  of  the  Shadow,  and  that  of  the  like 
Fringe  on  the  other  fide  of  the  Shadow  was  in 

the  full  red  Light  ^.  of  an  Inch,  and  in  the  full 

violet 


[3ii] 

violet  -v^.  And  the  like  diftance  between  the 
middle  and  moll  luminous  parts  of  the  fecond 
Fringes  on  either  lide  the  Shadow  was  in  the 
full  red  Light  A-,  and  in  the  violet  ^r^  of  an 
Inch.  And  thefe  diltances  of  the  Fringes  held 
the  fame  proportion  at  all  diltances  from  the 
Hair  without  any  fenfible  variation. 

So  then  the  Rays  which  made  thefe  Fringes 
in  the  red  Light  palfed  by  the  Hair  at  a  greater 
diftance  than  thofe  did  which  made  the  like 
Fringes  in  the  violet ;  and  therefore  the  Hair 
in  caufmg  thefe  Fringes  aded  alike  upon  the 
red  Light  or  leaft  refrangible  Rays  at  a  greater 
dilbnce,  and  upon  the  violet  or  moil  refrangi- 
ble Rays  at  a  lefs.  diltance,  and  by  thofe  adions 
difpoled  the  red  Light  into  larger  Fringes,  and 
the  violet  into  fmaller,  and  the  Lights  of  inter- 
mediate Colours  into  Fringes  of  intermediate 
bignelTes  without  changing  the  Colour  of  any 
fort  of  Light. 

When  therefore  the  Hair  in  the  firfl  and  fe- 
cond of  thefe  .Obfervations  was  held  in  the 
white  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light,  and  call  a  Sha- 
dow which  was  border 'd  with  three  Fringes  of 
colour'd  Light ,  thofe  Colours  arofe  not  from 
any  new  modifications  imprefs'd  upon  the  Rays 
of  Light  by  the  Hair,  but  only  from  the  vari- 
ous intlexions  whereby  the  feveral  forts  of  Rays 
were  feparated  from  one  another,  which  before 
feparation  by  the  mixture  of  all  their  Colours, 
compofed  the  white  beam  of  the  Sun's  Light, 
but  whenever  feparated  compofe  Lights  of  the 
feveral  Colours  which  they  are  originally  dilpo- 
fed  to  exhibit.  In  this  iithObfervation,  where 

X  4  the 


[312] 

the  Colours  are  feparated  before  the  Light  paf- 
fe  by  the  Kair,  the  leait  refrangible  Rays,  which 
when  leparaied  from  the  rclt  make  red,  were 
intleded  at  a  greater  diitance  from  the  Hair,  fo 
as  to  make  three  red  Fringes  at  a  greater  di- 
ilance  from  the  middle  of  the  Shadow  of  the 
Hair  ;  and  the  moil  refrangible  Rays  which 
when  feparated  make  violet ,  were  infie^led  at 
a  lefs  diilance  from  the  Hair,  fo  as  to  make 
three  violet  Fringes  at  a  lefs  diilance  from  the 
middle  of  the  Shadow  of  the  Hair.  And  other 
Rays  of  intermediate  degrees  of  Refrangibility 
were  infleded  at  intermediate  diltances  from 
the  Hair,  fo  as  to  make  Fringes  of  intermediate 
Colours  at  intermediate.dillanccs  from  the  mid- 
dle of  the  Shadow  of  the  Hair.  And  in  the 
fecond  Obfervation,  where  all  the  Colours  are 
mi>'d  in  the  white  Light  which  palfes  by  the 
Hair,  thefe  Colours  are  feparated  by  the  vari- 
ous inflexions  of  the  Rays ,  and  the  Fringes 
which  they  make  appear  all  together,  and  the 
innermoft  Fringes  being  contiguous  make  one 
broad  PMnge  compofed  of  all  the  Colours  in 
due  order,  the  violet  lying  on  the  infide  of  the 
Fringe  next  the  Shadow ,  the  red  on  the  out- 
fide  fartheil  from  the  Shadow,  and  the  blue, 
green  and  yellow,  in  the  middle.  And,  in  Hke 
manner,  the  middlemoft  Fringes  of  all  the  Co- 
lours lying  in  order,  and  being  contiguous, 
make  another  broad  Fringe  compofed  of  all  the 
Colours;  and  the  outmoll  Fringes  of  all  the 
Colours  lying  in  order,  and  being  contiguous, 
make  a  third  broad  Fringe  compofed  of  all  the 
Colours,  Thefe  are  the  three  Fringes  of  co- 
loured 


[  313  ] 

lour'd  Light  with  which  the  Shadows  of  all 
Bodies  are  border'd  in  the  fecond  OHfervation. 

W  hen  I  made  the  foregoing  Obfervations,  I 
defign'd  to  repeat  moil  of  them  with  more  care 
and  exadnefs,  and  to  make  fome  new  one$  for 
determining  the  manner  how  the  Rays  of  Light 
are  bent  in  their  paflage  by  Bodies  for  making 
the  Fringes  of  Colours  with  the  dark  lines  be- 
tween them.  But  I  was  then  interrupted,  and 
cannot  now  think  of  taking  thefe  things  into 
farther  confideration.  And  lince  I  liave  not  li- 
nifh'd  this  part  of  my  Delign,  I  iliall  conclude, 
with  propofing  only  fome  Queries  in  order  to  a 
farther  fearch  to  be  made  by  others. 

^fery  i.  Do  not  Bodies  ad:  upon  Light  at 
a  diitance,  and  by  their  adion  bend  its  Rays, 
and  is  not  this  action  (cateris p/iribus)  llrong- 
ell  at  the  Icalt  diliance  ? 

^i.  2.  Do  not  the  Rays  which  differ  in  Re- 
frangibility  ditFer  alfo  in  Flexibility,  and  are 
they  not  by  their  different  Inflexions  feparated 
from  one  another,  fo  as  after  feparation  to  make 
the  Colours  in  the  three  Fringes  above  defcri- 
bed .'  And  after  what  manner  are  they  infle6l- 
ed  to  make  thofe  Fringes? 

^/.  3.  Are  not  the  Rays  of  Light  in  pafling 
by  the  edges  and  fides  of  Bodies ,  bent  feveral 
times  backwards  and  forwards,  with  a  motion 
like  that  of  an  Eel  ?  And  do  not  the  three  Frin- 
ges of  colour 'd  Light  above  mention'd,  arife 
from  three  fuch  bendings  .^ 

^//.  4.  Do  not  the  Rays  of  Light  which  fall 
Upori  Bodies,  and  are  refleded  or  refradled,  be- 
gin 


gin  to  bend  before  they  arrive  at  the  Bodies ; 
and  are  th'ey  not  refleded,  refraded  and  in- 
fleded  by  one  and  the  fame  Principle,  ading 
varioufly  in  various  Circumitances  ? 

^t.  $.  Do  not  Bodies  and  Light  aft  mutu- 
ally upon  one  another,  that  is  to  fay.  Bodies 
upon  Light  in  emitting,  refleding,  refrading 
arid  inileding  it,  and  Light  upon  Bodies  for 
heating  them,  and  putting  their  parts  into  a  vi- 
brating motion  wnerein  heat  coniiils  ? 

§lu.  6.  Do  not  black  Bodies  conceive  heat 
more  eafily  from  Light  than  thole  of  other  Co- 
lours do,  by  reafon  that  the  Light  falling  on 
them  is  not  refleded  outwards,  but  enters  the 
Bodies,  and  is  often  reflected  and  refracled 
within  them,  until  it  be  llifled  and  loit  ?  .j 

^/.  7.   Is  not  the  ftrength  and  vigour  of  the ' 
aftion  between  Light  and  fulphureous  Bodies 
obferved  above,    one  reafon  why  fulphureous 
Bodies  take  fire  more  readily,   and  burn  more 
vehemently,  than  other  Bodies  do  ? 

^.  8.  Do  not  all  tix'd  i^odies  when  heated 
beyond  a  certain  degree,  emit  Light  and  fhine, 
and  is  not  this  Emillion  performed  by  the  vi- 
brating Motions  of  their  parts  ?  And  do  not  all 
Bodies  which  abound  with  terreltrial  parts,  and 
efpecially  with  fulphureous  ones,  emit  Light 
as  often  as  thofe  parts  are  fufficiently  agitated ; 
whether  that  agitation  be  made  by  Heat,  or  by 
Fridion,  or  Percullion,  or  Putrefadion,  or  by 
any  vital  Motion,  or  any  other  Caufe  ?  As  for 
inltance ;  Sea  Water  in  a  raging  Storm ;  Quick- 
filver  agitated  in  vacuo ;  the  Back  of  a  Cat,  or 
Neck  of  a  Horfe  obliquely  Ih'uck  or  rubbed  in 

a  dark 


[315] 

a  dark  place ;  Wood,  Flefli  and  Fifli  while  they 
putrefy;   Vapours  arifing  from  putrefy 'd  Wa- 
ters, ufually  call'd  J^nesFatui^  Stacks  of  moilt 
Hay  or  Corn  grovv'^ing  hot  by  fermentation  ; 
Glow-worms  and  the  Eyes  of  fome  Animals  by 
vital  Motions ;   the  vulgar  Thof^horus  agitated 
by  the  attrition  of  any  Body,   or  by  the  acid 
Particles  of  the  Air;   Ambar  and  fome  Dia- 
monds by  llriking,  preffing  or  rubbing  them  ; 
Scrapings  of  Steel  Itruck  off  with  a  Flint ;  Iron 
hammer'd  very  nimbly  till  it  become  fo  hot  as 
to  kindle  Sulphur  thrown  upon  it ;   the  Axle- 
trees  of  Chariots  taking  fire  by  the  rapid  rota- 
tion of  the  W  heels ;  and  fome  Liquors  mix'd 
with  one  another  whofe  Particles  come  toge- 
ther with  an  Impetus,  as  Oil  of  Vitriol  diililled 
from  its  weight  of  Nitre,  and  then  mix'd  with 
twice  its  weight  of  Oil  of  Annifeeds.     So  alfo  a 
Globe  of  Glais  about  8  or  lo  Inches  in  diameter, 
being  put  into  a  Frame  vvhere  it  maybe  fwift- 
ly  turn'd  round  its  Axis,  will  in  turning  fliine 
where  it  rubs  againll  the  palm  of  ones  Hand 
apply'd  to  it:   And  if  at  the  fame  time  a  piece 
of  white  Paper  or  white  Cloth,  or  the  end  of 
ones  Finger  be  held  at  the  diftance  of  about  a 
quarter  of  an  Inch  or  half  an  Inch  from  that 
part  of  the  Glafs  where  it  is  moil  in  motion, 
the  eleftrick  Vapour  which  is  excited  by  the 
friction  of  the  Glafs  againft  the  Hand,  will  by 
dafliing  againit  the  white  Paper,  Cloth  or  Fin- 
ger,  be  put  into  fuch  an  agitation  as  to  emit 
Light,  and  make  the  white  Paper,  Cloth  or  Fin- 
ger,  appear  lucid  like  a  Glow-worm ;   and  in 
rufliing  out  of  the  Giafs  will  fometimes  pufh 

againft 


[31^] 


againft  the  Finger  fo  as  to  be  felt.  And  the 
fame  things  have  been  found  by  rubbing  a  long 
and  large  Cylinder  of  Glafs  or  Ambar  with  a  Pa- 
per held  in  ones  hand,  and  continuing  the  fri- 
dion  till  the  Glafs  grew  warm. 

§lu.  9.  Is  not  Fire  a  Body  heated  fo  hot  as  to 
emit  Light  copiouily  ?  For  what  elfe  is  a  red 
hot  Iron  than  Fire  ?  And  what  elfe  is  a  burning 
Coal  than  red  hot  Wood  ? 

G^t.  10.  Is  not  Flame  a  Vapour,  Fume  or  Ex- 
halation heated  red  hot,  that  is,  fo  hot  as  to 
ihine?  For  Bodies  do  not  flame  without  emit- 
ting a  copious  Fume,  and  this  Fume  burns  in 
the  Flame.  The  IgnU  Fatiim  is  a  Vapour  fhi- 
ning  without  heat,  and  is  there  not  the  fame 
difference  between  this  Vapour  and  Flame ,  as 
between  rotten  Wood  lliining  without  heat  and 
burning  Coals  of  Fire  ?  In  dillilling  hot  Spirits , 
if  the  Head  of  the  Still  be  taken  off,  the  Va- 
pour which  afcends  out  of  the  Still  will  take  fire 
at  the  Flame  of  a  Candle,  and  turn  into  Flame, 
and  the  Flame  will  run  along  the  Vapour  from 
the  Candle  to  the  Still.  Some  Bodies  heated  by 
Motion  or  Fermentation ,  if  the  heat  grow  in- 
tenfe,  fume  copiouily,  and  if  the  heat  be  great 
enough  the  Fumes  will  fhine  and  become  Flame. 
Metals  in  fufion  do  not  flame  for  want  of  a  co- 
pious Fume,  except  Spelter,  which  fumes  co- 
piouily, and  thereby  flames.  All  flaming  Bo- 
dies, as  Oil,  Tallow,  Wax,  Wood,  fofTil  Coals, 
Pitch,  Sulphur,  by  flaming  wafte  and  vanifh  in- 
to burning  Smoke,  which  Smoke,  if  the  Flame 
be  put  out,  is  very  thick  and  vifible,  and  fome- 
times  fmells  ilrongly,  but  in  the  Flame  lofes  its 

fmell 


[  317  ] 


fmell  by  burning,  and  according  to  the  nature 
of  the  Smoke  the  Flame  is  of  leveral  Colours, 
as  that  of  Sulphur  blue,  that  of  Copper  open'd 
with  fublimate  green,  that  of  Tallow  yellow, 
that  of  Camphire  white.  Smoke  pafling  through 
Flame  cannot  but  grow  red  hot,  and  red  hot 
Smoke  can  have  no  other  appearance  than  that 
of  Flame.  When  Gun-powder  takes  tire,  it 
goes  away  into  flaming  Smoke.  For  the  Char- 
coal and  Sulphur  eafily  take  fire,  and  fet  fire  to 
the  Nitre,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Nitre  being 
thereby  rarified  into  Vapour,  rulhcs  out  with 
Exploiion  much  after  the  manner  that  the  Va- 
pour of  Water  rufhes  out  of  an  a£ohpile  ;  the 
Sulphur  alfo  beings  volatile  is  converted  into 
Vapour,  and  augments  the  Exploiion.  And 
the  acid  Vapour  of  the  Sulphur  (namely  that 
which  diftils  under  a  Bell  into  Oil  of  Sulphur,) 
entring  violently  into  the  fix't  Body  of  the  Ni- 
tre, fets  loofe  the  Spirit  of  the  Nitre,  and  ex- 
cites a  great  Ferm.entation,  whereby  the  Heat 
is  farther  augmented,  and  the  tix'd  Body  of  the 
Nitre  is  alfo  raritied  into  Fume,  and  the  Explo- 
iion is  thereby  made  more  vehement  and  quick. 
For  if  Salt  of  Tartar  be  mix'd  with  Gun-povi^- 
der ,  and  that  Mixture  be  warm'd  till  it  takes 
fire,  the  Exploiion  will  be  more  violent  and 
quick  than  that  of  Gun-powder  alone ;  which 
cannot  proceed  from  any  other  caufe  than  the 
aciion  of  the  V  apour  of  the  Gun-powder  upon 
the  Salt  of  Tartar,  whereby  that  Salt  is  rarihed. 
TheExplofion  of  Gun-powder  arifes  therefore 
from  the  violent  adion  whereby  all  the  Mixture 
being  quickly  and  vehemently  heated,  is  rarified 

and 


.[318] 

and  converted  into  Fume  and  \  apour :  which 
,\  apour ,  by  the  violence  of  that  adion ,  be- 
coming fo  hot  as  to  ihinc,  appears  in  the  form 
of  Flame. 

^^.11.  Do  not  great  Bodies  conferve  their 
heat  the  longeil,  their  parts  heating  one  ano- 
ther ,  and  may  not  great  denfe  and  fix'd  Bo- 
dies, when  heated  beyond  a  certain  degree,  e- 
mit  Light  fo  copioufly,  as  by  theEmiflion  and 
Re-adion  of  its  Light,  and  the  Reflexions  and 
Refractions  of  its  Rays  within  its  Pores  to  grow 
ftill  hotter ,  till  it  comes  to  a  certain  period  of 
,  heat,  fuch  as  is  that  of  the  Sun  ?  And  are  not 
the  Sun  and  fix'd  Stars  great  Earths  vehemently 
hot,  whofe  heat  is  conferved  by  the  greatnefs 
of  the  Bodies,  and  the  mutual  Adion  and  Re- 
adion  between  them,  and  the  Light  which  they 
emit,  and  whofe  parts  are  kept  from  fuming  a- 
way,  not  only  by  their  fixity,  but  alfo  by  the 
vaft  weight  and  denfity  of  the  Atmofpheres  in- 
cumbent upon  them ,  and  very  ftrongly  com- 
prefling  them,  and  condenfing  the  Vapours  and 
Exhalations  which  arife  from  them?  For  if 
Water  be  made  warm  in  any  pellucid  VefTel 
emptied  of  Air,  that  Water  in  the  Vacuum  will 
bubble  and  boil  as  vehemently  as  it  would  in 
the  open  Air  in  a  Veflcl  fet  upon  the  Fire  till 
it  conceives  a  much  greater  heat.  For  the 
weight  of  the  incumbent  Atrnofphere  keeps 
down  the  Vapours,  and  hinders  the  Water  from 
boiling,  until  it  grow  much  hotter  than  is  re- 
quifite  to  made  in  boil  in  vacuo,  Alfo  a  mix- 
ture of  Tin  and  Lead  being  put  upon  a  red  hot 
Iron  in  vacuo  emits  a  Fume  and  Flame,  but  the 

fame 


r  319 1 

fame  Mixture  in  the  open  Air,  byreafon  of  the 
incumbent  Atmofphere,  does  not  fo  much  as  e- 
mit  any  Fume  which  can  be  perceived  by  Sight. 
In  Hke  manner  the  great  weight  of  the  Atmo- 
fphere which  lies  upon  the  Globe  of  the  Sun 
may  hinder  Bodies  there  from  rifmg  up  and 
going  away  from  the  Sun  in  the  form  of  W 
pours  and  Fumes,  unlefs  by  means  of  a  far 
greater  heat  than  that  which  on  the  Surface  of 
our  Earth  would  very  eafily  turn  them  into  Va- 
pours and  Fumes.    Aixl  the  fame  great  weight 
maycondenfe  thofe  Vapours  and  Exhalations  as 
foon  as  they  ihall  at  any  time  begin  to  afcend 
from  the  Sun,  and  make  them  prefently  fall 
back  again  into  him,  and  by  that  adion  increale 
his  Heat  much  after  the  manner  that  in  our 
Earth  the  Air  increafes  the  Heat  of  a  cuHnary 
Fire.     And  the  lame  weight  may  hinder  the 
Globe  of  the  Sun  from  being  diminifh'd,  unlefs 
by  the  Emiflion  of  Light,  and  a  very  fmall  quan- 
tity of  Vapours  and  Exhalations. 

^t.  12.  Do  not  the  Rajs  of  Light  in  falling 
upon  the  bottom  of  the  Eye  excite  Vibrations 
in  the  Tunica  Retina  ?  Which  Vibrations,  be- 
ing propagated  along  the  folid  Fibres  of  the  op- 
tick  Nerves  into  the  Brain ,  caufe  the  Senfe  of 
feeing.  For  becaufe  denfe  Bodies  conferve  their 
Heat  a  long  time,  and  the  denfefl  Bodies  con- 
ferve their  Heat  the  longed,  the  Vibrations  of 
their  parts  are  of  a  lading  nature,  and  there- 
fore may  be  propagated  along  folid  Fibres  of 
uniform  denfe  Matter  to  a  great  diftance,  for 
conveying  into  the  Brain  the  impreffions  made 
upon  all  the  Organs  of  Senfe.     For  that  Motion 

which 


[  32q] 

which  can  continue  long  in  one  and  the  faiiid 
part  of  a  Body,  can  be  propagated  a  long  way 
from  one  part  to  another,  fuppoling  the  Body 
homogeneal,  fo  that  the  Motion  may  not  be  re- 
fle^led,  refracted,  interrupted  or  dilbrder'd  by 
any  unevennefs  of  the  Body. 

^.  13.  Do  not  feveral  forts  of  Rays  make 
Vibrations  of  feveral  bignefles,  which  according 
to  their  bignefTes  excite  Senfations  of  feveral 
Colours,  much  after  the-manner  that  the  Vibra- 
tions of  the  Air,  according  to  their  feveral  big- 
nelTes  excite  Senfations  of  feveral  Sounds?  And 
particularly  do  not  the  moft  refrangible  Rays 
excite  the  lliorteft  Vibrations  for  making  aSen- 
fation  of  deep  violet,  the  leatt  refrangible  the 
largeft  for  making  a  Senfation  of  deep  red,  and 
the  feveral  intermediate  forts  of  Rays ,  Vibra- 
tions of  feveral  intermediate  bignefles  to  make 
Senfations  of  the  feveral  intermediate  Colours  ? 

^/.  14.  May  not  the  harmony  and  difcord 
of  Colours  arife  from  the  proportions  of  the 
Vibrations  propagated  through  the  Fibres  of 
the  optick  Nerves  into  the  Brain,  as  the  harmo- 
ny and  difcord  of  Sounds  arife  from  the  pro- 
portions of  the  Vibrations  of  the  Air?  For 
fome  Colours,  if  they  be  view'd  together,  are 
agreeable  to  one  another,  as  thofe  of  Gold  and 
Indigo,  and  others  difagree. 

^.  15-.  Are  not  the  Species  of  Objects  feen 
with  both  Eyes  united  where  the  optick  Nerves 
meet  before  they  come  into  the  Brain,  the  Fi- 
bres on  the  right  fide  of  both  Nerves  uniting 
there,  and  after  union  going  thence  into  the 
Brain  in  the  Nerve  which  is  on  the  right  fide  of 

the 


i  321  ] 

the  Head,  and  the  Fibres  on  the  left  fide  of 
both  Nerves  uniting  in  the  fame  place,  and  af- 
ter union  going  into  the  Brain  in  the  Nerve 
which  is  on  the  left  fide  of  the  Head,  and  thefe 
two  Nerves  meeting  in  the  Brain  in  fuch  a  man- 
ner that  their  Fibres  make  but  one  entire  Spe- 
cies or  Picture,  half  of  which  on  the  right  fide 
of  the  Senforium  comes  from  the  right  fide  of 
both  Eyes  through  the  right  fide  of  both  op- 
tick  Nerves  to  the  place  where  the  Nerves  meetj 
and  from  thence  on  the  right  fide  of  the  Head 
into  the  Brain,  and  the  other  half  on  the  left 
fide  of  the  Senforium  comes  in  like  manner 
from  the  left  fide  of  both  Eyes.  For  the  op- 
tick  Nerves  of  fuch  Animals  as  look  the  fame 
way  with  both  Eyes  (as  of  Men,  Dogs,  Sheep, 
Oxen,  &c.)  meet  before  they  come  into  the 
Brain,  but  the  optick  Nerves  of  fuch  Animals 
as  do  not  look  the  fime  way  with  both  Eyes 
(as  of  Fiflies  and  of  the  Chameleon)  do  not 
meet,  if  I  am  rightly  inform'd. 

^.16.  When  aMan  in  the  dark  prefTes  either* 
corner  of  his  Eye  with  his  Finger,  and  turns  his 
Eye  away  from  his  Finger,  he  will  fee  a  Circle 
of  Colours  Hke  thofe  in  the  Feather  of  a  Pea- 
cock's Tail.  If  the  Eye  and  the  Finger  remain 
quiet  thefe  Colours  vaniih  in  a  fecond  Minute  of' 
Time,  but  if  the  Finger  be  moved  with  a  qua- 
vering Motion  they  appear  again.  Do  not  thefe 
Colours  arife  from  fuch  Motions  excited  in  the 
bottom  of  the  Eye  by  the  Preifure  and  Motion 
of  the  Finger,  as  at  other  times  are  excited 
there  by  Light  for  caufing  Vifion  ?  And  do  not 
the  Motions  once  excited  continue  about  a  Se- 

Y  Gond 


[    322  ] 

cond  of  Time  before  they  ceafe  ?  And  when  a 
Man  by  a  ftroke  upon  his  Eye  fees  a  flafli  of 
Light,  are  not  the  Hke  Motions  excited  in  the 
Retina  by  the  ilroke  ?  And  when  a  Coal  of  Fire 
moved  nimbly  in  the  circumference  of  a  Cir- 
cle, makes  the  whole  circumference  appear  hke 
a  Circle  of  Fire :  Is  it  not  becaufe  the  Motions 
excited  in  the  bottom  of  the  Eye  by  the  Rays 
of  Light  are  of  a  lading  nature,  and  continue 
till  the  Coal  of  Fire  in  going  round  returns  to 
its  former  place?  And  confidering  the  lafting- 
nefs  of  the  Motions  excited  in  the  bottom  of 
the  Eye  by  Light ,  are  they  not  of  a  vibrating 
nature  ? 

^/.  17.  If  a  Stone  be  thrown  into  ftagnating 
Water,  the  Waves  excited  thereby  continue 
fome  time  to  arife  in  the  place  where  the  Stone 
fell  into  the  Water,  and  are  propagated  from 
thence  in  concentrick  Circles  upon  the  Surface 
of  the  Water  to  great  diflances.  And  the  Vi- 
brations or  Tremors  excited  in  the  Air  by  per- 
cuflion,  continue  a  Httle  time  to  move  from  the 
place  of  percuflion  in  concentrick  Spheres  to 
great  diflances.  And  in  like  manner,  when  a 
Ray  of  Light  falls  upon  the  Surface  of  any  pel- 
lucid Body,  and  is  there  refraded  or  reflec^fed : 
may  not  Waves  of  Vibrations,  or  Tremors,  be 
thereby  excited  in  the  refrading  or  refleding 
Medium  at  the  point  of  Incidence,  and  continue 
to  arile  there,  and  to  be  propagated  from  thence 
as  long  as  they  continue  to  do  fo,  when  they  are 
excited  in  the  bottom  of  the  Eye  by  the  Pref- 
fure  or  Motion  of  the  Finger,  or  by  the  Li^ht 
which  comes  from  the  Coal  of  Fire  in  the  Ex- 
periments 


[  323  ] 

periments  above  mention'd  ?  And  are  not  thefe 
Vibrations  propagated  from  the  point  of  Inci- 
dence to  great  dilbnces?  And  do  they  not  o- 
vertake  the  Rays  of  Light,  and  by  overtaking 
them  fucceliively,  do  they  not  put  them  into 
the  Fits  of  cafy  Reflexion  and  ealy  Tranfmiifion 
defcribed  above  ?  For  if  the  Rays  endeavour  to 
recede  from  the  denfeil  part  of  the  \  ibration, 
they  may  be  alternately  accelerated  and  retard- 
ed by  the  Vibrations  overtaking  them. 

^{.  1 8.  If  in  two  large  tall  cyhndrical  Vef^ 
fels  of  Glafs  inverted,  two  Httle  Thermometers 
be  fufpendcd  fo  as  not  to  touch  the  Veifels,  and 
the  Air  be  drawn  out  of  one  of  thefe  Vellels^ 
and  thefe  Velfels  thus  prepared  be  carried  out 
of  a  cold  place  into  a  \^'arm  one ;  the  Thermo- 
meter /;/  vacuo  will  grow  warm  as  much,  and 
almolt  as  foon  as  the  Thermometer  which  is 
not  ///  vacuo.  And  when  the  V'eifels  are  carri- 
ed back  into  the  cold  place,  the  Thermometer 
i«  vacuo  will  grow  cold  almolt  as  foon  as  the 
other  Thermometer.  Is  not  the  Heat  of  the 
warm  Room  convey'd  through  the  Vacuum  by 
the  Vibrations  of  a  much  fubiiler  Medium  than 
Air,  which  after  the  Air  was  drawn  out  remain* 
ed  in  the  Vacuum  ?  And  is  not  this  Medium  the 
fame  with  that  Medium  by  which  Light  is  re- 
fraded  and  relle^led,  and  by  whofe  \'  ibrarions 
Light  communicates  Heat  to  Bodies ,  and  is 
put  into  Fits  of  ealy  Rerlc^xion  and  eafyTranf-- 
mifTion  ?  And  do  not  the  Vibrations  of  this  Me- 
dium in  hot  Bodies  contribute  to  the  intenfenefs 
and  duration  of  their  Heat  ?  And  do  not  hot 
Bodies  communicate  their  Heat  to  contiguous 

Y  2,  cold 


[  324-  ] 

cold  ones ,  by  the  V  ibrations  of  this  Medium 
propagated  from  them  into  the  cold  ones  ?  And 
is  not  this  Medium  exceedingly  more  rare  and 
fubtile  than  the  Air,  and  exceedingly  more  ela- 
llick  and  adive  ?  And  doth  it  not  readily  per- 
vade all  Bodies?  And  is  it  not  (by  its  elalUck 
force)  expanded  through  all  the  Heavens  ? 

§u.  19.  Doth  not  the  Refraction  of  Light 
proceed  from  the  different  denlity  of  this  ^Ethe- 
real Medium  in  different  places,  the  Light  re- 
ceding always  from  the  denfer  parts  of  the  Me- 
dium ?  And  is  not  the  denfity  thereof  greater 
in  free  and  open  Spaces  void  of  Air  and  other 
groller  Bodies,  than  within  the  Pores  of  Wa- 
ter, Glafs,  Cryftal,  Gems,  and  other  compa6t 
Bodies?  For  when  Light  paffes  through  Glafs 
or  Cryftal,  and  flilling  very  obliquely  upon  the 
fln'ther  Surface  thereof  is  totally  refleded,  the 
total  Reliexion  ought  to  proceed  rather  from 
the  denfity  and  vigour  of  the  Medium  without 
and  beyond  the  Glafs,  than  from  the  rarity  and 
weaknefs  thereof. 

^/.  20.  Doth  not  this  ^Ethereal  Medium  in 
palling  out  of  Water,  Glafs,  Cryftal,  and  other 
compact  and  denfe  Bodies  into  empty  Spaces, 
grow  denier  and  denfer  by  degrees,  and  by 
that  means  refrad  the  Rays  of  Light  not  in  a 
point,  but  by  bending  them  gradually  in  curve 
Lines?  And  doth  not  the  gradual  condenfa- 
tion  of  this  Medium  extend  to  fome^  diftance- 
from  the  Bodies,  and  thereby  caufe  the  Infle- 
xions of  the  Rays  of  Light,  which  pafs  by  the 
edges  of  denfe  Bodies,  at  fome  diftance  from 
the  Bodies  ? 


[325] 

^//.  II.  Is  not  this  Medium  much  rarer  with- 
in the  denfe  Bodies  of  the  Sun,  Stars,  Planets 
and  Comets,  than  in  the  empty  celclUal  Spaces 
between  them  ?  And  in  paiFmg  from  them  to 
great  difhnces,  doth  it  not  grow  denfer  and 
denfer  perpetually,  and  thereby  caufe  the  gra- 
vity of  thole  great  Bodies  towards  one  another, 
and  of  their  parts  towards  the  Bodies;  every 
Body  endeavouring  to  go  from  the  denier  parts 
of  the  Medium  towards  the  rarer  ?  For  if  this 
Medium  be  rarer  within  the  Sun's  Body  than  at 
its  Surface,  and  rarer  there  than  at  the  hun- 
dredth part  of  an  Inch  from  its  Body,  and  ra- 
rer there  than  at  the  fiftieth  part  of  an  Inch  from 
its  Body,  and  rarer  there  than  at  the  Orb  of 
SaUirn ;  I  fee  no  rcafon  wiiy  the  Increafe  of 
dcnlity  fliould  Hop  any  w^hcrc,  and  not  rather 
be  continued  through  all  dillances  from  the  Sun 
to  Saturn^  and  beyond.  And  though  this  In- 
creafe of  denilty  may  at  great  dillances  be  ex- 
ceeding flow ,  yet  if  the  elaflick  force  of  this 
Medium  be  exceeding  great,  it  may  fuiiice  to 
impel  Bodies  from  the  denfer  parts  of  the  Me- 
dium' towards  the  rarer,  with  all  that  power 
which  we  call  Gravity.  And  that  the  elaftick 
force  of  this  Medium  is  exceeding  great,  may 
be  gather'd  from  the  fwiftnefs  of  its  Vibrations. 
Sounds  move  about  w^o  Engl'ijh  Feet  in  a  fe- 
cond  Minute  of  Time ,  and  in  feven  or  eight 
Minutes  of  Time  they  move  about  one  hundred 
Englifi)  Miles.  Light  moves  from  the  Sun  to 
us  in  about  feven  or  eight  Minutes  of  Time, 
which  diflance  is  about  70000000  Englijh  Miles, 
fuppoiing  the  horizontal  Parallax  oi  the  Sun  to 

V  3  be 


be  about  ix".  And  the  Vibrations  or  Pulfes  of 
this  Medium,  that  they  may  caufe  the  alternate 
Fits  of  eafy  Tranfmillion  and  eafy  Reflexion , 
mufl  be  fwifter  than  Light,  and  by  confequence 
above  700000  times  fwifter  than  Sounds.  And 
therefore  the  elalHck  force  of  this  Medium,  in 
proportion  to  its  denfity,  mufl  be  above  700000 
X  700000  (that  is,  above  490000000000) 
times  greater  than  the  elallick  force  of  the  Air 
is  in  proportion  to  its  denlity.  For  the  Veloci- 
ties of  the  Pulfes  of  elaftick  Mediums  are  in  a 
fubduplicate  Ratio  of  the  Elallicities  and  the  Ra- 
rities of  the  Mediums  taken  together. 

As  Attraction  is  llronger  in  fmall  Magnets 
than  in  great  ones  in  proportion  to  their  bulk, , 
and  Gravity  is  greater  in  the  Surfaces  of  fmall 
Planets  than  in  thofe  of  great  ones  in  propor- 
tion to  their  bulk ,   and  fmall  Bodies  are  agita- 
ted much  more  by  electric  attradion  than  great 
ones ;    fo  the  fmallnefs  of  the  Rays  of  Light 
may  contribute  very  much  to  the  the  power  of 
the  Agent  by  which  they  are  refracted.     And 
fo  if  any  one  iliould  fuppofe  that  Mther  ( like 
our  Air)  may  contain  Particles  which  endeavour 
to  recede  from  one  another  (for  I  do  not  knov/ 
what  this  JEther  is )   and  that  its  Particles  are 
exceedingly  fmaller  than  thofe  of  Air,  or  even 
than  thofe  of  Light:    The  exceeding  fmallnefs 
of  its  Particles  may  contribute  to  the  greatnefs 
of  the  force  by  which  thofe  Particles  may  re- 
cede from  one  another,  and  thereby  make  that 
Medium  exceedingly  more  rare  and  elaftick 
than  Air,  and  by  confequence  exceedingly  lefs 
able  to  refift  the  motions  of  Projedtiles ,  and 

exceed- 


[  327  ] 

exceedingly  more  able  to  prefs  upon  gi*ofs  Bo- 
dies ,  by  endeavouring  to  expand  it  felf. 

^i.  22.  May  not  Planets  and  Comets,  and  all 
grols  Bodies,  perform  their  Motions  more  free- 
ly, and  u'ithlefs  refinance  in  thisy^therealMe- 
aium  than  in  any  Fluid,  which  fills  all  Space  ade- 
quately without  leaving  any  Pores,  andby  confe- 
quence  is  much  denfer  thanQuick-filver  or  Gold? 
And  may  not  its  refiltancc  be  fo  fmall,  as  to  be 
inconfiderable  ?  For  inftance ;  If thh JEtber  (for 
fo  I  will  call  it )  Ihould  be  fuppofed  700000 
times  more  elaftick  than  our  Air,  and  above 
yooooo  times  more  rare ;  its  refillance  would 
be  above  600000000  times  lefs  than  that  of  Wa- 
ter. And  fo  fmall  a  refiltance  would  fcarce 
make  any  fenfible  alteration  in  the  Motions  of 
the  Planets  in  ten  thoufand  Years.  If  any  one 
would  ask  how  a  Medium  can  be  fo  rare,  let 
him  tell  me  how  the  Air,  in  the  upper  parts  of 
the  Atmofphere,  can  be  above  an  hundred  thou- 
fand thoufand  times  rarer  than  Gold.  Let  him 
alfo  tell  me,  how  an  eleftrick  Body  can  by  Fri- 
ftion  emit  an  Exhalation  fo  rare  ^a  fubtile,  and 
yet  fo  potent,  as  by  its  Emiilion  to  caufe  no 
ienlible  Diminution  of  the  weight  of  the  ele- 
clrick  Body,  and  to  be  expanded  through  a 
Sphere,  whofe  Diameter  is  above  two  Feet,  and 
yet  to  be  able  to  agitate  and  carry  up  Leaf  Cop- 
per, or  Leaf  Gold,  at  the  diflance  of  above  a 
Foot  from  the  eledrick  Body?  And  how  the 
Effluvia  of  a  Magnet  can  be  fo  rare  and  fubtile, 
as  to  pafs  through  a  Plate  of  Glafs  without  any 
Refiftance  or  Diminution  of  their  Force,  and 
yet  fo  potent  as  to  turn  a  magnetick  Needle 
beyond  the  Glafs  ? 

Y  4  t". 


[  328  1 

^.13.  Is  not  Villon  perform'd  chiefly  by  the 
Vibrations  of  this  Medium,  excited  in  the  bot- 
tom of  the  Eye  by  the  Rays  of  Light,  and  pro- 
pagated through  the  folid,  pellucid  and  uniform 
Capillamentaof  the  optick  Nerves  into  the  place 
of  Senlation?  And  is  not  Hearing  perform'd 
by  the  Vibrations  either  of  this  or  fome  other 
Medium,  excited  in  the  auditory  Nerves  by  the 
Tremors  of  the  Air,  and  propagated  through 
the  folid,  pellucid  and  uniform  Capillamenta  of 
thofe  Nerves  into  the  place  of  Senlation?  And 
fo  of  the  other  Senfes. 

^i.  24.  Is  not  Animal  Motion  perform'd  by 
the  Vibrations  of  this  Medium ,  excited  in  the 
Brain  by  the  power  of  the  W  ill ,  and  propaga- 
ted from  thence  tiirough  the  folid,  pellucid  and 
uniform  Capillamenta  of  the  Nerves  into  the 
Mufcles,  for  contrading  and  dilating  them  ?  I 
fuppofe  that  the  Capillamenta  of  tie  Nerves  are 
each  of  them  folid  and  uniform,  that  the  vibra- 
ting Motion  of  the /P-^thereal  Medium  may  be 
propagated  along  them  from  one  end  to  the  o- 
ther  uniformly,  and  without  interruption :  For 
Obftru6lions  in  the  Nerves  create  Pallies.  And 
that  they  may  be  lufHciently  uniform,  I  I'uppofe 
them  to  be  pellucid  when  view'd  finely,  tho* 
the  Retlcxions  in  their  cyhndrical  Surfaces  may 
make  the  whole  Nerve  (compofed  of  many  Ca- 
pillamenta) appear  opake  and  white.  For  opaci- 
ty arifes  from  refieding  Surfaces,  fuch  as  may  di-- 
Hurb  and  interrupt  the  Motions  of  this  Medium. 

^/,  25*.   Are  there  not  other  original  Proper- 
ties of  the  Rays  of  Light ,   befides  thofe  alrea- 
dy defcribed  ?    An  initance  of  another  original 
^ ■'        '    "       Pro, 


[  329  ] 

Property  we  have  in  the  Refra6lion  of  Ifland 
Cryilal,  defcribed  firlt  by  Erafmus  BarthoL'me^ 
and  afterwards  more  exadly  by  Hugenhts,  in 
his  Book  T)e  la  Lumiere.    This  Cryltal  is  a  pel- 
lucid fiffile  Stone,  clear  as  Water  or  Cryilal  of 
the  Rock,  and  without  Colour ;  enduring  a  red 
Heat  without  lofing  its  tranfparency,  and  in  a 
very  llrong  Heat   calcining  without   Fulion. 
Steep'd  a  Day  or  two  in  Water,  it  lofes  its  na- 
tural Polilh.     Being  rubb'd  on  Cloth,  it  attrads 
pieces  of  Straws  and  other  light  things,  like  Am- 
bar  or  Glafs;  and  \\\xhJlqiia  fortis  it  makes  an 
Ebullition.    It  feems  to  be  a  fort  of  Talk,  and 
is  found  in  form  of  an  oblique  Parallelopiped, 
with  fix  parallelogram  Sides  and  eight  Iblid  An- 
gles.    The  obtufe  Angles  of  the  Parallelograms 
are  each  of  them  loi  Degrees  and  ^x  Minutes; 
the  acute  ones  78  Degrees  and  8  Minutes.  Two 
of  the  folid  Angles  oppofite  to  one  another,  as 
C  and  E,    are  compafled  each  of 
them    with  three  of  thefe   obtufe  %l'l'J°^l''^' 
Angles ,    and   each    of    the  other  "'"" 
fix  with  one  obtufe  and  two  acute  ones.    It 
cleaves  eafily  in  Planes  parallel  to  any  of  its 
Sides,  and  not  in  any  other  Planes.     It  cleaves 
with  a  glofTy  polite  Surface  not  perpedly  plane, 
but  with  fome  little  unevennefs.    It  is  eafily 
fcratch'd,  and  by  reafon  of  its  foftnefs  it  takes 
a  Pohfli  very  difficultly.    It  poHflies  better  up- 
on polifli'd  Ilooking-glafs  than  upon  Metal,  and 
perhaps  better  upon  Pitch,  Leather  or  Parch- 
ment.    Afterwards  it  mult  be  rubb'd  with  a 
little  Oil  or  White  of  an  Egg,  to  fill  up  its 
Scratches ;  w^hereby  it  will  become  very  tranf- 

parent 


[  33o] 


parent  and  polite.  But  for  feveral  Experiments, 
it  is  not  neceiFary  to  poliili  it.  If  a  piece  of  thiis 
cryflalline  Stone  be  laid  upon  a  Book,  every 
Letter  of  the  Book  feen  through  it  will  appear 
double,  by  means  of  a  double  Refraftion.  And 
if  any  beam  of  Light  falls  either  perpendicularly, 
or  in  any  oblique  Angle  upon  any  Surface  of  this 
Cryllal,  it  becomes  divided  into  two  beams  by 
means  of  the  fame  double  Refraftion.  Which 
beams  are  of  the  fame  Colour  with  the  incident 
beam  of  Li;:,ht,  and  feem  equal  to  one  another 
in  the  quantity  of  their  Light,  or  very  nearly 
equal.  One  of  thefe  Refradlions  is  perform'd 
by  the  ufualRule  of  Opticks,  the  Sine  of  Inci- 
dence out  of  Air  into  this  Cryilal  being  to  the 
Sine  of  Refradion,  as  five  to  three.  The  other 
Refraftion,  which  may  be  called  the  unufual 
Refradion,  is  perform'd  by  the  following  Rule. 

\S 


Let  ADBC  reprefent  the  refrafting  Surface 

of 


[  331  ] 

of  theCryllal,  C  the  biggeft  folid  Angle  at  that 
Surface,  GEHF  the  oppofite  Surface,  andCK 
a  perpendicular  on  that  Surface.  This  perpen- 
dicular makes  with  the  edge  of  the  Cryilal  CF, 
an  Angle  of  19  Degr.  3'.  Join  KF,  and  in  it 
take  K  L ,  fo  that  the  Angle  KC L  be  6  Degr. 
40.  and  the  Angle  LCF  ix  Degr.  zy  And  if 
STreprefent  any  beam  of  Light  incident  atT 
in  any  Angle  upon  the  refrafting  Surface  ADBC, 
let  TV  be  the  refraded  beam  determin'd  by 
the  given  Proportion  of  the  Sines  5  to  3,  accor- 
ding to  the  ufual  Rule  of  Opticks.  Draw  VX 
parallel  and  equal  to  KL.  Draw  it  the  fame 
way  from  V  in  which  L  lieth  from  K;  and 
joining  TX,  this  line  TX  fliall  be  the  other  re- 
frafted  beam  carried  from  T  to  X,  by  the  un- 
ufualRefraftion. 

If  therefore  the  incident  beam  ST  be  per- 
pendicular to  the  refracting  Surface,  the  two 
beams  TV  and  TX,  into  which  it  lliall  be- 
come divided,  fliall  be  parallel  to  the  lines  C  K 
and  C  L ;  one  of  thofe  beams  going  through 
the  Cryftal  perpendicularly,  as  it  ought  to  do 
by  the  ufual  Laws  of  Opticks ,  and  the  other 
TX  by  an  unufual  Refradion  diverging  from 
the  perpendicular,  and  making  with  it  an  An- 
gle VTX  of  about  67  Degrees,  as  is  found  by 
experience.  And  hence,  the  Plane  VTX, 
and  fuch  like  Planes  which  are  parallel  to  the 
Plane  CFK,  may  be  called  the  Planes  of  per- 
pendicular Refraftion.  And  the  Coafl  towards 
which  the  lines  K  L  and  V  X  are  drawn,  may 
be  caird  the  Coafl  of  unufual  Refradion. 

In  like  maimer  Cryilal  of  the  Rock  has  a 

double 


[332  ] 

double  Refraction :  But  the  difference  of  the 
two  Refractions  is  not  fo  great  and  manifeil  as 
in  Ifland  Cryflal. 

When  the  beam  ST  incident  on  Ifland  Cry- 
Ital,  is  divided  into  two  beams  TV  and  TX, 
and  thefe  two  beams  arrive  at  the  farther  Sur- 
face of  the  Glafs;  the  beam  TV,  which  was 
refracted  at  the  firft  Surface  after  the  ufual  man- 
ner, fliall  be  again  refraded  entirely  after  the 
ufual  manner  at  the  fecond  Surface ;  and  the 
beam  TX,  which  was  refrafted  after  the  unu- 
fual  manner  in  the  firfl:  Surface,  iliall  be  again 
refradled  entirely  after  the  unufual  manner  in 
the  fecond  Surface ;  fo  that  both  thefe  beams 
fhall  emerge  out  of  the  fecond  Surface  in  hnes 
parallel  to  the  firfl  incident  beam  ST. 

And  if  two  pieces  of  Ifland  Cryfl:al  be  pla- 
ced one  after  another,  in  fuch  manner  that  all 
the  Surfaces  of  the  latter  be  parallel  to  all  the 
correfponding  Surfaces  of  the  former :  The 
Rays  vv^hich  are  refradted  after  the  ufual  man- 
ner in  the  firll:  Surface  of  the  firll  Cryital  fhall 
be  refraded  after  the  ufual  manner  in  all  the 
following  Surfaces ;  and  the  Rays  which  are  re- 
fraded  after  the  unufual  manner  in  the  firil  Sur- 
face ,  fliall  be  refrafted  after  the  unufual  manner 
in  all  the  following  Surfaces.  And  the  fame 
thing  happens,  though  the  Surfaces  of  the  Cry- 
Itals  be  any  ways  inclined  to  one  another,  provi- 
ded that  their  Planes  of  perpendicular  Refradion 
be  parallel  to  one  another. 

x\nd  therefore  there  is  an  original  difference 
in  the  Rays  of  Light,  by  means  of  which  fome 
Rays  are  in  this  Experiment  conftantly  refrad- 

ed 


[  333  ] 

ed  after  the  ufual  manner,  and  others  conftant- 
ly  after  the  unufual  manner :  For  if  the  diffe- 
rence be  not  original,  but  arifes  from  new  Mo- 
difications imprefs'd  on  the  Rays  at  their  firil 
Refradion,-  it  would  be  alter'd  by  new  Modifi- 
cations in  the  three  following  Refradions ; 
whereas  it  fuff'ers  no  alteration,  but  is  conftant, 
and  has  the  fame  eifedt  upon  the  Rays  in  all  the 
Refraflions.  The  unufual  Refraction  is  there- 
fore perform'd  by  an  original  property  of  the 
Rays.  And  it  remains  to  be  enquired,  whe- 
ther the  Rays  have  not  more  original  Properties 
than  are  yet  difcover'd. 

^f.  z6.  Have  not  the  Rays  of  Light  feveral 
fides,  endued  with  feveral  original  Properties? 
For  if  the  Planes  of  perpendicular  Refradion 
of  the  fecond  Cryftal,  be  at  right  Angles  with 
the  Planes  of  perpendicular  Refradion  of  the 
firfl  Cryflal,  the  Rays  which  are  refraded  after 
the  ufual  manner  in  pailing  through  the  firft 
Cryftal,  will  be  all  of  them  refrafted  after  the 
unufual  manner  in  palling  through  the  fecond 
Cryfi;al ;  and  the  Rays  which  are  refraded  af- 
ter the  unufual  manner  in  paffing  through  the 
firit  Cryflal,  will  be  all  of  them  refraded  after 
the  ufual  manner  in  pafling  through  the  fecond 
Cryftal.  And  therefore  there  are  not  two  forts 
of  Rays  differing  in  their  nature  from  one  ano- 
ther, one  of  which  is  conftantly  and  in  all  Po- 
fitions  refraded  after  the  ufual  manner,  and  the 
other  conftantly  and  in  all  Pofitions  after  the 
unufual  manner.  The  difference  between  the 
two  forts  of  Rays  in  the  Experiment  mention'd 
in  the  ifth  QuefUon,  was  only  in  the  Pofitions 

of 


[  334] 

of  the  Sides  of  the  Rays  to  the  Planes  of  per* 
pendicular  Refraction.  For  one  and  the  fame 
Ray  is  here  refraded  fometimes  after  the  ufual, 
and  fometimes  after  the  unufual  manner,  ac- 
cording to  the  Pofition  which  its  Sides  have  to 
the  Cryllals.  If  the  fides  of  the  Rays  are  pofi- 
ted  the  fame  way  to  both  Cryitals,  it  is  refract- 
ed after  the  fame  manner  in  them  both :  But 
if  that  fide  of  the  Ray  which  looks  towards 
the  Coail  of  the  unufual  Refraction  of  the  firfl 
Cryftal,  be  90  Degrees  from  that  fide  of  the 
fame  Ray  which  loolvs  towards  the  Coaft  of  the 
unufual  Refraftion  of  ttie  fecond  Cry  Hal,  (which 
may  be  effedcd  by  varying  the  Pofition  of  the 
fecond  Cryllal  to  the  firli:,  and  by  confequence 
to  the  Rays  of  Light)  tiie  Ray  fliall  be  refraCled 
after  feveral  manners  in  the  feveral  Cryflals. 
There  is  nothing  more  required  to  determine 
whether  the  Rays  of  Light  which  fall  upon  the 
fecond  Cryftal,  mall  be  refracted  after  the  ufual 
or  after  the  unufual  manner ,  but  to  turn  about 
this  Cryilal,  fo  that  the  Coaft  of  this  Cryftal's 
unufual  Refradion  may  be  on  this  or  on  that 
fide  of  the  Ray.  And  therefore  every  Ray  may 
be  confider'd  as  having  four  Sides  or  Quarters, 
two  of  which  oppofite  to  one  another  incline 
the  Ray  to  be  refracted  after  the  unufual  man- 
ner ,  as  often  as  either  of  them  are  turn'd  to- 
wards the  Coaft  of  unufual  Refraction ;  and  the 
other  two,  whenever  either  of  them  are  turn*d 
towards  the  Coaft  of  unufual  RefraCtion,  do  not 
incline  it  to  be  otherwife  BefraCted  than  after 
the  ufual  manner.  The  two  firft  may  there- 
fore be  caU'd  the  Sides  of  unufual  RefraCtion. 

And 


[  335  ] 

And  fince  thefe  Difpofitions  were  in  the  Rays 
before  their  Incidence  on  the  fecond,  third  and 
fourth  Surfaces  of  the  two  Cryllals,  and  fuller- 
ed no  alteration  (fo  far  as  appears)  by  the  Re- 
fradion  of  the  Rays  in  their  paiTage  through 
thofe  Surfaces,  and  the  Rays  were  refraded  by 
the  fame  Laws  in  all  the  four  Surfaces ;  it  ap- 
pears that  thofe  Difpofitions  were  in  the  Rays 
originally,  and  fuffer'd  no  alteration  by  the  firll 
Refradion,  and  that  by  means  of  thofe  Difpofi- 
tions the  Rays  were  refrafted  at  their  Incidence 
on  the  firll  Surface  of  the  firlt  Cryftal,  fome  of 
them  after  the  ufual,  and  fome  of  them  after  the 
unufual  manner,  accordingly  as  their  Sides  of 
unufual  Refradion  were  then  turn'd  towards 
the  Coail  of  the  unufual  Refraction  of  that  Cry- 
Ital,  or  fideways  from  it. 

Every  Ray  of  Light  has  therefore  two  oppo- 
fite  Sides ,  originally  endued  with  a  Property 
on  which  the  unufual  Refradion  depends,  an3 
the  other  two  oppofite  Sides  not  endued  with 
that  Property.  And  it  remains  to  be  enquired, 
whether  there  are  not  more  Properties  of  Light 
by  which  the  Sides  of  the  Rays  differ,  and  are 
diflinguifli'd  from  one  another. 

In  explaining  the  difference  of  the  Sides  of 
the  Rays  above  mcntion'd,  I  have  fuppofed  that 
the  Rays  fall  perpendicularly  on  the  firfl  Cry- 
ftal. But  if  they  fall  obliquely  on  it,  the  Suc- 
cefs  is  the  fame.  Thofe  R?.ys  which  are  refract- 
ed after  the  ufual  manner  in  the  firfl  Crytfal, 
will  be  refradled  after  t'ie  unufual  manner  in 
the  fecond  Cryflal,  fuppofmg  the  Planes  of  per- 
pendicular Refradion  to  be  at  right  Angles  with 

2-  one 


f  330 

one  another,  as  above :  and  on  the  contrar}^ 

If  the  Planes  of  the  perpendicular  RefracHon 
of  the  two  Cryftals  be  neither  parallel  nor  per- 
pendicular to  one  another,  but  contain  an  acute 
Angle :  The  two  beams  of  Light  which  emerge 
out  of  the  tirft  Cryltal,  will  be  each  of  them  di- 
vided into  two  more  at  their  Incidence  on  the 
fecond  Cryftal.  For  in  this  cafe  the  Rays  in 
each  of  the  two  Beams  will  fome  of  them  have 
their  Sides  of  unufual  Refradtion,  and  fome  of 
them  their  other  Sides  turn'd  towards  the  Coafl 
of  the  unufual  Refradion  of  the  fecond  Cry- 
ftal. 

^/.  ty.  Are  not  all  Hypothefes  erroneous 
which  have  hitherto  been  invented  for  explain- 
ing the  Phenomena  of  Light,  by  new  Modifica- 
tions of  the  Rays  ?  For  thofe  Phenomena  de- 
pend not  upon  new  Modifications,  as  has  been 
luppofed,  but  upon  the  original  and  unchange- 
able Properties  of  the  Rays. 

^/.  28.  Are  not  all  Hypothefes  erroneous, 
in  which  Light  is  fuppofed  to  confifl  in  Pref- 
fion  or  Motion,  propagated  through  a  fluid  Me- 
dium ?  For  in  all  thefe  Hypothefes,  the  Pheno- 
mena of  Light  have  been  hitherto  explain'd  by 
fuppofing  that  they  arife  from  new  Modifica- 
tions of  the  Rays ;  which  is  an  erroneous  Sup- 
pofition. 

If  Light  confifted  only  in  PrefTion  propaga- 
ted without  actual  Motion,  it  would  not  be  a- 
ble  to  agitate  and  heat  the  Bodies  which  refrad 
and  refled  it.  If  it  confifted  in  Motion  propa- 
gated to  all  diftances  in  an  inflant,  it  would  re- 
quire an  infinite  force  every  moment,  in  every 

fliining 


t  337  ] 

lliining  Particle,  to  generate  that  Motion.  And 
if  it  conliiled  in  Prellion  or  Motion,  propaga- 
ihd  either  in  an  inliant  or  in  time,  it  would 
bend  into  the  Shadow.  For  Prefiion  or  Motion 
cannot  be  propagated  in  a  Fluid  in  right  Lines 
beyond  an  Obilacle  which  Hops  part  of  the  Mo- 
tion, but  will  bend  and  Ipread  every  way  into 
the  quiefcent  Medium  which  hes  beyond  the 
Obilacle.  Gravity  tends  downwards,  but  the 
PreHiire  of  Water  arifmg  trom  Gravity  tends 
every  way  with  equal  force,  and  is  propagated 
as  readily,  and  with  as  much  force  fidevv'ays  as 
downwards ,  and  through  crooked  palfages  as 
through  ilrait  ones.  The  Waves  on  th*e  Surface 
of  llagnating  Water,  paiEng  by  the  fides  of  i 
broad  Obftacle  which  Hops  part  of  them,  bend 
afterwards  and  dilaie  themfclves  gradually  into 
the  quiet  Water  behind  the  Obltacle.  The 
Waves,  Pulfes  orVibrations  of  theAir,  where- 
in Sounds  confilt,  bend  manifellly,  though  not 
fo  much  as  the  Waves  of  Water.  For  a  Bell 
or  a  Canon  may  be  heard  beyond  a  Hill  which 
intercepts  the  fight  of  the  founding  Body,  and 
Sounds  are  propagated  as  readily  through  crook- 
ed Pipes  as  through  Ibeight  ones.  But  Light 
is  never  known  to  follow  crooked  Palfages  nor 
to  bend  into  the  Shadow.  For  the  fix'd  Stars 
by  the  Interpofition  of  any  of  the  Planets  ceafe 
to  be  feen.  And  fo  do  the  Parts  of  the  Sun 
by  the  Interpofition  of  the  Moon,  Mercury  or 
Venm.  The  Rays  which  pafs  very  near  to  the 
edges  of  any  Body,  are  bent  a  Uttle  by  the  adion 
of  the  Body,  as  we  fhew'd  above  ;  but  this 
bending  is  not  towards  but  from  the  Shadow^ 

Z  and 


[338] 

and  is  perform'd  only  in  the  pafTage  of  the  Ray 
by  the  Body,  and  at  a  very  imall  dillance  from 
it.  So  foon  as  the  Ray  is  pail  the  Body,  it 
goes  right  on. 

To  explain  the  iinufual  Refradion  of  Ifland 
Cryftal  by  Preffion  or  Motion  propagated,  has 
not  hitherto  been  attempted  (to  my  knowledge) 
except  by  Huygens^  who  for  that  end  fuppofed 
two  feveral  vibrating  Mediums  within  that  Cry- 
ftal. But  when  he  tried  the  Refradions  in  two 
fucceflive  pieces  of  that  Crj'ftal,  and  found 
them  fuch  as  is  mention'd  above :  He  confef- 
fed  himfclf  at  a  lofs  for  explaining  them.  For 
Preilions'or  Motions,  propagated  from  a  fliining 
Body  through  an  uniform  Medium,  mult  be 
on  all  fides  alike;  whereas  by  thofc  Experi- 
ments it  appears,  that  the  Rays  of  Light  have 
different  Properties  in  their  different  Sides. 
He  fufpeded  that  the  Pulfes  of  Mther  in  paf- 
fmg  through  the  lirft  Cryltal  might  receive  cer- 
tain new  Modifications,  which  might  determine 
them  to  be  propagated  in  this  or  that  Medium 
within  the  fecond  Cryftal,  according  to  the 

Pofition    of   that  Cryftal. 
.    Man  pour  dire  ccm-.vcnt   But    wHat    Modifications 

cda  [^  fait,    je    n,y   rien     ^j^^^^    ^^    ^^^   ^^     ^iQ    COUld 
trove  pi  au   ici  qui  me   la-  _  c  i  •     i         r 

uja;je.    c  H.  de  la  lumi-   notfay,  nor  thmk  ot  any 
ere/c.5,p9i.  thing   fatisfadory  in   that, 

Point.  And  if  he  had 
known  that  the  unufual  Refraction  depends  not 
on  new  Modifications,  but  on  the  original  and 
unchangeable  Difpofitions  of  the  Rays,  he  would 
have  found  it  as  difficult  to  explain  how  thofe 
Difpofitions  which  he  fuppofed  to  be  imprefs'd 

on 


on  the  Rays  by  the  firfl  Cryllal,  could  be  in 
them  before  their  Incidence  on  that  Cryllal ; 
and  in  general ,  how  all  Rays  emitted  by  ihi- 
ning  Bodies,  can  have  thole  Difpoiitions  in 
them  from  the  beginning.  To  me,  at  lead, 
this  feems  inexplicable,  if  Light  be  nothing 
elfe  than  Prellion  or  Motion  propagated  through 

And  it  is  as  difficult  to  explain  by  thefe  Hy- 
pothefes,  how  Rays  can  be  alternately  in  Fits 
of  eafy  Reflexion  and  eafy  Tranfmiffion ;  unlefs 
perhaps  one  might  fuppofe  that  there  are  in  all 
Space  two  Ethereal  vibrating  Mediums ,  and 
that  the  Vibrations  of  one  of  them  conilitute 
Light,  and  the  Vibrations  of  the  other  are  fwift- 
er,  and  as  often  as  they  overtake  the  Vibrations 
of  the  firll,  put  them  into  thofe  Fits.  But  how 
two  jEthers  can  be  diffufed  through  all  Space, 
one  of  which  a61s  upon  the  other,  and  by  con- 
fcquence  is  re-ac^ted  upon,  without  retarding, 
ihattering,  difperfmg  and  confounding  one  an- 
others  Motions,  is  inconceivable.  And  againft 
filling  the  Heavens  with  fluid  Mediums,  unlefs 
they  be  exceeding  rare,  a  great  Objection  arifes 
from  the  regular  and  very  lading  Motions  of 
the  Planets  and  Comets  in  all  manner  of  Courfes 
through  the  Heavens.  For  thence  it  is  mani- 
feft,  that  the  Heavens  are  void  of  all  feniible 
Refiltance ,  and  by  confequence  of  all  fenfible 
Matter. 

For  the  refifling  Power  of  fluid  Mediums  a- 
rifes  partly  from  the  Attrition  of  the  Parts  of 
the  Medium ,  and  partly  from  the  Vis  inertia 
of  the  Matter.    That  part  of  the  Refitfance  of 

L  z  a  fphe- 


1 340  ] 

a  fpherical  Body  which  arifes  from  the  Attri- 
tion of  the  Parts  of  the  Medium  is  very  nearly 
as  the  Diameter,  or,  at  the  moit,  as  the  Fa6lum 
of  the  Diameter,  and  the  Velocity  of  the  fphe- 
rical  Body  together.  And  that  part  of  the  Re- 
finance which  arifes  from  the  Vis  inertia  of 
the  Matter,  is  as  the  Square  of  that  Fa^um. 
And  by  this  difference  the  two  forts  of  Refi- 
nance may  be  diftinguiih'd  from  one  another 
in  any  Medium  ;  and  thefe  being  difiinguifli'd, 
it  will  be  found  that  almolt  all  the  Reiilknce 
of  Bodies  of  a  competent  Magnitude  moving 
in  Air,  Water,  Quick-filver,  and  luch  like  Flu- 
ids with  a  competent  Velocity,  arifes  from  the 
Vis  inertia  of  the  Parts  of  the  Fluid. 

Now  that  part  of  the  refilling  Power  of  any 
Medium  which  arifes  from  the  Tenacity,  Fri- 
ftion  or  Attrition  of  the  Parts  of  the  Medium, 
may  be  diminiih'd  by  dividing  the  Matter  into 
fmaller  Parts,  and  making  the  Parts  more  fmooth 
and  flippery:  But.  that  part  of  the  Refiliance 
which  arifes  from  the  Vis.  inertia^  is  proportio- 
nal to  the  Denlity  of  the  Matter,  and  cannot  be 
diminifh'd  by  dividing  the  Matter  into  fmaller 
Parts,  nor  by  any  other  means  than  by  decrea- 
fing  theDeniity  of  the  Medium.  And  for  thefe 
Reafons  the  Denfity  of  fluid  Mediums  is^very 
nearly  proportional  to  their  Reliflance.  '  Li- 
quors which  differ  not  much  in  Denfity,  as  Wa- 
ter, Spirit  ofW^ine,  Spirit  of  Turpentine,  hot 
Oil,  differ  not  much  in  Refiftance.  Water  is 
thirteen  or  fourteen  times  hghter  than  Quick- 
filver,  and  by  confequence  thirteen  or  fourteen 
times  rarer,  and  its  Refiftance  is  lefs  than  that 

of 


[  341  ] 

of  Quick-filver  in  the  fame  Proportion,  or  there- 
abouts, as  I  have  found  by  Experiments  made 
with  Pendulums.  The  open  Air  in  which  we 
breathe  is  eight  or  nine  hundred  times  lighter 
than  Water,  and  by  coniequence  eight  or  nine 
hundred  times  rarer,  and  accordingly  its  Refi- 
ftance  is  lefs  than  that  of  Water  in  the  fame 
Proportion,  or  thereabouts ;  as  I  have  alfo  found 
by  Experiments  made  with  Pendulums.  And  in 
thinner  Air  the  Refiitance  is  Hill  lefs,  and  at 
length,  by  rarifying  the  Air,  becomes  infenfi- 
ble.  For  fmall  Feathers  falling  in  the  open  Air 
meet  with  great  Refiibnce,  but  in  a  tall  Glafs 
well  emptied  of  Air,  they  fall  as  faft  as  Lead  or 
Gold, as  1  have  feen  tried  feveral  times.  Whence 
the  Refinance  feems  Itill  to  decreafe  in  propor- 
tion to  the  Denfity  of  the  Fluid.  For  I  do  not 
find  by  any  Experiments,  that  Bodies  moving 
in  Quick-filver,  Water  or  Air,  meet  with  any 
other  fenfible  Refiftance  than  what  arifes  from 
the  Denfity  and  Tenacity  of  thofe  fenfible  Flu- 
ids, as  they  w^ould  doif  the  Pores  of  thofe  Flu- 
ids, and  all  other  Spaces,  v^'ere  filled  with  a 
denfe  and  fubtile  Fluid.  Now  if  the  Refiflance 
in  a  VefTel  well  emptied  of  Air,  was  but  an 
hundred  times  lefs  than  in  the  open  Air  ,  it 
would  be  about  a  million  of  times  lefs  than  in 
•Quick-filver.  But  it  feems  to  be  much  lefs  in 
fuch  a  Velfel,  and  flill  much  lels  in  the  Hea- 
vens, at  the  height  of  three  or  four  hundred 
Miles  from  the  Earth,  or  ^bove.' For  Mr. Boy /e 
has  fhew'd  that  Air  may  be  rarified  above  ten 
thoufand  times  in  Veflels  of  Glafs;  and  the 
Heavens  are  much  emptier  of  Air  than  any  f^a- 

Z  3  emm 


[  34-2  ] 

cuum  we  can  make  below.  For  fince  the  Air 
is  comprefs'd  by  the  weight  of  the  incumbent 
Atmoiphere,  and  the  Denfity  of  Air  is  propor- 
tional to  the  Force  comprelling  it ,  it  follows 
by  Computation,  that  at  the  height  of  about  fe- 
ven  Englijh  Miles  from  the  Earth,  the  Air  is 
four  times  rarer  than  at  the  Surface  of  the 
Earth ;  and  at  the  height  of  14  Miles^,  it  is  fix- 
teen  times  rarer  than  that  at  the  Surface  of  the 
Earth ;  and  at  the  height  of  21,  28,  or  35  Miles, 
it  is  refpc^lively  64,  256,  or  1024  times  rarer, 
or  thereabouts;  and  at  the  height  of  70,  140, 
2ioMiles,  it  is  about  loooooo,  loooooooooooo 
or  1 000000000000000000  times  rarer;  and  fo 
on. 

Heat  promotes  Fluidity  very  much,  by  dimi- 
nifliing  the  Tenacity  of  Bodies.  It  makes  ma- 
ny Bodies  fluid  which  are  not  fluid  in  cold,  and 
increaies  the  Fluidity  of  tenacious  Liquids,  as 
of  Oil,  Baliam  and  Floney,  and  thereby  de- 
creafes  their  Refillance.  But  it  decreafes  not 
the  Refiftance  of  Water  confiderablv,  as  it  would 
do  if  any  confiderable  part  ot  the  Refiltance  of 
Water  arofe  from  the  Attrition  or  Tenacity  of 
its  Parts.  And  thereforcithe Refiltance  of  Wa- 
ter arifes  principally  and  almoll  entirely  from 
the  Vis  inertia  of  its  Matter;  and  by  confe- 
quence,  if  the  Heavens  were  as  denfe  as  Wa- 
ter, they  would  not  have  much  lefs  Refiftance 
than  Water ;  if  as  denfe  as  Quick- fiiver,  they 
would  not  \\vft  much  lefs  Refiltance  than  Quick- 
filver;  if  abiblutely  denfe,  or  full  of  Matter 
without  any  Vacuum^  let  the  Matter  be  never 
fo  fubtile  and  fluid,  they  would  have  a  greater 

Refiftance 


[  3+3  ] 

Refiflance  than  Quick- filvTr.  A  folid  Globe  in 
fuch  a  Medium  would  lole  above  half  its  Mo- 
tion in  moving  three  times  the  length  of  its 
Diameter,  and  a  Globe  not  folid  (luch  as  are 
the  Planets)  would  be  retarded  iboner.  And 
therefore  to  make  way  for  the  regular  and  lad- 
ing Motions  of  the  Planets  and  Comets,  it's  ne- 
ceiFary  to  empty  the  Heavens  of  all  Matter,  ex- 
cept perhaps  fome  very  thin  Vapours,  Steams 
or  Effluvia,  arifmg  from  the  Atmof pheres  of  the 
Earth,  Planets  and  Comets,  and  from  fuch  an 
exceedingly  rare  ^Ethereal  Medium  as  we  de- 
fcribed  above.  A  dcnfe  Fluid  can  be  of  no  ufe 
for  explaining  the  Phsenomena  of  Nature^  the 
Motions  of  the  Planets  and  Comets  being  better 
explain'd  without  it.  It  ferves  only  to  dilturb 
and  retard  the  Motions  of  thofe  great  ]3odies, 
and  make  the  Frame  of  Nature  languiih :  And 
in  the  Pores  of  Bodies,  it  ferves  only  to  flop 
the  vibrating  Motions  of  their  Parts,  wherein 
their  Heat  and  A61ivity  coniills.  And  as  it  is 
of  no  ufe ,  and  hinders  the  Operations  of  Na- 
ture, and  makes  her  languiih,  lo  there  is  no  e- 
vidence  for  its  Exiilence,  and  therefore  it  ought 
to  be  rejeded.  And  if  it  be  rejeded,  the  Hy- 
pothefes  that  Light  confifts  in  Preflion  or  Mo- 
tion propagated  through  fuch  a  Medium,  are 
rejefted  with  it. 

And  for  rejecting  fuch  a  Medium,  we  have 
the  Authority  of  thofe  the  oldefl  and  moll  ce- 
lebrated Philofophers  of  Greece  and  Thoenic'ta^ 
who  made  a  Vdcimm  and  Atoms,  and  the  Gra- 
vity of  Atoms,  the  firlt  Principles  of  their  Phi- 
lofophy ;  tacitly  attributing  Gravity  to  fome  o- 

Z  4  ther 


[  344  ] 

ther  Caufe  than  denfe  Matter.  Later  Philofo- 
phers  banifli  the  Confidcration  of  iuch  a  Caufe 
out  of  Natural  Philoiophy,  feigning  Hypotheies 
for  explaining  all  things  mechanically ,  and  re- 
ferring other  Caufes  to  Metaphyficks :  W  hereas 
the  main  Bufmefs  of  Natural  Philofophy  is  to 
argue  from  Phcenomena  without  fefgning  Hy- 
potheies, and  to  deduce  Caufes  from  Efte6ls, 
till  we  come  to  the  very  tirfl  Caufe,  which  cer- 
tainly is  not  mechanical;  and  not  only  to  un- 
fold the Mechanifm  of  the  World,  but  chiefly 
to  refolve  thefe  and  fuch  like  Quellions.  W :  at 
is  there  in  places  almoll  empty  of  Matter,  and 
whence  is  it  that  the  Sun  and  Planets  gravitate 
towards  one  another,  without  denfe  Matter  be- 
tween them?  Whence  is  it  that  Nature  doth 
nothing  in  vain  ;  and  whence  arifes  all  that  Or- 
der and  Beauty  which  we  fee  in  the  World? 
To  what  end  are  Comets,  and  whence  is  it  that 
Planets  move  all  one  and  the  fame  way  in  Orbs 
concentrick,  while  Comets  move  all  manner  of 
ways  in  Orbs  very  excentrick,  and  what  hinders 
the  tix'd  Stars  from  falling  upon  one  another  ? 
How  came  the  Bodies  of  Animals  to  be  contri- 
ved with  lb  much  Art,  and  for  what  ends  were 
their  feveral  Parts  ?  Was  the  Eye  contrived 
without  Skill  in  Opticks,  and  the  Ear  without 
Knowledge  of  Sounds?  How  do  the  Motions 
of  the  Body  lollow  from  the  Will,  and  whence 
is  the  Inilinft  in  Animals  ?  Is  not  the  Senfory  of 
Animals  that  place  to  which  the  fenfitive  Sub- 
ilance  is  prefent,  and  into  which  the  fenfible 
Species  of  Things  are  carried  through  the  Nerves 
and  Brain,  that  there  they  may  be  perceived 

•  by 


[  345  ] 

by  their  immediate  prefence  to  that  Subflance  ? 
And  thele  things  being  rightly  difpatch'd,  does 
it  not  appear  from  Phaenomena  that  there  is  a 
Being  incorporeal,  living,  intelligent,  omnipre- 
fent,  who  in  intinite  Space,  as  it  were  in  his  Sen- 
lory,  fees  the  things  themfelves  intimately,  and 
throughly  perceives  them,  and  comprehends 
them  wholly  by  their  immediate  prefence  to 
himfelf :  Or  which  things  the  Images  only  car- 
ried through  the  Organs  of  Senfe  into  our  little 
Senforiums,  are  there  feen  and  beheld  by  that 
which  in  us  perceives  and  thinks.  And  tho* 
every  true  Step  made  in  this  Philofophy  brings 
us  not  -immediately  to  the  Knowledge  of  the 
firll  Caufe,  yet  it  brings  us  nearer  to  it,  and 
on  that  account  is  to  be  highly  valued. 

^i.  29.  Are  not  the  Rays  of  Light  very 
fmall  Bodies  emitted  from  Ihinino;  Subitances? 
For  fuch  Bodies  will  pafs  through  uniform  Me- 
diums in  right  Lines  without  bending  into  the 
Shadow ,  which  is  the  Nature  of  the  Rays  of 
Light.  They  will  alfo  be  capable  of  feveral 
Properties,  and  be  able  to  conlerve  their  Pro- 
perties unchanged  in  palling  through  feveral 
Mediums,  which  is  another  Condition  of  the 
Rays  of  Light.  Pellucid  Subltances  a<^t  upon 
the  Rays  of  Light  at  a  diftance  in  refrafting,  re- 
flecting and  infleding  them,  and  the  Rays  mu- 
tually agitate  the  Parts  of  thofe  Subflances  at  a 
dillance  for  heating  them  ;  and  this  Aftion  and 
Re-a(^lion  at  a  diilance,  very  much  refembles  an 
attractive  Force  between  Bodies.  If  Refradion 
be  perform'd  by  Attraction  of  the  Rays,  the 
Sines  of  Incidence  muit  be  to  the  Sines  of  Re- 

fradion 


[  340 

fra61ion  in  a  given  Proportion,  as  we  fliew'd  in 
our  Principles  of  Philoi'ophy :  And  this  Rule  is 
true  by  Experience.  The  Rays  of  Light  in 
going  out  of  Glafs  into  a  Vacuum^  are  bent  to- 
wards the  Glafs ;  and  if  they  fall  too  obliquely 
on  the  Vacuum  they  are  bent  backwards  into 
the  Glafs,  and  totally  receded ;  and  this  Refle- 
xion cannot  be  afcribed  to  the  Refillance  of  an 
abfolute  Vacuum ,  but  mull:  be  caufed  by  the 
Power  of  the  Glafs  attrading  the  Rays  at  their 
going  out  of  it  into  the  Vacuum^  and  bringing 
them  back.  For  if  the  farther  Surface  of  the 
Glafs  be  moillen'd  with  Water  or  clear  Oil,  or 
liquid  and  clear  Honey;  the  Rays  which  would 
otherwife  be  reflec^ted,  will  go  into  the  Water, 
Oil,  or  Honey,  and  therefore  are  not  reflefted 
before  they  arrive  at  the  farther  Surface  of  the 
Glafs,  and  begin  to  go  out  of  it.  If  they  go  out 
of  it  into  the  Water,  Oil  or  Honey,  they 
go  on,  becaufe  the  Attradion  of  the  Glafs  is 
almoft  balanced  and  render'd  ineffedual  by 
the  contrary  Attradion  of  the  Liquor.  But  if 
they  go  out  of  it  into  a  Vacuum  which  has  no 
Attraction  to  balance  that  of  the  Glafs,  the  At- 
traftion  of  the  Glafs  either  bends  and  refradls 
them,  or  brings  them  back  and  refleds  them. 
And  this  is  Hill  more  evident  by  laying  together 
two  Prifms  of  Glafs,  or  two  Objed-glalles  of 
of  very  long  Telefcopes ,  the  one  plane  the  6- 
ther  a  little  convex,  and  fo  compreffmg  them 
that  they  do  not  fully  touch,  nor  are  too  far  a- 
funder.  For  the  Light  which  falls  upon  the 
farther  Surface  of  the  firlt  Glafs  where  the  In- 
terval between  the  GlalTes  is  not  above  the  ten 

hundred 


[  34-7  ] 

hundred  thoufandth  part  of  an  Inch,   will  ga 
through  that  Surface,   and  through  the  Air  or 
Vacuum  between  thcGlalTes,  and  enter  into  the 
fecond  Glafs,  as  was  explain'd  in  the  firft,  fourth 
and  eighth  Obfervations  of  the  firtt  Part  of  the 
fecond  Book.   But  if  the  fecond  Glafs  be  taken 
away,  the  Light  which  goes  out  of  the  fecond. 
Surface  of  the  hrlt  Glafs  into  the  Air  or  Va- 
cuum^ will  nor  go  on  forwards,  but  turns  back 
into  the  tirll  Glafs,  and  is  reflected  ;  and  there- 
fore it  is  drawn  back  by  the  Power  of  the  firfl: 
Glafs,  there  being  nothing  elfe  to  turn  it  back. 
Nothing  more  is  requifite  for  producing  all  the 
variety  of  Colours  and  degrees  of  Refrangibi- 
Hty,   than  that  the  Rays  of  Li^iht  be  Bodies  of 
ditierent  Sizes,  the  Icall:  of  which  may  make 
violet  the  weakcfl  and  darkeft  of  the  Colours, 
and  be  more  eafily  diverted  by  rcfradiing  Sur- 
faces from  the  right  Courfe ;   and  the  reft  as 
they  are  bigger  and  bigger,   may  make  the 
Ih'onger  and  more  lucid  Colours,  blue,  green, 
yellow^  and  red ,   and  be  more  and  more  difti- 
cultly  diverted.     Nothing  more  is  requifite  for 
putting  the  Rays  of  Light  into  Fits  of  eafy  Re- 
flexion and  eafy  TranfmilFion,  than  that  they  be 
fmall  Bodies  which  by  their  attradive  Powers, 
or  fome  other  Force,  Itir  up  Vibrations  in  what 
they  acT:  upon ,  which  Vibrations  being  fwifter 
than  the  Rays,  overtake  them  fucceiFively,  and 
agitate  them  fo  as  by  turns  to  increafe  ami  de- 
creafe  their  \^elocities,   and  thereby  put  them 
into  thofe  Fits.     And  lailly,  the  unufual  Refra- 
ftion  of  Ifland  Cryftal  looks  very  much  as  if  it 
were  perform'd  by  fome  kind  of  attraftive  vir- 
tue 


[34-8] 


tue  lodged  in  certain  Sides  both  of  the  Rays, 
and  of  the  Particles  of  the  Cryltal.  For  were 
it  not  for  fome  kind  of  Difpofition  or  Virtue 
lodged  in  fome  Sides  of  the  Particles  of  the 
Cryltal,  and  not  in  their  other  Sides,  and  which 
incUnes  and  bends  the  Rays  towards  theCoalt 
of  unufual  Refraction,  the  Rays  which  fall  per- 
pendicularly on  the  Cryltal,  would  not  be  re- 
fraded  towards  that  Coaft  rather  than  towards 
any  other  Coalt,  both  at  their  Incidence  and  at 
their  Emergence,  fo  as  to  to  emerge  perpendi- 
cularly by  a  contrary  Situation  of  the  Coalt  of 
unuiual  Refradion  at  the  fecond  Surface ;  the 
Cryllal  acting  upon  the  Rays  after  they  have 
pafs'd  through  it,  and  are  emerging  into  the 
Air ;  or,  if  you  pleafe,  into  a  Vacuum.  And 
lince  the  Cryltal  by  this  Difpofitjon  or  Virtue 
does  not  act  upon  the  Rays,  unlefs  when  one 
of  their  Sides  of  unufual  Refradion  looks  to- 
wards that  Coalt,  this  argues  a  Virtue  or  Dif- 
pofition in  thole  Sides  of  the  Rays ,  which  an- 
fwers  to  and  fympathizes  with  that  Virtue  or 
Difpofition  of  the  Cryftal,  as  the  Poles  of  two 
Magnets  anfwer  to  one  another.  And  as  Mag- 
netifm  may  be  intended  and  remitted,  and  is 
found  only  in  the  Magnet  and  in  Iron :  So  this 
Virtue  of  refrading  the  perpendicular  Rays  is 
greater  in  Ifland  Cryltal,  lefs  in  Cryftal  of"  the 
Rock,  and  is  not  yet  found  in  other  Bodies.  I 
do  not  fay  that  this  Virtue  is  magnetical :  It 
feems  to  be  of  another  kind.  I  only  fay,  that 
what  ever  it  be,  it's  difficult  to  conceive  how 
the  Rays  of  Light,  unlefs  they  be  Bodies,  can 
have  a  permanent  Virtue  in  two  of  their  Sides 

which 


[  349  ] 

which  is  not  in  their  other  Sides,  and  this 
without  any  regard  to  their  Polition  to  the 
Space  or  Medium  through  which  they  pafs. 

What  I  mean  in  this  Queltion  by  a  Vacuum^ 
and  by  the  Attradions  of  the  Rays  of  Light  to- 
wards Glafs  or  Cryllal,  may  be  underllood  by 
what  was  faid  in  the  i8th,  19th  and  2,0th  Que^ 
flions. 

^i.  30.  Are  not  grofs  Bodies  and  Light  con- 
vertible into  one  another,  and  may  not  Bodies 
receive  much  of  their  adivity  from  the  Parti- 
cles of  Light  which  enter  their  Compofition  ? 
For  all  fix'd  Bodies  being  heated  emit  Light  lo 
long  as  they  continue  fufficiently  hot,  and  Light 
mutually  Itops  in  Bodies  as  often  as  its  Rays 
ftrike  upon  their  Parts,  as  we  fliew'd  above.  I 
know  no  Body  lefs  apt  to  fliine  than  Water; 
and  yet  Water  by  frequent  Dillillations  c'  anges 
into  fix'd  Earth,  as  Mr.  Boyle  has  tried ;  and 
then  this  Earth  being  enabled  to  endure  a  fuf- 
ficientHeat,  fliines  by  Heat  like  other  Bodies. 

The  changing  of  Bodies  into  Light,  and  Light 
into  Bodies,  is  very  conformable  to  the  Courfe 
of  Nature,  which  feems  delighted  withTranf- 
mutations.  Water,  which  is  a  very  fluid  taft- 
lefsSalt,  flie  changes  byHcat  into  Vapour,  which 
is  a  fort  of  Air,  and  by  Cold  into  Ice,  which  is 
a  hard,  pellucid,  brittle,  fulible  Stone :  and  this 
Stone  returns  into  Water  by  Heat,  and  Vapour 
returns  into  Water  by  Cold.  Earth  by  Heat  be- 
comes Fire,  and  by  Cold  returns  into  Earth. 
Denie  Bodies  by  Fermentation  rarify  into  feve- 
ral  forts  of  Air,  and  this  Air  by  Fermentation, 
and  fometimes  without  it,  returns  into  denfe 

Bodies, 


[  350  ] 

Bodies.  Mercur}?'  appears  fometimes  in  the 
form  of  a  fluid  Metal,  fometimes  in  the  form 
of  a  hard  brittle  Metal,  fometimes  in  the  form 
of  a  corrofive  pellucid  Salt  call'd  Sublimate , 
fometimes  in  the  form  of  a  taftlefs,  pellucid, 
volatile  white  Earth ,  call'd  Merctirius  dulcis  ; 
jor  in  that  of  a  red  opake  volatile  Earth,  call'd 
Cinnaber  ;  or  in  that  of  a  red  or  white  Preci- 
pitate, or  in  that  of  a  fluid  Salt ;  and  in  Dillil- 
lation  it  turns  into  Vapour,  and  being  agitated 
in  I'acuOj  it  fliines  like  Fire.  And  after  all  thefe 
Changes  it  returns  again  into  its  firfl  form  of 
Mercury.  Eggs  grow  from  infenfible  Maf^ni- 
tudes,  and  change  into  Animals ;  Tadpoles  into 
Frogs;  and  W'orms  into  Flies.  All  Birds, Beafts 
and  Fiflies,  Infeds,  Trees,  and  other  \egeta- 
bles,  with  their  feveral  parts,  grow  out  of  Wa- 
ter and  watry  Tindures  and  Salts,  and  byPu- 
trefadion  return  again  into  watry  Subllances. 
And  Water  ftanding  a  few  Days  in  the  open 
Air ,  yields  a  Tindure ,  which  ( like  that  of 
Mault)  by  Handing  longer  yields  a  Sediment 
and  a  Spirit,  but  before  Putrefaction  is  lit  Nou- 
rifliment  for  Animals  and  Vegetables.  And  a- 
mong  fuch  various  and  ftrange  Tranfmutations, 
why  may  not  Nature  change  Bodies  into  Light, 
and  Light  into  Bodies  ? 

^/.  31.  Have  not  the  fmall  Particles  of  Bo- 
dies certain  Powers,  Virtues  or  Forces,  by 
w^hich  they  aft  at  a  diftance,  not  only  upon  the 
Rays  of  Light  for  refleding,  refrafting  and  in- 
fleding  them,  but  alio  upon  one  another  for 
producing  a  great  part  of  the  Phasnomena  of 
Nature  ?    For  it's  well  known  that  Bodies  ad 

one 


[351] 

one  upon  another  by  the  Attradions  of  Gravi- 
ty,  Magnetifm  and  Electricity ;    and  thefc  In- 
llances  ihew  the  Tenor  and  Courfe  of  Nature, 
and  make  it  not  improbable  but  that  there  may 
be  more  attradive  Powers  than  thefe.   For  Na- 
ture is  very  confonant  and  conformable  to  her 
felf.    How  thefe  Attradions  may  be  perform'd, 
I  do  not  here  confider.     What  I  call  Attraction 
may  be  perform'd  by  impulfe,  or  by  fome  other 
means  unknown  to  me.     I  ufe  that  Word  here 
to  fignify  only  in  general  any  Force  by  which 
Bodies  tend  towards  one  another,   whatfocver 
be  the  Caufe.     For  we  mult  learn  from  the 
PhcTnomena  of  Nature  what  Bodies  attrad  one 
another,  and  what  are  the  Laws  and  Properties 
ofi>the  Attradion,  before  we  enquire  the  Caufe 
by  which  the  Attradion  is  perform'd,     The  At- 
tradions  of  Gravity,  Magnetifm  and  Eledrici- 
ty,  reach  to  very  fenfible  diltances,  and  fo  have 
been  obferved  by  vulgar  Eyes,   and  there  may 
be  others  which  reach  to  fo  fmall  diftances  as 
hitherto  efcape  Obfcrvation ;   and  perhaps  ele- 
drical  Attradion  may  reach  to  fuch  fmall  di- 
ftances, even  without  being  excited  by  Fridion. 
For  when  Salt  of  Tartar  runs/^r  deliquiumy 
is  not  this  done  by  an  Attradion  between  the 
Particles  of  the  Salt  of  Tartar ,   and  the  Parti- 
cles of  the  Water  which  float  in  the  Air  in  the 
form  of  Vapours  ?  And  why  does  not  common 
Salt,  or  Salt-petre,  or  Vitriol,  run  per  deliqntum^ 
but  for  want  of  fuch  an  Attradion  ?    Or  w^hy 
does  not  Salt  of  Tartar  draw  more  W  ater  out 
of  the  Air  than  in  a  certain  Proportion  to  its 
quantity,  but  for  want  of  an  attradive  Force 

after 


[  352  ] 

after  it  is  fatiated  with  Water?  And  whence 
is  it  but  from  this  attractive  Power  that  Water 
which  alone  diflils  with  a  gentle  lukewarm 
Heat,  will  not  diitil  from  Salt  of  Tartar  with- 
out a  great  Heat?  And  is  it  not  from  the  like 
attractive  Power  between  the  Particles  of  Oil  of 
Vitriol  and  the  Particles  of  Water,  that  Oil  of 
Vitriol  draws  to  it  a  good  quantity  of  Water 
out  of  the  Air,  and  after  it  is  fatiated  draws  no 
more,  and  in  Dillillation  lets  go  the  Water  ve- 
ry difficultly  ?  And  when  Water  and  Oil  of  Vi- 
triol poured  fuccedively  into  the  fame  VelTel 
grow  very  hot  in  the  mixing,  does  not  this 
Heat  argue  a  great  Motion  in  the  parts  of  the 
Liquors  ?  And  does  not  this  Motion  argue  that 
the  Parts  of  the  two  Liquors  in  mixing  coa- 
lelce  with  Violence,  and  by  confequence  rufh 
towards  one  another  with  an  accelerated  Mo- 
tion ?  And  when  Aqua  fort  Is  or  Spirit  of  Vi^ 
triol  poured  upon  Filings  of  Iron,  difTolves  the 
Filings  with  a  great  Heat  and  Ebullition,  is  not 
this  Heat  and  Ebullition  etfeded  by  a  violent 
Motion  of  the  Parts,  and  does  not  that  Motion 
argue  that  the  acid  Parts  of  the  Liquor  rufh  to- 
wards the  Parts  of  the  Metal  with  violence^ 
and  run  forcibly  into  its  Pores  till  they  get  be- 
tween its  outmofl  Particles  and  the  main  Mafs 
of  the  Metal,  and  furrounding  thofe  Particles 
loofen  them  from  the  main  Mafs,  and  fet  them 
at  liberty  to  float  off  into  the  Water?  And 
when  the  acid  Particles  which  alone  would 
diitil  with  ancafyHeat,  will  not  feparate  from 
the  Particles  of  the  Metal  without  a  very  vio- 
lent 


[  353  ] 

lent  Heat,  does  not  this  confirm  the  Attradion 
between  them  ? 

When  Spirit  of  Vitriol  poured  upon  com- 
mon Salt  or  Salt-petre  makes  an  Ebullition  with 
the  Salt  and  unites  with  it,  and  in  Diltillation 
the  Spirit  of  the  common  Salt  or  Salt-petre 
comes  over  much  eafier  than  it  would  do  be- 
fore, and  the  acid  part  of  the  Spirit  of  Vitriol 
itays  behind ;  does  not  this  argue  that  the  fix'd 
Alcaly  of  the  Salt  attrads  the  acid  Spirit  of  the 
Vitriol  more  Itrongly  than  its  own  Spirit,  and 
not  being  able  to  hold  them  both ,  lets  go  its 
own  ?    And  when  Oil  of  Vitriol  is  drawn  off 
from  its  weight  of  Nitre,  and  from  both  the 
Ingredients  a  compound  Spirit  of  Nitre  is  diitil- 
led,  and  two  parts  of  this  Spirit  are  poured  on 
one  part  of  Oil  of  Cloves  or  Caraway  Seeds,  or  of 
any  ponderous  Oil  of  vegetable  or  animal  Sub- 
itances,  or  Oil  of  Turpentine  thickcn'd  with  a 
little  Balfam  of  Sulphur,  and  the  Liquors  grow  fo 
very  hot  in  mixing,  as  prelently  to  fend  up  a  burn- 
ing Flame :  Does  not  this  very  great  and  fudden 
Heat  argue  that  the  two  Liquors  mix  with  vio- 
lence, and  that  their  Parts  in  mixing  run  to- 
wards one  another  with  an  accelerated  Motion, 
and  clafli  with  the  greateit  Force?    And  is  it 
not  for  the  fame  reafon  that  well  redihed  Spi- 
rit of  Wine  poured  on  the  lame  compound  Spi- 
rit flaflies;  and  xh'MX.h^Tulvis  fulmifjans,  com- 
pofed  of  Sulphur ,  Nitre ,  and  Salt  of  Tartar, 
goes  off  with  a  more  fudden  and  violent  Ex- 
plofion  than  Gun-powder,  the  acid  Spirits  of 
the  Sulphur  and  Nitre  rufliing  towards  one  an- 
other, and  towards  the  Salt  of  Tartar,  with  fo 

A  a  great 


[  354  ] 

greilt  a  violence,  as  by  the  fliock  to  turn  the 
whole  at  once  into  Vapour  and  Flame?  Where 
the  Diilolution  is  How,  it  makes  a  How  Ebulli- 
tion and  a  gentle  Heat ;  and  where  it  is  quick- 
er, it  makes  a  greater  Ebullition  with  more 
Heat ;  and  where  it  is  done  at  once,  the  Ebul- 
lition is  contraded  into  a  luddcn  Blait  or  vio- 
lent Explofion,  with  a  Heat  equal  to  that  of 
Fire  and  Flame.  So  when  a  Drachm  of  the  a- 
bove  mention'd  compound  ^Spirit  of  Nitre  was 
poured  upon  half  a  Drachm  of  Oil  of  Caraway 
Seeds  /;/  vacuo ;  the  Mixture  immediately  made 
a  flafh  hke  Gun-pov^'der,  and  burll  the  exhau- 
lled  Receiver,  which  was  a  Glais  lix  Inches 
wide,  and  eight  Inches  deep.  And  even  the 
grofs  Body  of  Sulphur  powder 'd ,  and  with  an 
equal  weight  of  Iron  Filings,  and  a  little  Water 
made  into  Palle,  afts  upon  the  Iron,  and  in  five 
OS  iix  Hours  grows  too  hot  to  be  touch'd,  and 
emits  a  Flame.  And  by  thele  Experiments  com- 
pared with  the  great  quantity  of  Sulphur  with 
which  the  Earth  abounds,  and  the  warmth  of 
the  interior  Parts  of  the  Earth,  and  hot  Springs, 
and  burning  Mountains,  and  with  Damps,  mi- 
neral Corufcations,  Earthquakes,  hot  fuffoca- 
ting  Exhalations,  Hurricanes  and  Spouts;  we 
may  learn  that  fulphurcous  Steams  abound  in 
the  Bowels  of  the  Earth  and  ferment  with  Mi- 
nerals, and  fometimes  take  Fire  with  a  fudden 
Corufcation  and  Explofion ;  and  if  pent  up  in 
fubterraneous  Caverns,  burlt  the  Caverns  with  a 
great  fhaking  of  the  Earth,  as  in  fpringing  of  a 
Mine.  And  then  the  Vapour  generated  \y^  the 
F^xplofion,  expiring  through-  the  Pores  of  the 
-•  -  Earth, 


I  355  ] 

Earth,  feels  hot  and  fulTocates,  and  makes  Teni- 
pells  and  Hurricanes,  and  iometiines  caufes  the 
Land  to  Aide ,  or  the  Sea  to  boil,  and  carries 
up  the  Water  thereof  in  Drops,  which  by  their 
weight  fall  down  again  in  Spouts.  Alfo  icme 
fulphureous  Steams,  at  all  times  when  the  Earth 
is  dry,  afcending  into  the  Air,  ferment  there 
with  nitrous  Acids,  and  fornetimes  taking  fire: 
caufe  Lightening  and  Thunder ,  and  tiery  .Me- 
teors. For  the  Air  abounds  with  acid  Vapours 
fit  to  promote  Fermentations,  as  appears  by  the 
ruffing  of  Iron  and  Copper  in  it,  the  kindling 
of  Fire  by  blowing,  and  the  beating  of  the 
Heart  by  means  of  Relpiration.  Now  the  a- 
bove  mention'd  Motions  are  fo  ^reat  and  vio- 
lent as  to  fliew  that  in  Fermentations,  the  Par- 
ticles of  Bodies  which  almoif  relt,  arc  put  into 
new  Motions  by  a  very  potent  Principle,  which 
adls  upon  them  only  when  they  approach  ond 
another,  and  caules  them  to  meet  and  clafli 
with  great  violence,  and  grow  hot  with  the 
Motion,  and  dalli  one  another  into  pieces,  and 
vanifli  into  Air,  and  Vapour,  and  Flame. 

When  Salt  of  Tartar  J>er  dellqu'nimy  being 
poured  into  the  Solution  of  any  iMetal,  preci- 
pitates the  Metal,  and  makes  it  fall  down  to  the 
bottom  of  the  Liquor  in  the  form  of  Mud  : 
Does  not  this  argue  that  the  acid  Particles  are 
attraded  more  Itrongly  by  the  Salt  of  Tartar 
than  by  the  Metal,  and  by  the  ftronger  Attra- 
dion  go  from  the  Metal  to  the  Salt  of  Tartar  ? 
And  lo  when  a  Solution  of  Iron  in  Aqua  fort  is 
diifolves  the  Lapis  Calarmnaris  and  lets  go  the 
Iron,  or  a  Solution  of  Copper  dilTolves  Iron  im-^ 

A  a  i  merfed 


t  356  ] 

inerfcd  in  it  and  lets  go  the  Copper,  or  a  So- 
lution of  Silver  difiblves  Copper  and  lets  go  the 
Silver,  or  a  Solution  of  Mercury  in  Aqua  fort  is 
being  poured  upon  Iron,  Copper,  Tin  or  Lead, 
diilblves  the  Metal  and  lets  go  the  Mercury, 
docs  not  this  argue  that  the  acid  Particles  of 
the  Aqua  fort'is  are  attraded  more  ih'ongly  by 
the  Laps  Calam'maris  than  by  Iron,  and  more 
flrongly  by  Iron  than  by  Copper,  and  more 
ftrongly  by  Copper  than  by  Silver,  and  more 
flrongly  by  Iron,  Copper,  Tin  ahdXead,  than 
by  Mercury?  And  is  it  not  for  the  fame  reafon 
that  Iron  requires  moxc  Aqua  fort  is  to  dillblve 
it  than  Copper,  and  Copper  more  than  the  o- 
ther  Metals ;  and  that  ot  all  Metals,  Iron  is  dif- 
folved  moft  eafily,  and  is  moll  apt  to  rult ;  and 
next  after  Iron,  Copper  ? 

When  Oil  of  Vitriol  is  mix'd  with  a  little 
Water,  or  is  run  per  dcl'tquuim^  and  in  Dillil- 
lation  the  Water  afcends  difficultly,  and  brings 
over  with  it  fome  part  of  the  Oil  of  Vitriol  in 
the  form  of  Spirit  of  \  itriol,  and  this  Spirit  be- 
ing poured  upon  Iron,  Copper,  or  Salt  of  Tar- 
tar, unites  with  the  Bod}'  and  lets  go  the  Wa- 
ter, doth  not  this  flievv  that  the  acid  Spirit  is  at- 
traded  by  the  Water,  and  more  attracted  by 
the  tix'd  Body  than  by  the  Water,  and  there- 
fore lets  go  the  Water  to  clofe  with  the  fix'd 
Body  ?  And  is  it  not  for  the  fame  reafon  that 
the  Water  and  acid  Spirits  which  are  mix'd  to- 
gether in  Vinegar,  Aqua  forth ,  and  Spirit  of 
Salt,  cohere  and  rile  together  in  Diflillation ; 
but  if  the  Menfiruum  be  poured  on  Salt  of  Tar- 
tar, or  on  Lead  or  Iron,  or  any  fix'd  Body 

which 


.  ;   .  [357] 

which  it  can  difTolvc,  the  Acid  b}^  a  {Irongcr  At- 
tradion  adheres  to  the  Body,  and  lets  go  the 
Water  ?  And  is  it  not  aUb  from  a  mutual  At- 
traction that  the  Spirits  of  Soot  and  Sea-Salt 
unite  and  compofe  the  Particles  of  Sal-armo- 
niac ,  which  are  Icfs  volatile  than  before ,  be- 
caufe  grofler  and  freer  from  Water;  and  that 
the  Particles  of  Sal-armoniac  in  Sublimation  car- 
ry up  the  Particles  of  Antimony,  which  will  not 
fublime  alone ;  and  that  the  Particles  of  Mer- 
cury uniting  with  the  acid  Particles  of  Spirit 
of  Salt  compofe  Mercury  fublimate,  and  with 
the  Particles  of  Sulphur,  compofe  Cinnaber  ; 
and  that  the  Particles  of  Spirit  of  Wine  and 
Spirit  of  Urine  well  reclified  unite,  and  letting 
go  the  Water  which  dillblved  them,  compofe  a 
confillent  Body;  and  that  in  fubliming  Cinna- 
ber from  Salt  of  Tartar,  or  from  quick  Lime, 
the  Sulphur  by  a  f Ironger  Attraction  of  the  Salt 
or  Lime  lets  go  the  Mercury,  and  llays  with 
the  fix'd  Body ;  and  that  when  Mercury  fubli- 
mate is  fublimed  from  Antimony,  or  from  Re- 
gulus  of  Antimony,  the  Spirit  of  Salt  lets  go  the 
Mercury,  and  unites  with  the  antimonial  Me- 
tal which  attrads  it  more  llrongly,  and  Hays 
with  it  till  the  Heat  be  great  enough  to  make 
them  both  afcend  toget.ier,  and  then  carries 
up  the  Metal  Avith  it  in  the  form  of  a  very  fu- 
lible  Salt,  called  Butter  of  Antimony,  although 
the  Spirit  of  Salt  alone  be  almoll  as  volatile  as 
Water,  and  the  Antimony  alone  as  fix'd  as 
Lead  ? 

V>J\\tr\.^^Ha  fort  is  dilTolves  Silver  and  not 
Gold,  afid  jfqza  regia  dilfolves  Gold  and  not 

Aa  3  Silver, 


[  358  ] 

Silver ,  may  it  not  be  faid  that  Aqua  forth  is 
fubtile  enough  to  penetrate  Gold  as  well  as  Sil- 
ver, but  wants  the  attractive  Force  to  give  it 
Entrance ;  and  that  Aqua reg'ia  is  fubtile  enough 
to  penetrate  Silver  as  well  as  Gold,  but  wants 
the  attractive  Force  to  give  it  Entrance?    For 
Aqua  reg'ta  is  nothing  elfe  than  Aqua  fort  is 
mix'd  with  fome  Spirit  of  Salt,  or  with  Sal  ar- 
moniac ;  and  even  common  Salt  diflblved  in  A- 
quafortis,   enables  xhQ  Menffruum  to  diflblve 
Gold,  though  the  Salt  be  a  grofs  Body.   When 
therefore  Spirit  of  Salt  precipitates  Silver  out 
oi  Aqua  fort is:,  is  it  not  done  by  attrading  and 
mixing  with  the  Aqua  fortis^  and  not  attraft- 
ing,   or  perhaps  repeUing  Silver?    And  when 
Water  precipitates  Antimony  out  of  the  Subli- 
mate of  Antimony  and  Sal-armoniac,  or  out  of 
Butter  of  Antimony,  is  it  not  done  by  its  dif- 
folving,  mixing  with,  and  weakening  the  Sal^ 
armoniac  or  Spirit  of  Salt,  and  its  not  attract- 
ing, or  perhaps  repelling  the  Antimony?    And 
is  it  not  for  want  of  an  attra(!:tive  Virtue  be- 
tween the  Parts  of  Water  and  Oil,  of  Quick- 
filver  and  Antimony ,   of  Lead  and  Iron,  that 
thefe  Subilances  do  not  mix ;  and  by  a  weak 
Attraction,  that  Quick-filver  and  Copper  mix 
difficultly ;  and  from  a  ftrong  one,  that  Quick- 
filver  and  Tin,  A^ntimony  and  Iron,  Water  and 
Salts,  mix  readily  ?    And  in  general,  is  it  not 
from  the  fame  Principle  that  Heat  congregates 
homogeneal  Bodies,  and  feparates  heterogeneal 
ones? 

When  Arfnick  with  Soap  gives  ^^Regulus, 
and  with  Mercury  fublimate  a-  volatile  fufible 

Salt, 


[  359  ] 

Salt,  like  Butter  of  Antimony,  doth  not  this 
ilievv  that  Arfnick,  which  is  a  Subltance  totally 
volatile,  is  compounded  of  fix'd  and  volatile 
Parts,  llrongly  cohering  by  a  mutual  Attraftion, 
fo  that  the  volatile  will  not  afcend  without  car- 
rying up  the  fixed?  And  fo,  when  an  equal 
weight  of  Spirit  of  Wine  and  Oil  of  Vitriol 
are  digefled  together ,  and  in  Diilillation  yield 
two  fragrant  and  volatile  Spirits  which  will  not 
mix  with  one  another,  and  a  tix'd  black  Earth 
remains  behind;  doth  not  this  fliew^  that  Oil  of 
Vitriol  is  compoCed  of  volatile  and  fix'd  Parts 
ftrongly  united  by  Attraction,  fo  as  to  afcend 
togetiier  in  form  of  a  volatile,  acid,  fluid  bait, 
until  the  Spirit  of  VV^ine  attrai^fs  and  feparatcs 
the  volatile  Parts  from  the  fixed  ?  And  tlicre- 
fore,  iince  Oil  of  Sulphur  per  cmnpanam  is  of 
the  iame  Nature  with  Oil  of  Mtriol,  mav  it  not 
be  inferred,  that  Sulphur  is  alfo  a  mixture  of 
volatile  and  fix'd  Parts  fo  flrongly  cohering  by 
Attradion,  as  to  afcend  together  in  Sublima- 
tion. By  dilfolving  Flowers  of  Sulphur  in  Oil 
of  Turpentine,  and  diflilhng  the  Solution,  it  is 
found  that  Sulphur  is  compofed  of  an  inflama- 
ble  thick  Oil  or  fat  Bitumen,  an  acid  Salt,  a  ve- 
ry fix'd  Earth,  and  a  little  Metal.  The  three 
firft  were  found  not  much  unequal  to  one 
another,  the  fourth  in  fo  fmall  a  quantity  as 
fcarce  to  be  worth  confidering.  The  acid  Salt 
dilTolved  in  Water,  is  the  fame  with  Oil  of  Sul- 
phur per  campanant^  and  abounding  much  in 
the  Bowels  of  the  Earth,  and  particularly  in 
Markafites,  unites  it  'felf  to  the  other  Ingredi- 
ents of  the  Markafite,  which  are.  Bitumen,  I- 

A  a  4  ron. 


i*on,  Copper  and  Earth,  and  with  them  com- 
pounds Alume,  Vitriol  and  Sulphur.  With  the 
Earth  alone  it  compounds  Alume ;  with  the 
Metal  alone,  or  Metal  and  Earth  together,  it 
compounds  Vitriol ;  and  v^ith  the  Bitumen  and 
Earth  it  compounds  Sulphur.  Whence  it  comes 
to  pafs  that  Markafites  abound  with  thofe  three 
Minerals.  And  is  it  not  from  the  mutual  At- 
traction of  the  Ingredients  that  they  flick  toge- 
ther for  compounding  thefe  Minerals,  and  that 
the  Bitumen  carries  up  the  other  Ingredients  of 
the  Sulphur,  which  without  it  would  not  i'ub- 
lime?  And  the  fame  Queflion  may  be  put  con- 
cerning all,  or  almoft  all  the  grofs  Bodies  in 
Nature.  For  all  the  Parts  of  Animals  and  Ve- 
getables are  compofed  of  Subllances  volatile 
and  fix'd,  fluid  and  folid,  as  appears  by  their 
Analyfis :  and  fo  are  Salts  and  Minerals,  fo  tar 
as  Chymifts  have  been  hitherto  able  to  examine 
their  Compoiition. 

When  Mercury  fublimate  is  refublimed  with 
frefli  Mercury,  and  becomes  Mercurms  dulcis^ 
which  is  a  white  taftlefs  Earth  fcarce  dillblva- 
ble  in  Water,  and  Mercurim  dulc'ts  refublimed 
with  Spirit  of  Salt  returns  into  Mercury  fubli- 
mate ;  and  when  Metals  corroded  with  a  little 
acid  turn  into  Ruft,  which  is  an  Earth  taltlefs 
and  indifTolvable  in  Water,  and  this  Earth  im- 
bibed with  more  Acid  becomes  a  metallick 
Salt;  and  when  fome  Stones,  as  Spar  of  Lead, 
diifolved  in  proper  MenJIrmims  become  Salts; 
do  not  thefe  things  fliew  that  Salts  are  dry  Earth 
^nd  watryAcid  united  byAttradion,  and  that 
the  Earth  will  not  become  a  Salt  without  fo 

much 


[3^1  ] 

much  Acid  as  makes  it  difToivnble  in  Water? 
Do  not  the  (harp  and  pungent  Taites  of  Acids 
arife  from  the  llrong  Attradion  whereby  the 
acid  Particles  rufli  upon  and  agitate  the  Parti- 
cles of  the  Tongue?  And  when  iMetals  are  dif- 
folved  in  acid  Menftriinms^  and  the  Acids  in 
conjunction  with  the  Metal  ad:  after  a  ditlerent 
manner,  fo  that  the  Compound  has  a  different 
talle  much  milder  than  before,  and  fomctimes 
a  fwcet  one ;  is  it  not  becaufc  the  Acids  ad- 
here to  the  metallickParticles,  and  thereby lofe 
much  of  their  Adivity  ?  And  if  the  Acid  be  in 
too  fmall  a  Proportion  to  make  the  Compound 
diffolvable  in  Water,  will  it  not  by  adhering 
Ih'ongly  to  the  Metal  become  unadive  and  lofe 
its  taite,  and  the  Compound  be  a  taillefs  Earth  ? 
For  fuch  things  as  are  not  diffolvable  by  the 
Moiilure  of  the  Tongue,  ad  not  upon  the 
Tafte. 

As  Gravity  makes  the  Sea  flow  round  the 
denier  and  weightier  Parts  of  the  Globe  of  the 
Earth ,  fo  the  Attradion  may  make  the  u^atry 
Acid  flow  round,  the  denfer  and  compader 
Particles  of  Earth  for  compofmg  the  Particles 
of  Salt.  For  othcrwife  the  Acid  would  not  do 
the  office  of  a  Medium  between  the  Earth  and 
common  Water,  for  making  Salts  diffolvable  in 
the  Water;  nor  would  Salt  of  Tartar  readily 
draw  off  the  Acid  from  diffolved  Metals,  nor 
Metals  the  Acid  from  Mercury.  Now  as  in  the 
great  Globe  of  the  Earth  and  Sea,  the  denfell 
J^odies  by  their  Gravity  fmk  down  in  Water, 
and  always  endeavour  to  go  towards  the  Cen- 
ter of  the  Globe ;  fo  in  Particles  of  Salt ,   the 

denfefl 


denfell  Matter  may  always  endeavour  to  ap- 
proach the  Center  of  the  Particle :  So  that  a 
Particle  of  Salt  may  be  compared  to  a  Chaos ; 
being  denfe,  hard,  dry,  and  earthy  in  the  Cen- 
ter ;  and  rare,  foft,  moilt,  and  watry  in  the 
Circumference.  And  hence  it  leems  to  be  that 
Salts  are  of  a  lading  nature ,  being  fcarce  de- 
ftroy'd,  unlefs  by  drawing  away  their  watry 
Parts  by  violence,  or  by  letting  them  foak  into 
the  Pores  of  the  central  Earth  by  a  gentle  Heat 
in  Putrefaction,  until  the  Earth  be  diifolved  by 
the  Water,  and  feparated  into  fmaller  Particles, 
which  by  reafon  of  their  fmallncfs  make  the 
rotten  Compound  appear  of  a  black  Colour. 
Hence  alfo  it  may  be  that  the  Parts  of  Animals 
and  Vegetables  preferve  their  feveral  Forms, 
and  aflimilate  their  Nourifliment ;  the  foft  and 
moiit  Nourilhment  cafily  changing  its  Texture 
by  a  gentle  Heat  and  Motion ,  till  it  becomes 
like  the  denfe,  hard,  dry,  and  durable  Earth 
in  the  Center  of  each  Particle.  But  when  the 
Nourifliment  grows  unfit  to  be  ailimilated,  or 
the  central  Earth  grows  too  feeble  to  aflimilate 
it,  the  Motion  ends  in  Confulion,  Putrefaction 
and  Death. 

If  a  very  fmall  quantity  of  any  Salt  or  Vitriol 
be  diiiblved  in  a  great  quantity  of  Water,  the 
Particles  of  the  Salt  or  V  itriol  will  not  fink  to 
the  bottom,  though  they  be  heavier^  in  Specie 
than  the  W^'ater,  but  will  evenly  diffufe  them- 
felves  into  all  the  Water,  fo  as  to  make  it  as  fa- 
line  at  the  top  as  at  the  bottom.  And  does  not 
this  imply  that  the  Parts  of  the  Salt  or  Vitriol 
recede  from  one  another,  and  endeavour  to  ex- 
pand 


[  3^3  ] 

pand  themfelves,  and  get  as  far  afunder  as  the 
quantity  of  Water  in  vviiich  they  float,  will  al- 
low? And  does  not  this  Endeavour  imply  that 
they  have  a  repulfive  Force  by  which  they  fly 
from  one  another,  or  at  leafl,  that  they  attrac^t 
the  Water  more  llrongly  than  they  do  one  ano- 
ther? For  as  all  things  afcend  in  VV^ater  which 
are  lefs  attra^led  than  Water,  by  the  gravitating 
Power  of  the  Earth ;  fo  all  the  Particles  of  Salt 
which  float  in  Water,  and  are  lefs  attracted 
than  Water  by  any  one  Particle  of  Salt,  mult 
recede  from  that  Particle,  and  give  way  to  the 
more  attracted  Water. 

When  any  faline  Liquor  is  evaporated  to  a 
Cuticle  and  let  cool,  the  Salt  concretes  in  re- 
gular Figures ;  which  argues,  that  the  Particles 
of  the  Salt  before  they  concreted,  floated  in 
the  Liquor  at  equal  diilances  in  rank  and  file, 
and  by  confequence  that  they  ac^led  upon  one 
another  by  lome  Power  which  at  equal  diflances 
is  equal,  at  unequal  diltances  unequal.  For  by 
fuch  a  Power  they  will  range  themfelves  uni- 
formly, and  without  it  they  will  float  irregular- 
ly, and  come  together  as  irregularly.  And 
fince  the  Particles  of  Ifland  Cryltal  acl  all  the 
fame  way  upon  the  Rays  of  Light  for  caufmg 
the  unulual  Refraftion,  may  it  not  be  fuppofed 
that  in  the  Formation  of  this  Cryflal,  the  Par- 
ticles not  only  ranged  themfelves  in  rank  and 
file  for  concreting  in  regular  Figures,  but  alfo 
by  fome  kind  of  polar  Virtue  turned  their  ho- 
mogeneal  Sides  the  fame  way. 

The  Parts  of  all  homogeneal  hard  Bodies 
which  fully  touch  one  another,  flick  together 

very 


[  3^4  ] 

very  ftrongly.  And  for  explaining  how  this 
may  be,  lome  have  invented  hooked  Atoms, 
which  is  begging  the  Queflion;  and  others  tell 
us  that  Bodies  are  glued  together  by  reft,  that 
is,^  by  an  occult  Quality,  or  rather  by  nothing; 
and  others,  that  they  flick  together  by  confpi- 
ring  N4otions,  that  is,  by  relacive  rell  ainongfl 
themfelvcs.  I  had  rather  inter  from  their  Co- 
hefion,  that  their  Particles  attrad  one  another 
by  fome  Force,  which  in  immediate  Conta6i:  is 
exceed' ng  ftrong,  at  fmall  diflances  performs 
the  chymical  Operations  above  mentioned,  and 
reaches  not  far  from  the  Particles  with  any  fen- 
fible  Eircd. 

All  Bodies  feem  to  be  compofed  of  hard  Par- 
ticles :  For  otherwife  Fluids  would  not  congeal ; 
as  Water,  Oils,  Vinegar,  and  Spirit  or  Oil  of 
Vitriol  do  by  freezing ;    Mercury  by  Fumes  of 
Lead;  Spirit  of  Nitre  and  Mercury,  bydiflbl- 
ving  the  Mercury  and  evaporating  the  Flegm  ; 
Spirit  of  Wine  and  Spirit  of  Urine,  bydeiiegm- 
ing  and  mixing  them ;  and  Spirit  of  Urine  and 
Spirit  of  Salt,  by  fubliming  them  together  to 
make  Sal-armoniac.    Even  the  Kays  of  Light 
feem  to  be  hard  Bodies;    for  otherwife  they 
would  not  retain  different  Propenics  in  their 
different  Sides.     And  therefore  Hardnefs  may 
be  reckon'd  the  Property  of  all  uncompounded 
Matter.    At  leall,  this  leems  to  be  as  evident 
as  the  univerfal  Impenetrability  of  Matter.  For 
all  Bodies,  fo  far  as  Experience  reaches,  are  ei- 
ther hard ,   or  may  be  harden'd ;  and  we  have 
no  other  Evidence  of  univerfal  Impenetrability, 
befides  a  large  Experience  without  an  experi- 
mental 


[  3^5  ] 


mental  Exception.  Now  if  compound  Bodies 
are  fo  very  hard  as  we  find  fome  of  them  to 
be,  and  yet  are  very  porous,  and  confill  of  Parts 
which  are  only  laid  together ;  the  fimple  Par- 
ticles which  are  void  of  Pores,  and  were  never 
]fet  divided,  muft  be  much  harder.  For  fuch 
hard  Particles  being  heaped  up  together,  can 
fcarce  touch  one  another  in  more  than  a  few 
Points,  and  therefore  muft  be  feparable  by 
much  lefs  Force  than  is  rcquifite  to  break  a  Ib- 
lid  Particle,  whofe  Parts  touch  in  all  the  Space 
between  them,  wituout  any  Pores  or  Interfaces 
to  weaken  their  Cohefion.  And  how  fuch  ve- 
ry hard  Particles  which  are  only  laid  together 
and  touch  only  in  a  few  Points,  can  Hick  toge- 
ther, and  that  fo  firmly  as  they  do,  without  the 
afliilance  of  fomething  which  caufes  them  to 
be  attracted  or  prefs'd  towards  one  another,  is 
very  difficult  to  conceive. 

The  fame  thing  I  infer  alfo  from  the  cohe- 
ring of  two  polilli'd  Marbles  m  vacuo,  and  from 
the  {landing  of  Quick-filver  in  the  Barometer  at 
the  height  of  50,  60  or  70  Inches,  or  above, 
when  ever  it  is  well  purged  of  Air  and  careful- 
ly poured  in,  fo  that  its  Parts  be  every  where 
contiguous  both  to  one  another  and  to  the 
Glafs.  The  xltmolphere  by  its  weight  prelfes 
the  Quick-lilver  into  the  Glafs,  to  the  height  of 
29  or  30  Inches.  And  fome  other  Agent  raifes 
it  higher,  not  bv  preliing  it  into  the  Glafs,  but 
by  making  its  Parts  Hick  to  the  Glafs ,  and  to 
one  another.  For  upon  any  dilcontinuation  of 
Parts,  made  either  by  Bubbles  or  by  iliaking  the 

Glafs, 


[  366  ] 

Glafs,  the  whole  Mercury  falls  down  to  the 
height  of  ^<)  or  30  Inches. 

And  of  the  fame  kind  with  thefe  Experi- 
ments are  thofe  that  follow.  If  two  plane  po- 
li(h'd  Plates  of  Glais  (fuppofe  two  pieces  of  a 
pohfli'd  Looking-glafs)  be  laid  together^  fo  that 
their  fides  be  parallel  and  at  a  very  Imall  di- 
ftance  from  one  another,  and  then  their  lower 
edges  be  dipped  into  Water,  the  Water  will 
rife  up  between  them.  And  the  lefs  the  di- 
flance  of  the  Glalles  is,  the  greater  will  be  the 
height  to  which  the  Water  will  rife.  If  the 
dif  lance  be  about  the  hundredth  part  of  an  Inch, 
the  Water  will  rife  to  the  height  of  about  an 
Inch;  and  if  the  diflance  be  greater  or  lefs«in 
any  Proportion,  the  height  will  be  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  diftance  very  nearly.  For 
the  attractive  Force  of  the  Glafies  is  the  fame, 
whether  the  dillance  between  them  be  greater 
or  lefs ;  and  the  weight  of  the  Water  drawn 
up  is  the  fame,  if  the  Height  of  it  be  recipro- 
cally proportional  to  the  height  of  the  Glalles. 
And  in  like  manner.  Water  afcends  between 
two  Marbles  poHfli'd  plane,  when  their  polifh- 
ed  fides  are  parallel,  and  at  a  very  httle  diflance 
from  one  another.  And  if  ilender  Pipes  of 
Glafs  be  dipped  at  one  end  into  flagnating  Wa- 
ter, the  Water  will  rife  up  within  the  Pipe,  and 
the  height  to  which  it  riies  will  be  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  Diameter  of  the  Cavity  of 
the  Pipe,  and  will  equal  the  height  to  which  it 
rifes  between  two  Planes  of  Glafs,  if  the  Semi- 
diameter  of  the  Cavity  of  the  Pipe  be  equal  to 
the  diflance  between  the  Planes,  or  thereabouts. 

And 


And  thefe  Experiments  fucceed  after  the  fame 
manner  iu  vacuo  as  in  the  open  Air,  (as  hath- 
been  tried  before  the  Royal  Society,)  and  there-;, 
fore  are  not  influenced  by  the  Weight  or  Pref- 
fure  of  the  Atmofphere. 

Ajid  if  a  large  Pipe  of  Glafs  be  filled  with 
fifted  Aflies  well  prcHed  together  in  the  Glafs, 
and  one  end  of  the  Pipe  be  dipped  into  flag- 
nating  Water,  the  Water  will  rife  up  llowly  in 
the  Aflies,  fo  as  in  the  fpace  of  a  \Veek  or.  Fort- 
night to  reach  up  within  the  Glafs,  to  the  height 
of  30  or  40  hiches  above  the  Itagnating  Water. 
And  the  Water  rifes  up  to  this  height  by  the 
A(;:iion  only  of  thofe  Particles  of  the  Aflies  which 
are  upon  the  Surface  of  the  elevated  Water;- 
the  Particles  which  are  within  the  Water,  at-* 
trading  or  repelling  it  as  much  downwards 
as  upwards.  And  therefore  the^(!:l:ion  of  the 
Particles  is  very  Itrong.  But  the  Particles  of 
the  Aflics  being  not  fo  denfe  and  clofe  toge- 
ther as  thofe  of  Glafs,  their  Action  is  not  fo 
ib'ong  as  that  of  Glafs,  which  keeps  Quick-fil- 
ver  fulpended  to  the  height  of  60  or  70  Inches, 
and  therefore  ads  with  a  Force  which  would 
keep  Water  fufpended  to  the  height  of  above 
60  Feet. 

By  the  fame  Principle,  a  Sponge  fucks  in 
Water,  and  the  Glands  in  the  Bodies  of  Ani- 
mals, according  to  their  feveral  Natures  and 
Dilpofitions,  luck  in  various  Juices  from  the 
Blood. 

If  two  plane  polifli'd  Plates  of  Glafs  three  or 
four  Inches  broad,  and  twenty  or  twenty  five 
long,  be  laid,  one  of  them  parallel  to  the  Ho- 
rizon, 


[  3^8  ] 

rizon,  the  other  upon  the  fiiil,  fo  as  at  one  of 
their  ends  to  touch  one  another ,  and  contain 
an  Angle  of  about  lo  or  15"  Minutes,  and  the 
fame  be  firlt  moillen'd  on  their  inward  fides 
with  a  clean  Cloth  dipp'd  into  Oil  of  Oranges 
or  Spirit  of  Turpentime,  and  a  Drop  or  two  of 
the  Oil  or  Spirit  be  let  fall  upon  the  loWer 
Glafs  at  the  other  end ;  fo  foon  as  the  upper 
Glafs  is  laid  down  upon  the  lower  fo  as  to 
touch  it  at  one  end  as  above,  and  to  touch  the 
Drop  at  the  other  end,  making  with  the  lower 
Glafs  an  Angle  of  about  10  or  15"  Minutes ;  the 
Drop  will  begin  to  move  towards  the  Concourfe 
of  the  Glalfes,  and  will  continue  to  move  with 
an  accelerated  Motion,  till  it  arrives  at  that 
Concourfe  of  the  Glafles.  For  the  two  GlalTes 
attradl  the  Drop,  and  make  it  run  that  way  to- 
wards which  the  Attradions  incline.  And  if 
when  the  Drop  is  in  motion  you  lift  up  that  end 
of  the  Glalfes  where  they  meet ,  and  towards 
which  the  Drop  moves ,  the  Drop  will  afcend 
between  the  Glalfes,  and  therefore  is  attraded. 
And  as  you  lift  up  the  Glalfes  more  and  more, 
the  Drop  will  afcend  flower  and  flower,  and  at 
length  reft,  being  then  carried  downward  by 
its  Weight,  as  much  as  upwards  by  the  Attra- 
dion.  And  by  this  means  you  may  know  the 
Force  by  which  the  Drop  is  attraded  at  all  di- 
fiances  from  the  Concourfe  of  the  Glalfes. 

Now  by  fomc  Experiments  of  this  kind, 
(made  by  Mr.  HawksbyJ  it  has  been  found  that 
the  Attradion  is  almolt  reciprocally  in  a  dupli- 
cate Proportion  of  the  diftance  of  the  middle 
of  the  Drop  from  the  Concourfe  of  the  Glalfes, 
»  viz. 


[3^9] 

viz.  reciprocally  in  a  fimple  Proportion,  by 
reafon  of  the  fpreading  of  the  Drop,  and  its 
touching  each  Glafs  in  a  larger  Surface;  and 
again  reciprocally  in  a  fimple  Proportion ,  by 
real  on  of  the  Attractions  growing  Itronger 
within  the  fame  quantity  of  attracting  Sur- 
face. The  Attradioa  therefore  within  the 
fame  quantity  of  attraCtiAg  Surface ,  is  reci- 
procally as  the  dillancc  betu^een  the  GlalTes. 
And  therefore  where  the  diilance  is  exceed- 
ing fm.all,  the  Attraction  mult  be  exceeding 
great.  By  the  Table  in  the  fecond  Part  of 
the  fecond  Book,  wherein  the  thicknelles  of 
colour 'd  Plates  of  Water  between  two  Glalfes 
are  fet  down ,  the  thicknefs  of  the  Plate  where 
it  appears  very  black,  is  three  eighths  of  the 
ten  hundred  thoufandth  part  of  an  Inch.  And 
where  the  Oil  of  Oranges  between  the  GlaiFes 
is  of  this  thicknefsj  theAttradion  colleded  by 
the  foregoing  Rule,  feems  to  be  fo  Itrong,  as 
within  a  Circle  of  an  Inch  in  diameter,  to  fuf- 
fice  to  iiold  up  a  Weight  equal  to  that  of  a  Cy- 
linder of  Water  of  an  Inch  in  diameter  j  and 
two  or  three  Furlongs  in  length.  And  where 
it  is  of  a  lefs  thicknefs  the  Attradion  may  be 
proportionally  greater,  and  continue  to  increafe, 
until  the  thicknefs  do  not  exceed  that  of  a  fm- 
gle  Particle  of  the  Oil.  There  are  therefore 
Agents  in  Nature  able  to  make  the  Particles  of 
Bodies  ilick  together  by  very  ilrong  Attra6tions. 
And  it  is  the  Bufmefs  of  experimental  Philofo- 
phy  to  find  them  out. 

B  b  Now 


[  ?70  ] 

Now  the  fmalleft  Particles  of  Matter  may  co- 
here by  the  ftrongelt  Attradions,  and  compofe 
bigger  Particles  of  weaker  Virtue;   and  many 
of  thefe  may  cohere  and  compofe  bigger  Par- 
ticles whofe  Virtue  is  itill  weaker,  and  loon  for 
divers  Succeflions,  until  the  Progreflion  end  in 
the  biggeft  Particles  on  which  the  Operations 
in  Chymiilry,  and  the  Colours  of  natural  Bodies 
depend ,  and  which  by  coliering  compofe  Bo- 
dies of  a  fenfible  Magnitude.     If  the  Body  is 
compa^l,   and  bends  or  yields  inward  to  Pref- 
fion  without  any  Hiding  of  its  Parts,  it  is  hard 
and  elaltick,  returning  to  its  Figure  with  a  Force 
arifmg  from  the  mutual  Attraction  of  its  Parts. 
If  the  Parts  Aide  upon  one  another,  the  Body- 
is  malleable  or  foft.     If  they  flip  eafily,  and  are 
of  a  fit  fize  to  be  agitated  byHeaty  and  the  Heat 
is  big  enough  to  keep  them  in  Agitation,  the 
Body  is  fluid';  and  if  it  be  apt  to  Hick  to  things,- 
it  is  humid ;   and  the  Drops  of  every  Fluid  af- 
feft  a  round  Figure  by  the  mutual  Attraftion  of 
their  Parts,  as  the  Globe  of  the  Earth  and  Sea^ 
affedls  a  round  Figure  by  the  mutual  Attractions 
of  its  Parts  by  Gravity. 

Since  Metals  dilTolved  in  Acids  attradl  but  ^' 
frnall  quantity  of  the  Acid,  their  attradtive  Force' 
can  reach  but  to  a  fmall  diftance  from  them. 
And  as  in  Algebra,  where  affirmative  Quanti- 
ties vaniih  and  ceafe,  there  negative  ones  be- 
gin ;  fo  in  Mechanicks,  where  Attraction  cea- 
fes,  there  a  repulfive  Virtue  ought  to  fucceed*.. 
And  that  there  is  fuch  a  Virtue ,  feems  to  fol* 
low  from  the  Reflexions  and  Inflexions  of  the 

Rayt 


[371  ] 

Rays  of  Light.  For  the  Rays  are  repelled  by 
Bodies  in  both  thefe  Cafes,  without  the  imme- 
diate Contad  of  the  retlefting  or  intletting  Bo- 
dy. It  feems  alfo  to  follow  from  the  Emiffion 
of  Light ;  the  Ray  fo  foon  as  it  is  fhaken  oif 
from  a  fliining  Body  by  the  vibrating  Motion  of 
the  Parts  of  the  Body,  and  gets  beyond  the 
reach  of  Attradlion,  being  driven  away  with  ex- 
ceeding great  Velocity.  For  that  Force  which 
is  fufficient  to  turn  it  back  in  Reflexion,  may 
be  futficient  to  emit  it.  It  feems  alfo  to  fol- 
low from  the  Production  of  Air  and  Vapour. 
The  Particles  when  they  are  Ihaken  oti  from 
Bodies  by  Heat  or  Fermentation  >  fo  ioon  as 
they  are  beyond  the  reach  of  the  Attradion  of 
the  Body,  receding  from  it,  and  alfo  from  one 
another  with  great  Strength ,  and  keeping  at  a 
dilfance,  fo  as  fometimes  to  take  up  above  a 
million  of  times  more  fpace  than  they  did  be- 
fore in  the  form  of  a  denfe  Body.  Which  vafl 
Contradion  andExpanfion  feems  unintelligible^ 
by  feigning  the  Panicles  of  Air  to  be  fpringy 
and  ramous,  or  rolled  up  like  Hoops,  or  by  a- 
ny  other  means  than  a  repulfive  Power.  The 
Particles  of  Fluids  which  do  not  cohere  too 
flrongly,  and  are  of  fuch  a  fmallnefs  as  renders 
them  molt  fufceptible  of  thofe  Agitations  which 
keep  Liquors  in  a  Fluor,  are  moil  eafily  fepa- 
rated  and  rarified  into  Vapour,  and  in  the  Lan- 
guage of  the  Chymilts,  they  are  volatile,  rati- 
fying with  an  eafy  Heat,  and  condenfmg  with 
Cold.  But  thofe  which  are  grolTer,  and  fo  lefs 
fufceptible  of  Agitation,  or  cohere  by  a  flrong- 

Bb  i  er 


t  372  ] 


er  Attraction,  are  not  feparatcd  without  a 
itronger  Heat,  or  perhaps  not  without  Fermen- 
tation. And  thcie  ]ait  are  the  Bodies  which 
Chymiits  call  fix'd,  and  being  rarihed  by  Fer- 
mentation,, become  true  permanent  Air :  thofe 
Particles  receding  from  one  another  with  the 
greatell  Force,  and  being  mofl difficultly  brought 
together,  which  upon  Contad:  cohere  moll 
Ih'ongly.  And  becaufe  the  Particles  of  perma- 
nent iVir  are  groflcr,  and  arife  from  denier  Sub- 
llanccs  than  thofe  of  \  apours,  thence  it  is:that 
true  Air  is  more  ponderous  than  Vapour,  and 
that  a  moift  Atmofphere  is  lighter  than  a  dry 
one,  quantity  for  quantity.  From  the  fame  re- 
pelling Power  it  feems  to-  be  that  Flies  walk 
upon  the  Water  without  wetting  their  Feet; 
and  that  the  Objedl-glafTes  of  long  Telefcopes 
Jie  upon  one  another  without  touching;  and 
that  dry  Powders  are  difficultly  made  to  touch 
one  another  fo  as  to  Hick  together,  unlefs  by 
melting  them ,  or  wetting  them  with  Water, 
which  by  exhaling  may  bring  them  together; 
and  that  two  polifli'd  Marbles,  which  by  im- 
mediate Contad  Hick  together,  are  difficultly? 
brought  fo  clofe  together  as  to  lUck. 

And  thus  Nature  will  be  very  conformable 
to  her  felf  and  very  fimple,  performing  all  the 
great  Motions  of  the  heavenly  Bodies  by  the 
Attradion  of  Gravity  which  intercedes  thofe 
Bodies,  and  almoft  all  the  fmall  ones  of  their 
Particles  by  fome  other  attradive  and  repelling 
Powers  which  intercede  the  Particles.  The 
yis  inertia  is  a  paflive  Principle  by  which  Bo- 
dies 


[373  ]  

^ics  perfifl  in  their  Motion  or  RelTT  receive 
Motion  in  proportion  to  the  Force  imprelling 
it,  and  refill  as  much  as  they  are  refilted.  By 
this  Principle  alone  there  never  could  have  been 
any  Motion  in  the  World.  Some  other  Prin- 
ciple was  necelTary  for  putting  Bodies  into  Mo- 
tion; and  now  they  are  in  Motion,  fome  other 
Principle  is  necelfary  for  conferving  the  Mo- 
tion. For  from  the  various  Compofition  of  two 
Motions,  'tis  very  certain  that  there  is  not  al- 
ways the  lame  quantity  of  Motion  in  the  World. 
For  if  two  Glooes  joined  by  a  DenderRod,  re- 
volve about  their  common  Center  of  Gravity 
with  an  uniform  Motion,  while  that  Center 
moves  <^n  uniformly  in  a  right  Line  drawn  in 
the  Plane  of  their  circular  Motion ;  the  Sum  of 
the  Motions  of  the  two  Globes,  as  often  as  the 
Globes  are  in  the  right  Line  •dcfcribcd  by  their 
common  Center  of  Gravity,  will  be  bigger  than 
the  Sum  of  their  Motions,  when  they  are  in  a 
Line  perpendicular  to  that  right  Line.  By  this 
Inlbnce  it  appears  that  Motion  may  be  got  or 
loll.  But  by  reafon  of  the  Tenacity  of  Fluids, 
and  Attrition  of  their  Parts,  and  uhe  Weaknefs 
of  Elallicity  in  Solids,  Motion  is  much  more 
apt  to  be  loll  than  got,  and  is  always  upon  the 
Decay.  For  Bodies  which  are  either  abfolute- 
ly  hard,  or  fo  foft  as  to  be  void  of  Elallicity, 
will  not  rebound  from  one  another.  Impene- 
trability makes  them  only  flop.  If  two  equal 
Bodies  meet  directly  in  vacuo^  they  will  by  the 
Laws  of  Motion  Hop  where  they  meet,  and 
lofe  ail  their  Motion,  and  remain  in.  refl,  unleis 

B  b  3;  they 


[  374  ] 

they  be  ekftick,  and  receive  new  Motion  froni 
their  Spring.    If  they  have  fo  much  Elafticity 
as  fufhces  to  make  them  rebound  with  a  quar- 
ter, or  half,  or  three  quarters  of  the  Force  with 
which  they  come  together,  they  will  loie  three 
quarters,  or  half,  or  a  quarter  of  their  Motion. 
And  this  may  be  tried,  by  letting  two  equal 
Pendulums  fall  againft  one  another  from  equal 
heights.     If  the  Pendulums  be  of  Lead  or  loft 
Clay ,  they  will  lofe  all  or  almolt  all  their  Mo- 
tions :  If  of  elaflick  Bodies  they  will  lofe  all  but 
what  they  recover  from  their  Elailicity.    If  it 
be  faid,  that  they  can  lofe  no  Motion  but  what 
they  communicate  to  other  Bodies,  the  confe- 
quence  is,  that  in  vacuo  they  can  lofe  no  Mo- 
tion, but  when  they  meet  they  mud  go  on  and 
penetrate  one  anothers  Dimenfions.    If  three 
equal  round  Velfels  be  filled,  the  one  with  Wa- 
ter, the  other  with  Oil,  the  third  with  molten 
Pitch,  and  the  Liquors  be  llirred  about  alike 
to  give  them  a  vortical  Motiou ;  the  Pitch  by 
its  Tenacity  will  lofe  its  Motion  quickly ,   the 
Oil  being  lefs  tenacious  will  keep  it  longer,  and 
the  Water  being  leis  tenacious  will  keep  it  Ibng- 
eit,  but  yet  will  lofe  it  in  a  fliort  time.  Whence 
it  is  eafy  to  underltand,  that  if  many  contiguous 
Vortices  of  molten  Pitch  were  each  of  them  as 
large  as  thofe  which  fome  fuppofe  to  revolve 
about  the  Sun  and  fix'd  Stars,  yet  thefe  and  all 
their  Parts  would,  by  their  tenacity  and  lliffiicfs, 
communicate  their  Motion  to  one  another  till 
they  ai!  reiled  among  themfelves.     Vortices  of 
Oil  or  Water,  or  fome  fluidev  Matter,  might 

con- 


[  375  I 

.continue  longer  in  Motion ;  but  unlefs  the  Mat- 
ter were  void  of  all  Tenacity  and  Attrition  of 
Parts,  and  Communication  of  Motion,  (which 
is  not  to  be  fuppofed)  the  Motion  would  con- 
itantly  decay.  Seeing  therefore  the  variety  of 
Motion  which  we  find  in  the  World  is  always 
decreafing,  there  is  a  neceflity  of  conferving 
.and  recruiting  it  by  ^dive  Principles,  luch  as 
,are  the  caufe  of  Gravity,  by  which  Planets  and 
-Comets  keep  their  Motions  in  their  Orbs,  and 
Bodies  acquire  great  Motion  in  falling;  and  the 
caufe  of  Fermentation,  by  which  the  Heart  and 
Blood  of  Animals  are  kept  in  perpetual  Motion 
.and  Heat ;  rhe  inward  Parts  of  the  Earth  are 
confiantly  warm'd,  and  in  fome  places  grow 
very  hot ;  Bodies  burn  and  fliine.  Mountains 
take  Fire,  the  Caverns  of  the  Earth  are  blown 
up,  and  the  Sun  continues  violently  hot  and 
lucid,  and  warms  all  things  by  his  Light.  For 
we  meet  with  very  Httle  Motion  in  the  World, 
befides  what  is  owing  to  thefe  aftive  Principles. 
And  if  it  were  not  for  thefe  Principles  the  Bo- 
dies of  the  Earth,  Planets,  Comets,  Sun,  and 
all  things  in  them  would  grow  cold  and  freeze, 
and  become  inadive  Malles ;  and  all  Putrefa- 
ftion.  Generation,  Vegetation  and  Life  would 
ceafe,  'and  the  Planets  and  Comets  would  not 
remain  in  their  Orbs. 

AH  thefe  things  being  confider'd,  it  feems  pro- 
bable to  me,  that  God  in  the  Beginning  form'd 
Matter  in  folid,  malTy,  hard,  impenetrable,  move- 
able Particles,  of  fuch  Sizes  and  Figures,  and  with 
fuch  other  Properties,  and  in  fuch  Proportion 

Bb  4  to 


[316] 

to  Space ,  as  moft  conduced  to  the  End  for 
which  he  form'd  them ;  and  that  thefe  primi- 
tive Particles  being  Solids,  are  incomparably 
iiarder  th^n  any  porous  Bodies  compounded  of 
them ;  even  lo  very  hard,  as  never  to  wear  or 
break  in  pieces:  No  ordinary  Power  being  able 
to  divide  what  God  himlelf  made  one  in  the  firll 
Creation.  While  the  Particles  continue  entire, 
they  may  compote  Bodies  of  one  and  the  lame 
Nature  and  Texture  in  all  Ages :  But  ihould 
they  wear  away,  or  break  in  pieces,  the  Nature 
of  Things  depending  on  them,  would  be  chan^- 
ged.  Water  and  Earth  compofed  of  old  worn 
Particles  and  Fragments  of  Particles,  would  not 
be  of  the  fame  Nature  and  Texture  now,  with 
Water  and  Earth  compofed  of  entire  Particles, 
in  the  Beginning.  And  therefore  that  Nature 
may  be  lailing,  the  Changes  of  corporeal  Things 
are  to  be  placed  only  in  the  various  Separations 
and  new  AiTociations  and  Motions  of  thefe  per- 
manent Particles ;  compound  Bodies  being  apt 
to  break,  not  in  themidlloflblid  Particles,  but 
wJiere  thofe  Particles  are  laid  together,  and 
only  touch  in  a  few  Points. 

It  feems  to  me  farther,  that  thefe  Particles 
have  not  only  a  Vu  inertia,  accompanied  with 
fuch  pailive  Laws  of  Motion  as  naturally  rcfult 
from  that  Force,  but  alfo  that  they  are  moved 
by  certain  active  Principles,  fuch  as  is  that  of 
Gravity,  and  that  which  caufcs  Fermentation, 
and  thcCohefion  of  Bodies.  Thefe  Principles 
I  conlidcr  not  as  occult  Qualities,  fuppofcd  to 
refult  from  the  fpecihck  Forms  of  Tilings,  but 


[  377  ] 

as  general  Laws  of  Nature,  by  which  the  Things 
themfelves  are  form'd :  their  Truth  appearing 
to  us  by  Phaenomena ,'  though  their  Caufes  be 
not  yet  difcover'd.  For  thele  are  manifeii: Qua- 
lities, and  their  Caufes  only  are  occult.  And 
the  Ariftotelians'  gave  the  Name  of  occult  Qua- 
lities not  to  manifeil:  Qualities,  but  to  fuch 
Qualities  only  as  they  fuppofed  to  lie  hid  in 
Bodies,  and  to  be  the  unknown  Caufes  of  ma- 
nifeil Effeds :  Such  as  would  be  the  Caufes  of 
Gravity ,  and  of  magnetick  and  eledrick  At- 
tractions, and  of  Fermentations,  if  we  fhould 
fuppofe  that  thefe  Forces  or  Anions  arofe  from 
Qualities  unknown  to  us,  and  uncapable  of  be- 
ing difcovered  and  made  manifeit.  Such  oc- 
cult Qualities  put  a  flop  to  the  Improvement 
of  natural  Philolbphy ,  and  therefore  of  late 
Years  have  been  rejeCled.  To  tell  us  that 
every  Species  of  Things  is  endow'd  withan  oc- 
cult fpecitick  Quality  by  which  it  ads  and  pro- 
duces manifeft  Kifeds,  is  to  tell  us  nothing: 
But  to  derive  two  or  three  general  Principles 
of  Motion  from  Phaenomena,  and  afterwards 
to  tell  us  how  the  Properties  and  Adions  of  all 
corporeal  Things  follow  from  thofe  manifeit 
Principles,  would  be  a  very  great  Itep  in  Phi- 
lolbphy, though  the  Caufes  of  thofe  Principles 
were  not  yet  difcover'd :  And  therefore  I  fcru- 
ple  not  to  propofe  the  Principles  of  Motion  a- 
bove  mentioned,  they  being  of  very  general  Ex- 
tent, and  leave  their  Caufes  to  be  found  out. 

Now  by  the  help  of  thcfe  Principles,  all  ma- 
terial Things  feem  to  have  been  compofed  of 

the 


[  378  ] 

jlie  hard  and  folid  Particles  above  mention'dar 
varioufly  affociated  in  the  firft  Creation  by  the 
Counfel  of  an  intelligent  Agents  For  it  became 
him  who  created  them  to  fet  them  in  order. 
And  if  he  did  fo,  it's  unpliilofophical  to  feek 
for  any  dther  Origin  of  the  World,  or  to  pre- 
tend that  it  might  arife  out  of  a  Chaos  by  the 
mere  Laws  of  Nature;  though  being  once 
form'd,  it  may  continue  by  thofe  Laws  for  ma- 
ny Ages.  For  while  Comets  move  in  very  ex- 
centrick  Orbs  in  all  manner  of  Pofitions,  blind 
Fate  could  never  make  all  the  Planets  move 
one  and  the  fame  way  in  Orbs  concentrick, 
fome  inconfiderable  Irregularities  excepted 
which  may  have  rifen  from  the  mutual  Acftions 
of  Comets  and  Planets  upon  one  another,  ancj 
which  will  be  apt  to  increafe,  till  this  Syilem 
wants  a  Reformation.  Such  a  wonderful  Uni- 
formity in  the  Planetary  Syilem  mult  be  allow- 
ed the  EfFed  of  Choice.  And  fo  mult  the 
Uniformity  in  the  Bodies  of  Animals,  they  ha- 
ving generally  a  right  and  a  left  fide  Ihaped  a- 
like,  and  on  either  fide  of  their  Bodies  two 
Legs  behind,  and  either  two  Arms,  or  two 
Legs,  or  two  Wings  before  upon  their  Shoul- 
ders, and  between  their  Shoulders  a  Neck  run- 
ning down  into  a  Back-bone,  and  a  Head  up- 
on it ;  and  in  the  Head  two  Ears,  two  Eyes,  a 
Nofe,  a  Mouth  and  a  Tongue,  alike  lituated. 
Alfo  the  firll  Contrivance  of  thofe  very  artifi- 
cial Parts  of  Animals,  the  Eyes,  Ep.rs,  Brain, 
Muxcles,  Hc?rt,  Lungs,  Midrift  Glands  La- 
rynx, Hands,  Wings,  Swimming  Bladders,  na- 
tural 


r  379  ] 

tural  Spedlacles,  and  other  Organs  of  Senfe  and 
Motion ;  and  the  Inftind  of  Brutes  and  Infers, 
can  be  the  effed  of  nothing  elfe  than  the  Wif- 
dom  and  Skill  of  a  powerful  ever-living  Agent, 
who  being  in  all  Places,  is  more  able  by 
his  Will  to  move  the  Bodies  within  his  bound- 
lefs  uniform  Senforium,  and  thereby  to  form 
and  reform  the  Parts  of  the  Univerfe,  than  we 
are  by  our  Will  to  move  the  Parts  of  our  own 
Bodies.  And  yet  we  are  not  to  confider  the 
World  as  the  Body  of  God,  or  the  feveral  Parts 
thereof,  as  the  Parts  of  God.  He  is  an  uni- 
form Being,  void  of  Organs,  Members  or  Parts, 
and  they  are  his  Creatures  fubordinate  to  him, 
and  fubfervient  to  his  Will;  and  he  is  no  more 
the  Soul  of  them,  than  the  Soul  of  a  Man  is  the 
Soul  of  the  Species  of  Things  carried  through 
the  Organs  of  Senfe  into  the  place  of  its  Sen- 
fation,  where  it  perceives  them  by  means  of  its 
immediate  Prefence,  without  the  Intervention 
of  any  third  thing.  The  Organs  of  Senfe  are 
not  for  enabling  the  Soul  to  perceive  the  Spe- 
cies of  Things  in  its  Senforium ,  but  only  for 
conveying  them  thither ;  and  God  has  no  need 
of  fuch  Organs,  he  being  every  where  prefent 
to  the  Things  themfelves.  And  fmce  Space  is 
divifible  in  iftfinuum^  and  Matter  is  not  necef- 
farily  in  all  places,  it  may  be  alfo  allow'd  that 
God  is  able  to  create  Particles  of  Matter  of  fe- 
veral Sizes  and  Figures,  and  in  feveral  Propor- 
tions to  Space,  and  perhaps  of  different  Denfi- 
ties  and  Forces,  and  thereby  to  vary  the  Laws 
of  Nature,  and  make  Worlds  of  feveral  forts  in 

feveral 


[  3So  ] 

feveral  Parts  of  the  Univerfc.    At  leafl,  I  fee 
nothing  of  Contradidion  in  all  this. 

As  in  Mathematicks,  fo  in  Natural  Philofo- 
phy,  the  Invefligation  of  difficult  Things  by  the 
Method  of  Analyfis,  ought  ever  to  precede  the 
Method  of  Compofition.    This  Analyfis  con- 
iifts  in  making  Experiments  and  Obfervations, 
and  in  drawing  general  Conclufions  from  them 
by  Indudion,   and  admitting  of  no  Objedions 
jigainll  the  Conclufions ,  but  fuch  as  are  taken 
from  Experiments,  or  other  certain  Truths. 
For  Hypothefes  are  not  to  be  regarded  in  ex- 
perimental Philofophy.     And  although  the  ar- 
guing from  Experiments  and  Obfervations  by 
Indudion  be  no  Demonflration  of  general  Con- 
clufions ;  yet  it  is  the  beft  way  of  arguing  which 
the  Nature  of  Things  admits  of,  and  may  be 
looked  upon  as  fo  much  the  itronger,  by  how 
much  the  Induction  is  more  general.     And  if 
no  Exception  occur  from  Phaenomena,  theCon- 
clufion  may  be  pronounced  generally.     But  if 
at  any  time  afterwards  any  Exception  fliall  oc- 
cur from  Experiments,  it  may  then  begin  to  be 
pronounced  with  luch  Exceptions  as  occur.  By 
this  way  of  Analyiis  we  may  proceed  from  Com- 
pounds to  Ingredients,   and  from  Motions  to 
the  Forces  producing  them;   and  in  general, 
from  Effects  to  their  Caufes,  and  from  particu- 
lar Caufes  to  more  general  ones,  till  the  Argu- 
ment end  in  the  moil  general.    This  is  the  Me- 
thod of  Analyfis:  And  theSynthefis  confiils  in 
alFuming  the  Caufes  difcovcr'd,  and  ellablilh'd 
as  Principles,  and  by  them  explaining  the  Phae^ 

nomena 


[38i] 

nomena  proceeding  from  theniy  and  proving 
the  Explanations. 

In  the  two  tirfl  Books  of  thefe  Opticks,  I 
proceeded  by  this  Analyfis  to  difcover  and  prove 
the  original  Ditlerences  of  the  Rays  of  Light  in 
refpedof  Refrangibility,  Refiexibility,  and  Co- 
lour, and  their  alternate  Pits  of  ealy  Retlexion 
and  eafy  Tranfmiflion ,  and  the  Properties  of 
Bodies,  both  opake  and  pellucid,  on  which 
their  Reflexions  and  Colours  depend.  And 
thefe  Diiboveries  being  proved,  may  be  alTumed 
in  the  Method  of-,Compoiition  for  explaining 
the  Phsenomena  arifmg  from  them :  An  In- 
llance  of  which  Method  I  gave  in  the  End  of 
the  tirfl  Book.  In  this  third  Book  I  have  only- 
begun  the  Analyfis  of  v\hat  remains  to  be  dif- 
cover'd  about  Light  and  its  Effeds  upon  the 
Frame  of  Nature,  hinting  fevcral  things  about 
it,  and  leaving  the  Hints  to  be  examin'd  and 
improved  by  the  farther  Experiments  and  Ob- 
fervacions  of  fuch  as  are  inquilitive.  And  if 
natural  Philofophy  in  all  its  Parts,  by  purfuing 
this  Method,  ihall  nt  length  be  perfc<^i:ed,  the 
Bounds  of  moral  Philofophy  will  be  alfo  enlar- 
ged. For  fo  far  as  we  can  know  by  natural 
Philofophy  what  is  the  firllCaule,  what  Power 
he  has  over  us,  and  what  Benehts  we  receive 
from  him,  fo  far  our  Duty  towards  him,  as  well 
as  that  towards  one  another,  will  appear  to  us 
by  the  Light  of  Nature.  And  no  doubt,  if  the 
Woriliip  of  falle  Gods  had  not  blinded  the  Hea- 
then, their  moral  Philofophy  would  have  gone 
farther  than  to  the  four  Cardinal  Virtues ;  and 

inftead 


1 382  ] 


inftead  of  teaching  the  Tranfmigration  of  Souls, 
and  to  worlhip  the  Sun  and  Moon ,  and  dead 
Heroes,  rhey  would  have  taught  us  to  worlhip 
our  true  Author  and  Benefador. 


F  I  N  I  S. 


Book  III  Hafe  I 


1 


A  Catalogue  of  Books  printed  for  and  fold  hy 
Will.  Innys,  at  the  Prince's- Arms  in  St.  PaulV 
Church-yard. 

THE  Pofthumous  Works  of  Dr.  Robert  Hoeke;   in  which, 
I.    rhs  prefent  Deficiency  of  natural  Philofophy  is  dif- 
courfed  of,  with  the  Methods  of  rendring  it  more  cer- 
tain and  beneficial,     II.  Of  the  Nature,  Motion  and  Effefts  of 
Light,  particularly  that  of  the  Sun  and  Comets.     III.  An  hypo- 
thetical Explication  of  M.emory ;    how  the  Organs  made  ufe  of 
hy  the  Mind  in  its  Operation  may  be  mechanically  underftood. 
IV.  An  Hypothefis  and  Explication  of  the  Caufe  of  Gravity,  or 
Gravitation,  Magnetifm ,    c^c.      V.  Difcourfes  of  Earthquakes^ 
their  Caufes  and  Effeds,  and  Hiftories  of  feveral :  To  which  are 
annex'd,  Phyfical  Explications  of  feveral  of  the  Fables  in  Ovid' 
Metamorphofes,  very  different  from  other  Mythologick  Interpr 
ters.     VI.  Ledlures  for  improving  Navigation  and  Aftronon. 
with  the  Uefcriptions  of  feveral  new  and  ufeful  Inftruments  an 
Contrivances ;  the  whole  full  of  curious  Difquifitions  and  Experi- 
ments, illuftrated  with  Sculptures.     To  thefe  Difcourfes  is  pre- 
fix'd  the  Author's  Life.     By  Richard  Waller,  R.  S.  Sec.     Folio. 

A  Treatife  of  Algebra v  both  Hiftorical  and  Pradical  ;  with 
fome  additional  Treatifes.  I.  Of  the  Cono-Cuneus.  II.  Of  an- 
gular SeAions  and  Trigonometry.  III.  Of  the  Angle  of  Conta<3v 
with  other  things  appertaining  to  theCompofition  of  Magnitudes, 
the  Inceptives  of  Magnitudes,  and  the  Compofition  of  Motions, 
with  the  Refults  thereof.  IV.  Of  Combinations,  Alternations, 
and  aliquot  Parts,     hy  John  JVallis,  D.  D.     Folio. 

New  Experiments  Phyfico-Mechanical,  touching  the  Air  and 
its  Effedls,  made,  for  the  moft  part,  in  a  new  Pneumatical  En- 
gine. The  third  Edition.  Whereunio  is  added,  A  Defence  of 
the  Author's  Explication  of  the  Experiments  againft  the  Obje- 
€iions  oi  Francij'cus  Linus,  znd  Tho.  Hob hs ;  with  Cats.  By  the 
Honourable  Robert  Boyle,  Efq;     4/0. 

Jo.  Alph.  Borellus  de  Motu  Animalium.     Editio  Nova,    4/5. 

Lugd.  Bat.  1710^ 

Phil.  Ckverii  Introdudio  in  univerfam  Geographiam  tarn 
▼eterem  quam  novara.    Editio   Nova,    a  Johan.  Bunone,    ^to. 

Lond.  17H. 

Afta  Eruditorum  publicata  Lipfis  ab  Initio,  A.  D.  i68z  ad 
1717.  incl.  cum  Supplementis  &  Indicibus,  in  43  Tom.  vel  fepa- 
ratlm. 

Jo.  Craig  Methodus  Figurarum,  4/0.  Lond.  i68j. 

[    Euclides  demonftratus  per  Coetfium,  Svo.         Lugd.  Bat.  1692. 

Geographic  Pradique,  par.  N.  Chemerau,  ^to.         Amft.  17 15, 

Hermanni  (Jac.)  Phoronomia  feude  motu  Corp  4rp.  Amft.iiiC. 

Mela 


Mela  (Pomp.)  de  fitii  Orbis  cuin*Notis  Groyovii,  e^c.     2vo. 

Lugd.  Bat.  1(^96 

Newtoni  (Ifaaci,  Eq.  Aur.)  Analyfis,  per  Quantitatum  Series 
Fludtiones  ac  DitFerentias  cum  Enumerauone  Linearum  Tertii 
Ordinis,  ^to.  Land.  1711 

Taylor  (Brook)  Methodus  Incrementorum  Diredla  &  Inver- 
fa,   ^to.  ibid,  i-jj-] 

Tabulae  Chronologicae  continentes  turn  Sacra,  turn  Profana 
maxime  notatu  digna  a  Creatione  Mundi,  ufque  ad  Chrifti  Nati- 
vitatem,  per  Ben.  Marfliall,  A.  M.   lolh. .  Oxon.  1713 

The  Ancient  and  Modern  Hiftdry  of  the  Balearick  Iflands,  or 
of  the  Kingdom  oi  Majorca ;  which  comprehends  the  Iflands  of 
Majorca,  Minorca,  Yvyfa,  Fermentera,  and  others ;  with  their 
Natural  and  Geographical  Defcription     By  Collin  Camphell,  2vo; 

Analyfis  j^quationum  Univerfalis  feu  ad  i^squationes  Algebrai- 
cas  relblvendas  methodus  generalis,  per  Jof.  Raphfon,  ^to.    i-joz 

Barrow  Lecliones  Mathematics,  Svo.  Lend.  1683 

Dionyfii  Orbis  Defcriptio,  cnm  Comment.  Euflathii,  Grjec.Lat. 

ivo.  Oxon.  1710 

Horroccii  opera  Poflhuma  Aftronomica,  accedunt  Guil.  Crab- 
traei  Obfervationes  Coeleftes,  quibus  acceflerunt  Jo.  Flamfledii  de 
Temporisi^quatione  Diatriba,  numeri  ad  Lunoe  Theoriam  Hor- 

roccianam,  &c.   4:0.  Lond.  1678 

Keill  Introdudio  ad  veraip  Phyficamii   Svd.  ibid.  1715; 

'  Philofophical  Tranfadions,  giving  fome  Account  of  the  pre- 
fent  Undertakings,  Studies  and  Labours  of  the  Ingenious,  in  ma- 
ny confiderable  Parts  of  the  World.  Vol.  zp.  for  the  Years  1714,- 
1 7 15,  1 7 16.  Gontinoed  and  publiflied  by  Dr.  Edmund' Halley^ 
Reg.  Soc.  Seer. 

In  the  Prefs,  the  Seventh  Edition  of 

The  Wifdom  of  God  manifefted  in  the  Works  of  the  Creation  ; 
in  two  Parts,  viz.  The  Heavenly  Bodies,  Elements,  Meteors^ 
Foffils,  Vegetables,  Animals  (Beafts,  Birds,  FiQies  and  Infeds) 
more  particularly  in  the  Body  of  the  Earth,  its  Figure,  Motion 
and  Coniiflency,  and  in  the  admirable  Strudure  of  the  Bodies  of 
Man,  and  other  Animals;  as  alfo  in  their  Generation,  crc.  With 
Anfwers  to  fome  Objedions.  By  JohnRajf  late  Fellow  of  the 
Royal  Society. 


f 


c 


jTW) 


■^s^'^^i 


'■^■rfp^' 


^• 


■V^/-' vvl>,  >'/ 


^  'r 


lifv 


^i%ir. 


A'^. 


L^    A, 


^^il 


w*"-:*i 


