in 


«V;* 


mm 


NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY. 


3Lont>on : c.  J.  CLAY,  m.a.  & SON. 

CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  WAREHOUSE, 
17,  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 


ffiattlfrrtTlge:  DEIGHTON,  BELL,  AND  CO. 
Hcipjig:  P.  A.  BROCKHAUS. 


TREATISE 


ON 


NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY 


BY 

R WILLIAM  THOMSON,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S., 

OF  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  GLASGOW, 
FELLOW  OF  ST  PETER’S  COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE, 

AND 

PETER  GUTHRIE  TAIT,  M.A., 

PROFESSOR  OF  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  EDINBURGH, 
FORMERLY  FELLOW  OF  ST  PETER’S  COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE. 


VOL.  I.  PART  II. 

NEW  EDITION. 


Cambridge : 

AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 

1883 

[The  Rights  of  translation  and  reproduction  are  reserved,] 


PREFACE. 


The  original  design  of  tlie  Authors  in  commencing  this  work 
about  twenty  jmars  ago  has  not  been  carried  out  beyond  the 
production  of  the  first  of  a series  of  volumes,  in  which  it  was 
intended  that  the  various  branches  of  mathematical  and  experi- 
mental physics  should  be  successively  treated.  The  intention 
of  proceeding  with  the  other  volumes  is  now  definitely  aban- 
doned ; but  much  new  matter  has  been  added  to  the  first 
volume,  and  it  has  been  divided  into  two  parts,  in  the  second 
edition  now  completed  in  this  second  part.  The  original  first 
volume  contained  many  references  to  the  intended  future 
volumes;  and  these  references  have  been  allowed  to  remain  in 
the  present  completion  of  the  new  edition  of  the  first  volume, 
because  the  plan  of  treatment  followed  depended  on  the 
expectation  of  carrying  out  the  original  design. 

Throughout  the  latter  part  of  the  book  extensive  use  has, 
according  to  Prof.  Stokes’  revival  of  this  valuable  notation, 
been  made  of  the  “solidus”  to  replace  the  horizontal  stroke  in 

fractions  ; for  example  ^ is  printed  a/b.  This  notation  is  (as  is 

illustrated  by  the  spacing  between  these  lines)  advantageous  for 
the  introduction  of  isolated  analytical  expressions  in  the  midst 
of  the  text,  and  its  use  in  printing  complex  fractional  and 
exponential  expressions  permits  the  printer  to  dispense  with 
much  of  the  troublesome  process  known  as  “justification,”  and 
effects  a considerable  saving  in  space  and  expense. 

VOL.  II.  l 


VI 


PREFACE. 


An  index  to  the  ivhole  of  the  first  volume  has  been  prepared 
by  Mr  Burnside,  and  is  placed  at  the  end. 

A schedule  is  also  given  below  of  all  the  amendments  and 
additions  (excepting  purely  verbal  changes  and  corrections) 
made  in  the  present  edition  of  the  first  volume. 

Inspection  of  the  schedules  on  pages  xxii.  to  xxv.  will  shew 
that  much  new  matter  has  been  imported  into  the  present 
, edition,  both  in  Part  I.  and  Part  II.  These  additions  are 
indicated  by  the  word  “new.” 

The  most  important  part  of  the  labour  of  editing  Part  II. 
has  been  borne  by  Mr  G.  H.  Darwin,  and  it  will  be  seen  from 
the  schedule  below  that  he  has  made  valuable  contributions  to 
the  work. 


CONTENTS. 


DIVISION  II.— ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 

Chapter  Y. — INTRODUCTORY. 

Approximate  treatment  of  physical  questions — Further  ap- 
proximations ..... 

Object  of  the  present  division  of  the  work  . 

Laws  of  friction  ..... 

Rejection  of  merely  curious  speculations  . 

Chapter  VI.— STATICS  OF  A PARTICLE.— ATTRACTION. 

Objects  of  the  chapter  ..... 

Conditions  of  equilibrium  of  a particle — Equilibrium  of  a 
particle — Angle  of  repose  .... 

Attraction — Universal  law  of  attraction — Special  unit  of 
quantity  of  matter — Linear,  surface,  and  volume,  den- 
sities— Electric  and  magnetic  reckonings  of  quantity — 
Positive  and  negative  masses  admitted  in  abstract  theory 
of  attraction — Uniform  spherical  shell — Attraction  on 
internal  point  ..... 

Digression  on  the  division  of  surfaces  into  elements — Explana- 
tions and  definitions  regarding  cones — The  solid  angle  of 
a cone,  or  of  a complete  conical  surface — Sum  of  all  the 
solid  angles  round  a point  = 47r — Sum  of  the  solid  angles 
of  all  the  complete  conical  surfaces  = 2t — Solid  angle 
subtended  at  a point  by  a terminated  surface — Orthogonal 
and  oblique  sections  of  a small  cone — Area  of  segment 
cut  from  spherical  surface  by  small  cone 

Uniform  spherical  shell — Attraction  on  external  point — At- 
traction on  an  element  of  the  surface  . 

Attraction  of  a spherical  surface  of  which  the  density  varies 
inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  distance  from  a given  point 
— Uninsulated  sphere  under  the  influence  of  an  electric 
point — Direct  analytical  calculation  of  attractions — Uni- 
form spherical  shell — Uniform  circular  disc,  on  particle 
in  its  axis — Cylinder  on  particle  in  axis — Right  cone  on 
particle  at  vertex— Positive  and  negative  discs — Variation 


SECTIONS 

438—447 
448,  449 
450—452 

453 

454 
455,  456 

457—462 


463—470 
471,  472 


Vlll 


CONTENTS. 


of  force  in  crossing  an  attracting  surface — Uniform  hemi- 
sphere attracting  particle  at  edge — Alteration  of  latitude ; 
by  hemispherical  hill  or  cavity,  by  crevasse — Attraction 
of  a sphere  composed  of  concentric  shells  of  uniform  den- 
sity— Attraction  of  a uniform  circular  arc,  of  a uniform 
straight  line  ..... 

Potential — Force  in  terms  of  the  potential — Equipotential  sur- 
face—Relative  intensities  of  force  at  different  points  of  an 
equipotential  surface — Line  of  force — Variation  of  in- 
tensity along  a line  of  force — Potential  due  to  an  attract- 
ing point — Analytical  investigation  of  the  value  of  the  po- 
tential—Force  at  any  point— Force  within  a homogeneous 
sphere— Rate  of  increase  of  the  force  in  any  direction — 
Laplace’s  equation — Poisson’s  extension  of  Laplace’s  equa- 
tion— Potential  of  matter  arranged  in  concentric  spherical 
shells  of  uniform  density — Coaxal  right  cylinders  of  uni- 
form density  and  infinite  length — Matter  arranged  in 
infinite  parallel  planes  of  uniform  density — Equipotential 
surface  ....•• 

Integral  of  normal  attraction  over  a closed  surface — Equivalent 
to  Poisson’s  extension  of  Laplace’s  equation — Equivalent 
to  Laplace’s  equation — Inverse  problem — Attractions  of 
solid  homogeneous  ellipsoid  and  circumscribed  focaloid  of 
equal  mass  found  equal — Homoeoids  and  Focaloids  de- 
fined— Proof  of  Maclaurin’s  Theorem — Maclaurin’s  Theo- 
rem— Equivalent  in  shells  of  Maclaurin’s  Theorem 

Digression  on  the  attraction  of  an  ellipsoid — To  find  the 
potential  of  an  ellipsoid  at  any  interior  point— Attraction 
of  an  infinitely  long  elliptic  cylinder— Liternal  isodynamic 
surfaces  are  similar  to  the  bounding  surface 

Potential  in  free  space  cannot  have  a maximum  or  minimum 
value ; is  a minimax  at  a point  of  zero  force  in  free 
Space — Earnshaw’s  theorem  of  unstable  equilibrium — 
Mean  potential  over  a spherical  surface  equal  to  that  at 
its  centre — Theorem  of  Gauss,  proved 

Green’s  problem,  reduced  to  the  proper  general  solution  of 
Laplace’s  equation  ; solved  synthetically  in  terms  of  par- 
ticular solution  of  Laplace’s  equation— Isolation  of  effect 
by  closed  portion  of  surface — Green’s  problem ; applied 
to  a given  distribution  of  electricity,  M,  influencing  a 
conducting  surface,  S — Virtually  Maclaurin  s theorem 
Elliptic  homoeoid,  an  example  belonging  to  the  reducible 
case  of  Green’s  problem— Complex  application  of  § 501- 
General  problem  of  electric  influence  possible  and  determi- 
nate— Simultaneous  electric  influences  in  spaces  separated 
by  infinitely  thin  conducting  surfaces  - Reducible  case  of 
Green’s  problem  ; applied  to  the  invention  of  solved  piob- 


SECTIONS 


473—481 


482—491 


492—494  i 


494  j — q 


495a — 498 


CONTENTS. 


IX 


lems  of  electric  influence — Examples — Electric  images — 
Transformation  by  reciprocal  radius-vectors — General  sum- 
mary of  ratios — Application  to  the  potential — Any  distribu- 
tion on  a spherical  shell — Uniform  shell  excentrically 
reflected  ...... 

Second  investigation  of  attraction  of  ellipsoid— Elliptic 
homoeoid  exerts  zero  force  on  internal  point : theorem 
due  to  Newton — Distribution  of  electricity  on  ellipsoidal 
conductor — Force  external  to  an  elliptic  homoeoid  found 
— Digression,  second  proof  of  Maclaurin’s  theorem — - 
Magnitude  and  direction  of  attraction  of  elliptic  homoeoid 
on  external  point,  expressed  analytically — Potential  of 
an  elliptic  homoeoid  at  any  point  external  or  internal 
found — Synthesis  of  concentric  homoeoids— Potential  of 
heterogeneous  ellipsoid — Potential  of  homogeneous  ellip- 
soid— Attraction  of  heterogeneous  ellipsoid — Potential  and 
attraction  of  homogeneous  ellipsoid  of  revolution : oblate : 
prolate  ...... 

Third . investigation  of  the  attraction  of  an  ellipsoid — Corre- 
sponding points  on  confocal  ellipsoids  defined — Digres- 
sion ; orthogonal  trajectory  of  confocal  ellipsoids  is  traced 
by  any  point  of  a confocally  distorted  solid  ellipsoid: 
proof — Ivory’s  Lemma  on  corresponding  points — Ivory’s 
theorem  proved— Chasles’  comparison  between  the  po- 
tentials of  two  confocal  homoeoids — Proof  of  Poisson’s 
theorem  regarding  attraction  of  elliptic  homoeoid — Law  of 
attraction  when  a uniform  spherical  shell  exerts  no  action 
on  an  internal  point — Cavendish’s  Theorem 

Centre  of  gravity — Centrobaric  bodies,  proved  possible  by 
Green  — Properties  of  centrobaric  bodies  — Centrobaric 
shell  — Centrobaric  solid — The  centre  of  gravity  (if  it 
exist)  is  the  centre  of  inertia — A centrobaric  body  is 
kinetically  symmetrical  about  its  centre  of  gravity 

Origin  of  spherical  harmonic  analysis  of  Legendre  and  La- 
place— Application  of  spherical  harmonic  analysis — Po- 
tential of  a distant  body — Attraction  of  a particle  on  a 
distant  body — Principle  of  the  approximation  used  in  the 
common  theory  of  the  centre  of  gravity — Potential  of  solid 
sphere  with  harmonic  distribution  of  density — Potential 
of  any  mass  in  harmonic  series — Application  to  figure  of 
the  earth — Case  of  the  potential  symmetrical  about  an 
axis — Examples.  (I.)  Potential  of  circular  ring ; Poten- 
tial symmetrical  about  an  axis — (II.)  of  circular  disc 

Potential  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a circular  galvanometer 
coil 

Exhaustion  of  potential  energy— Green’s  method— Exhaustion 


SECTIONS 


499—518 


519—527 


528—533 


534,  535 


536—546 


X 


CONTENTS. 


of  potential  energy,  in  allowing  condensation  of  diffused 
matter — Gauss’s  method — Equilibrium  of  repelling  par- 
ticles enclosed  in  a rigid  smooth  surface 

Chapter  VII.— STATICS  OF  SOLIDS  AND  FLUIDS. 

Eigid  body — Equilibrium  of  freed  rigid  body — Important  pro- 
position; proved — Equilibrium  of  constrained  rigid  body — 
Example.  Two  constraints  ; — the  four  equations  of  equi- 
librium found ; and  the  two  factors  determining  the 
amounts  of  the  constraining  forces  called  into  action — 
Equations  of  equilibrium  without  expression  of  constrain- 
ing reactions — Equilibrium  of  forces  applied  to  a nut  on 
a frictionless  fixed  screw  —Work  done  by  a single  force  on 
a nut,  turning  on  a fixed  screw — Equation  of  equilibrium 
of  forces  applied  to  a nut  on  a frictionless  screw — The 
same  analytically  and  in  terms  of  rectangular  co-ordinates 
— Two  generalized  component  velocities  corresponding  to 
two  freedoms — Equilibrant  and  resultant 

Couples — Composition  of  couples — Force  resolved  into  force 
and  couple — Application  to  equilibrium  of  rigid  body — 
Forces  represented  by  the  sides  of  a polygon — Forces  pro- 
portional and  perpendicular  to  the  sides  of  a triangle — 
Composition  of  force  and  couple — Composition  of  any  set 
of  forces  acting  on  a rigid  body — Central  axis  . 

Eeduction  to  two  forces — Symmetrical  case — Composition  of 
parallel  forces — Centre  of  gravity — Parallel  forces  whose 
algebraic  sum  is  zero — Conditions  of  equilibrium  of  three 
forces— Physical  axiom — Equilibrium  under  the  action  of 
gravity — Eocking  stones— Equilibrium  about  an  axis,  on 
a fixed  surface — Pappus’  theorem 

Mechanical  powers,  Examples  — Balance,  sensibility  — Eod 
with  frictionless  constraint— Eod  constrained  by  frictional 
surfaces— Block  on  frictional  plane— Mass  supported  by 
rings  passing  round  a rough  post 

Equilibrium  of  a flexible  and  inextensible  cord— Catenary- 
Three  methods  of  investigation— Equations  of  equilibrium 
with  reference  to  tangent  and  osculating  plane— Integral 
for  tension— Cartesian  equations  of  equilibrium— Method 
of  energy — Catenary — Energy  equation  of  equilibrium — 
Common  catenary — Eelative  kinetic  problem  — Kinetic 
question  relative  to  catenary — Examples — Catenary.  In- 
verse problem— Catenary  of  uniform  strength— Flexible 
string  on  smooth  surface  — On  rough  surface  — Eope 
coiled  about  rough  cylinder  . 

Elastic  wire,  fibre,  bar,  rod,  lamina,  or  beam— Composition 
and  resolution  of  curvatures  in  a curved  line— Laws  of 
flexure  and  torsion — Warping  of  normal  section  by  torsion 


SECTIONS 

547—550 


551—558 


559—559  g 


560—570 


571—572 


573—587 


CONTEXTS. 

and  flexure,  infinitesimal — Rotations  corresponding  to 
flexure  and  torsion —Potential  energy  of  elastic  force  in 
bent  and  twisted  wire— Components  of  restituent  couple — 
Three  principal  or  normal  axes  of  torsion  and  flexure — 
Three  principal  torsion-flexure  rigidities— Three  principal 
or  normal  spirals — Case  in  which  elastic  central  line  is  a 
normal  axis  of  torsion — Case  of  equal  flexibility  in  all 
directions — Wire  strained  to  any  given  spiral  and  twist — 
Twist  determined  for  reducing  the  action  to  a single  force 

Spiral  springs— Spiral  spring  of  infinitely  small  inclination  : 
virtually  a torsion-balance  . 

Elastic  curve  transmitting  force  and  couple— Kirchhofif’s  ki- 
netic comparison — Common  pendulum  and  plane  elastic 
curve — Graphic  construction  of  elastic  curve  transmitting 
force  in  one  plane — Equation  of  the  plane  elastic  curve — - 
Bow  slightly  bent — Plane  elastic  curve  and  common  pen- 
dulum .... 

• • 

Wire  of  any  shape  disturbed  by  forces  and  couples  applied 
through  its  length — Longitudinal  tension — Equations  of 
torsion-flexure— Torsion,  and  two  components  of  curva- 
ture, of  wire  (or  component  angular  velocities  of  rotating 
solid)— Terminal  conditions— Straight  beam  infinitely 

little  bent — Case  of  independent  flexure  in  twro  planes 

Plank  bent  by  its  own  weight — Plank  supported  by  its 
ends  ; by  its  middle — Droops  compared — Plank  supported 
by  its  ends  or  middle ; by  three  or  more  points— Plank 
supported  by  its  ends  and  middle — Rotation  of  a wire 
round  its  elastic  central  line — Elastic  universal  flexure 
joint— Equable  elastic  rotating  joint— Practical  inequali- 
ties—Elastic  rotating  joint— Rotation  round  its  elastic 
central  circle,  of  a straight  wire  made  into  a hoop— Rota- 
tion round  its  elastic  central  circle,  of  a hoop  of  wire 
equally  flexible  in  all  directions,  but  circular  when  un- 
strained—Wire  unequally  flexible  in  different  directions, 
and  circulai  when  unstrained,  bent  to  another  circle  by 
balancing-couples  applied  to  its  ends— Conical  bendings  of 
developable  surface 

f lexure  of  a plane  elastic  plate— Definitions — Geometrical 
preliminaries  Limitation  of  flexure  not  to  imply  a stretch- 
ing of  middle  surface  comparable  with  that  of  either  side— 
Stretching  of  a plane  by  synclastic  or  anticlastic  flexure— 
Stretching  of  a curved  surface  by  flexure  not  fulfilling 

Gauss  s condition — Gauss’s  theorem  regarding  flexure 

Limitations  as  to  the  forces  and  flexures  to  bo  admitted  in 
elementary  theory  of  elastic  plate — Results  of  general 
theory  stated  in  advance— Laws  for  flexure  of  elastic  plate 
assumed  in  advance — Stress-couple  acting  across  a normal 


xi 

SECTIONS 


588—603 

604—608 

609—613 


614—626 


XU  ' 


CONTENTS. 


section— Twisting  components  proved  equal  round  any 
two  perpendicular  axes — Principal  axes  of  bending  stress — 
Synclastic  and  anticlastic  stresses  defined — Anticlastic 
stress  referred  to  its  principal  axes ; referred  to  axes  in- 
clined to  them  at  45° — Octantal  resolution  and  composition 
of  anticlastic  stress — Construction  by  parallelogram — 
Geometrical  analogues — Two  cylindrical  curvatures  round 
perpendicular  axes,  and  an  anticlastic  curvature  round  axis 
bisecting  their  right  angles ; or  a spherical,  curvature  and 
two  anticlastic  curvatures ; or  a spherical  and  one  anti- 
clastic curvature — Work  done  in  bending — Partial  differ- 
ential  equations  for  work  done  in  bending  an  elastic 
plate — Potential  energy  of  an  elastic  plate  held  bent — 
Case  of  equal  flexibility  in  all  directions — Synclastic  and 
anticlastic  rigidities  of  a plate 

Plate  bent  by  any  forces— Conditions  of  equilibrium— Equa- 
tions of  equilibrium  investigated — Equations  of  stress — 
Equations  connecting  stress  and  curvature — Partial  dif- 
ferential equation  of  the  bent  surface  . 

Boundary  conditions  ; Poisson’s  three : two  sufficient,  proved 
by  Kirchhoff— Kirchhoff’s  boundary  equations  investi- 
gated—Distribution  of  shearing  force  determined,  which 
produces  same  flexure  as  a given  distribution  of  couple 
round  axes  perpendicular  to  boundary — Uniform  distribu- 
tion of  twisting  couple  produces  no  flexure — The  distribu- 
tion of  shearing  force  that  produces  same  flexure  as  from 
distribution  of  twisting  couple 

Case  of  circular  strain — Independent  investigation  for  circular 
strain— Interpretation  of  terms  in  integral 

Symmetrical  flexure  of  flat  ring — Flexure  of  flat  ring 
equilibrated  by  forces  symmetrically  distributed  over  its 
edges  ; and  with  load  symmetrically  spread  over  its  area — 
Circular  table  of  isotropic  material,  supported  symmetri- 
cally on  its  edge,  and  strained  only  by  its  own  weight 

Reduction  of  general  problem  to  case  of  no  load  over  area  — 
Flat  circular  ring  the  only  case  hitherto  solved— Rectangu- 
lar plate,  held  and  loaded  by  diagonal  pairs  of  corners— 
Transition  to  finite  flexures  indicated  . 

Transmission  of  force  through  an  elastic  solid— Homogeneous 
stress— Force  transmitted  across  any  surface  in  elastic 
solid— Specification  of  a stress;  by  six  independent  ele- 
ments— Relations  between  pairs  of  tangential  tractions 
necessary  for  equilibrium— Specification  of  a stress ; by 
six  independent  elements ; three  simple  longitudinal 
stresses,  and  three  simple  shearing  stresses— Simple  lon- 
gitudinal, and  shearing,  stresses— Force  across  any  sur- 


BECTIONS 


627—642 
643,  644 


645—648 

649—651 

652,  653 
654—657 


CONTENTS. 


Xlll 


face  in  terms  of  rectangular  specification  of  stress—  Stress- 
quadric — Principal  planes  and  axes  of  a stress — Varieties 
of  stress-quadric — Composition  of  stresses — Laws  of  strain 
and  stress  compared — Rectangular  elements  of  strains  and 
stresses — Work  done  by  a stress  within  a varying  solid — 
Work  done  on  the  surface  of  a varying  solid — Strain- 
components  in  terms  of  displacement — Work  done  through 
interior ; agrees  with  work  done  on  surface— Differential 
equation  of  work  done  by  a stress—  Physical  application — 
Perfectly  elastic  body  defined*  in  abstract  dynamics — Its 
conditional  fulfilment  in  nature — Potential  energy  of  an 
elastic  solid  held  strained — Stress-components  expressed 
in  terms  of  strain — Strain-components  expressed  in  terms 
of  stress — Average  stress  through  any  changing  strain 

Homogeneousness  defined — Molecular  hypothesis  assumes  a 
very  fine  grained  texture  in  crystals,  but  no  ultimate 
homogeneousness — Scales  of  average  homogeneousness — 
Isotropic  and  eolotropic  substances  defined — Isotropy  and 
eolotropy  of  different  sets  of  properties — Practical  limita- 
tion of  isotropy,  and  homogeneousness  of  eolotropy,  to  the 
average  in  the  aggregate  of  molecules — Conditions  fulfilled 
in  elastic  isotropy — Measures  of  resistance  to  compression 
and  resistance  to  distortion — Bulk-modulus  or  modulus  of 
compression— Compressibility— Rigidity,  or  elasticity  of 
figure,  defined  .... 

Discrepant  reckonings  of  shear  and  shearing  stress,  from  the 
simple  longitudinal  strains  or  stresses  respectively  in- 
volved— Strain  produced  by  a single  longitudinal  stress — 

loung  s modulus  = — Ratio  of  lateral  contraction  to 

longitudinal  extension  different  for  different  substances 
from  \ for  jelly  to  0 for  cork— Supposition  of  £ for  ideal 
perfect  solid,  groundless 

1 oung  s modulus  defined — Same  as  longitudinal  rigidity 

Weight-modulus  and  length  of  modulus— Velocity  of 
transmission  of  a simple  longitudinal  stress  through  a rod 
Specific  loung’s  modulus  of  an  isotropic  body  in  terms 
of  the  absolute  unit ; or  of  the  force  of  gravity  on  the  unit 
of  mass  in  any  particular  locality — Metrical  denomina- 
tions of  moduluses  of  elasticity  in  general 

Practical  rules  for  velocities  of  waves;  distortional  without 
change  of  bulk  ; compressional,  in  an  elastic  solid  ; com- 
pressional  in  liquid  ; compressional  in  gas  ; gravitational 
in  liquid  ; transversal  vibration  of  stretched  cord — Digres- 
sion on  Resilience,  from  Art.  Elasticity,  Encyc.  Brit. 

VOL.  II. 


SECTIONS 


658—674 


675—680 


681—685 


686—691 


691  a—f 


C 


XIV 


CONTENTS. 


Stress  required  to  maintain  a simple  longitudinal  strain — 
Stress  components  in  terms  of  strain  l'or  isotropic  body — 
Equation  of  energy  for  the  same 

Fundamental  problems  of  mathematical  theory — Conditions  of 
internal  equilibrium,  expressed  by  three  equations — 
General  equations  of  interior  equilibrium — Being  suffi- 
cient, they  imply  that  the  forces  on  any  part  supposed 
rigid  fulfil  the  six  equations  of  equilibrium  in  a rigid 
body — Verification  of  equations  of  equilibrium  for  any 
part  supposed  rigid — Simplified  equations  for  isotropic 
solid  ...... 

St  Venant’s  application  to  torsion  problems — Torsion  pro- 
blem stated  — Lemma  — Torsional  rigidity  of  circular 
cylinder — Prism  of  any  shape  constrained  to  a simple 
twist  requires  tractions  on  its  sides — Traction  on  sides  of 
prism  constrained  to  a simple  twist— St  Venant’s  correc- 
tion to  give  the  strain  produced  by  mere  twisting  couples 
applied  to  the  ends — Hydro-kinetic  analogue  to  torsion 
problem — Solution  of  torsion  problem  — Equations  of 
strain,  stress,  and  internal  equilibrium — Surface  traction 
to  be  made  zero — Couple  resultant  of  traction  in  normal 
section — Hydro-kinetic  application  of  torsional  equation — 
St  Venant’s  invention  of  solvable  cases — Solution  for 
elliptic  cylinder,  for  equilateral  triangle,  for  curvilinear 
squares,  for  star  with  four  rounded  points — St  Venant’s 
reduction  to  Green’s  problem — Solution  for  rectangular 
prism,  found  by  Fourier’s  analysis — Extension  to  a class 
of  curvilinear  rectangles — Lame’s  transformation  to  plane 
isothermal  co-ordinates — Theorem  of  Stokes  and  Lanni — 
Solution  for  rectangle  of  plane  isothermals — Example. 
Rectangle  bounded  by  two  concentric  arcs  and  two  radii — 
Contour  lines  of  normal  section  of  elliptic  cylinder,  as 
warped  by  torsion  : equilateral  hyperbolas — Contour  lines 
of  normal  section  of  triangular  prism,  as  warped  by  tor- 
sion— Diagram  of  St  Venant’s  curvilinear  squares  for 
which  torsion  problem  is  solvable — Contour  lines  for  St 
Venant’s  “dtoile  h quatre  points  arrondis” — Contour  lines 
of  normal  section  of  square  prism,  as  warped  by  torsion — 
Elliptic  square,  and  flat  rectangular  bars  twisted 

Torsional  rigidity  less  in  proportion  to  sum  of  principal 
flexural  rigidities  than  according  to  false  extension  (§  703) 
of  Coulomb’s  law— Ratios  of  torsional  rigidities  to  those  of 
solid  circular  rods  (a)  of  same  moment  of  inertia,  (fc)  of 
same  quantity  of  material— Places  of  greatest  distortion  in 
twisted  prisms — Solid  of  any  shape  having  edges  01  pyra- 
midal or  conical  angles,  under  stress — Strain  at  projecting 
angles  evanescent,  at  re-entrant  angles  infinite  Liability 


SECTIONS 

692-695 


096—698 


699—708 


CONTENTS. 


XV 


to  cracks  proceeding  from  re-entrant  angles,  or  any  places 
of  too  sharp  concave  curvature — Cases  of  curvilinear  rect- 
angles for  which  torsion  problem  has  been  solved — Distor- 
tion zero  at  central  angle  of  sector  (4),  infinite  at  central 
angle  of  sector  (6) ; zero  at  all  the  other  angles — Problem  of 
flexure — Forced  condition  of  no  distortion  in  normal  sec- 
tions— Surface  traction  ( P , Q),  required  to  prevent  distor- 
tion in  normal  section— Correction  to  do  away  with  lateral 
traction,  and  bodily  force — St  Yenant’s  solution  of  flexure 
problem — Flexure  of  a bar — Line  through  centres  of  in- 
ertia of  normal  sections  remains  unchanged  in  length — 
Flexure  through  finite  angle  in  one  plane;  must  be  in  either 
of  two  principal  planes,  if  produced  simply  by  balancing 
couples  on  the  two  ends — Principal  flexural  rigidities  and 
axes — Geometrical  interpretation  of  distortion  in  normal 
plane — Anticlastic  and  conical  curvatures  produced  in  the 
tour  sides  of  a rectangular  prism  by  flexure  in  a principal 
plane— Experimental  illustration  — Uncalculated  effects 
of  ordinary  bendings  of  a thin  flat  spring— Hence  neces- 
sity for  stricter  limitation,  § G28,  of  curvature  than  § 588 
\\  hen  a thin  flat  spring  is  bent  in  a plane  perpendicular 
to  its  breadth 

1 lexure  of  a plate : by  a single  bending  stress ; by  simultaneous 
bending  stresses  in  two  planes  at  right  angles  to  one  an- 
other htress  in  cylindrical  curvatui'e  : in  spherical  curva- 
ture : in  anticlastic  curvature— Flexural  rigidities  of  a 
plate  : (-1 ) cylindrical,  (())  synelastic,  (fc)  anticlastic — 
Same  lesult  for  anticlastic  flexure  of  a plate  arrived  at  also 

by  transition  from  simple  torsion  of  rectangular  prism 

Analysis  of  traction  in  normal  section  of  twisted  rectangu- 
lar prism— Composition  of  action  in  normal  section  of  a 
long  rectangular  lamina  under  torsion— Uniform  distribu- 
tion of  couple  applied  to  its  edges  to  render  the  stress  uni- 
form from  the  edges  inwards— Algebraic  solution  express- 
ing displacement,  strain,  and  stress,  through  a plate  bent 
to  uniform  anticlastic  curvature— Thin  rectangular  plate 
subjected  to  the  edge-traction  of  § 647— Transition  to  plate 
without  corners  subjected  to  edge-traction  of  § 647 — Origin 
shifted  from  middle  plane  to  one  side  of  plate— Displace- 
ment of  substance  produced  by  edge-traction  of  § 647 

Case  of  § 647  independently  investigated— Eapid  decrease  of 
disturbance  from  edge  inwards 

Froblems  to  be  solved— General  problem  of  infinite  solid- 
solved  for  isotropic  substance— General  equations  for 
infinite  isotropic  solid  integrated— Force  applied  uni- 
formly to  spherical  portion  of  infinite  homogeneous  solid— 
Dilatation  produced  by  it— Investigation  of  displacement— 


SECTIONS 


709—718 


719—727 
728,  729 


XVI 


CONTENTS. 


SECTIONS 


Displacement  produced  by  a force  applied  to  an  infinitely 
small  part  of  an  infinite  elastic  solid — Displacement  pro- 
duced by  any  distribution  of  force  through  an  infinite 
elastic  solid  ..... 

Application  to  problem  of  § G9G — General  problem  of  § GOG 
reduced  to  case  of  no  bodily  force — Important  class  of 
cases,  reduced  to  case  of  no  bodily  force — Problem  of  § 696 
with  no  force  except  over  surface : equations  of  equilibrium 
to  which  the  surface-tractions  are  subject — Equations  of 
surface  condition,  when  tractions  are  given 

Problem  of  § 696  solved  for  spherical  shell — Dilatation  proved 
expressible  in  convergent  series  of  spherical  harmonics — 
General  theorem  regarding  expansibility  in  solid  har- 
monics— Displacement  determined  on  temporary  suppo- 
sition that  dilatation  is  known — Complete  harmonic  solu- 
tion of  equations  of  interior  equilibrium — Solid  sphere 
with  surface  displacements  given — Shell  with  given  dis- 
placements of  its  outer  and  inner  surfaces 

Surface-tractions  given — Component  tractions  on  any  spheri- 
cal surface  concentric  with  origin  harmonically  expressed 
— Prescribed  surface  conditions  put  into  harmonics — Equa- 
tions of  equilibrium  to  which  the  surface  tractions  are 
subject— Limitations  imposed  on  the  otherwise  arbitrary 
harmonic  data  of  surface  tractions,  for  their  equilibrium— 
Surface  tractions  given  : general  solution ; for  spherical 
shell ; for  solid  sphere— Case  of  homogeneous  strain- 
indeterminate  rotations  without  strain,  necessarily  in- 
cluded in  general  solution  for  displacement,  when  the  data 
are  merely  of  force  .... 

Plane  strain  defined— Problem  for  cylinders  under  plane 
strain,  solved  in  terms  of  “plane  harmonics ’’—Plane 
harmonic  functions  defined— Problem  for  cylinders  under 
plane  strain  solved  in  terms  of  plane  harmonics 

Small  bodies  stronger  than  large  ones  in  proportion  to  their 
weights — Example:  a straight  rod  held  horizontally  by 
its  middle — Stiffness  of  uniform  steel  rods  of  different  di- 
mensions . 

Transition  to  hydrodynamics — Imperfectness  of  elasticity  in 
solids— Viscosity  of  solids— Viscosity  of  fluids— Forbes’ 
“Viscous  Theory  of  Glacial  Motion”— Plasticity  of  solids. 
—Perfect  and  unlimited  plasticity  unopposed  by  internal 
friction,  the  characteristic  of  the  ideal  perfect  fluid  of 
abstract  hydrodynamics— Fluid  pressure  proved  equal  in 
all  directions— Application  to  statics  of  solids— Centre  of 
pressure — Application  of  the  principle  of  energy  Pioof  by 
energy  of  the  equality  of  fluid  pressure  in  all  direc- 
tions . 


730,  731 


732—734 


735,  736 


737 


738,  739 


740 


741—747 


CONTENTS. 


XVII 


SECTIONS 

Fluid  pressure  depending  on  external  forces — Surfaces  of  equal 
pressure  are  perpendicular  to  the  lines  of  force,  and  are 
surfaces  of  equal  density  and  of  equal  potential  when  the 
system  of  force  is  conservative — Gravity  the  only  external 
force  ......  748—751 

Rate  of  increase  of  pressure — Pressure  in  a calm  atmosphere 
of  uniform  temperature — Height  of  the  homogeneous  at- 
mosphere— Analytical  investigation  of  the  preceding 
theorems  .....  752,  753 

Conditions  of  equilibrium  of  fluid  completely  filling  a closed 
vessel — Free  surface  in  open  vessel  is  level — Fluid,  in 
closed  vessel,  under  a non-conservative  system  of  forces — 

Fluid  under  any  system  of  forces — Equilibrium  condition  754 — 756 


Ideal  example  of  equilibrium  under  non-conservative  forces — 

Actual  case — Relation  between  density  and  potential  of 
applied  forces  .....  757—760 

Resultant  pressure  on  a plane  area  — Kinetic  measure 

P=9Pz+Po  • • ...  761 


764—768 


Loss  of  apparent  weight  by  immersion  in  a fluid — Lemma  . 762,  763 

Stability  of  equilibrium  of  a floating  body— Vertical  displace- 
ments—Work  done  in  vertical  displacement— Displace- 
ment by  rotation  about  an  axis  in  the  plane  of  flotation— 

V ork  done  in  this  displacement — General  displacement — 

Work  required  Conditions  of  stability — The  metacentre. 

Condition  of  its  existence 

A homogeneous  ellipsoid  is  a figure  of  equilibrium  of  a ro- 
tating liquid  mass— The  square  of  a requisite  angular 
velocity  is  as  the  density  of  the  liquid— Table  of  corre- 
sponding values  of  ellipticities  and  angular  velocities— 

Mean  density  of  the  earth  expressed  in  attraction  units— 

Time  of  rotation  for  spheroid  of  given  eccentricity— Mass 

and  moment  of  momentum  of  fluid  given  . 769 776 

Equilibrium  ellipsoid  of  three  unequal  axes— General  problem 
of  rotating  liquid  mass— Stability  and  instability  of  oblate 
spheroid  of  revolution — Annular  figures:  probably  not 
stable  ; unless  under  constraint  to  remain  symmetrical 
lound  an  axis  Instability  of  oblate  spheroid  and  stability 
of  Jacobian  figure — Unstable  Jacobian  figures — Configura- 
tion of  two  detached  rotating  masses  stable  . . 777 ’J’JQ'1 

Digression  on  spherical  harmonics — Harmonic  spheroid Har- 

monic nodal  cone  and  line — Theorem  regarding  nodal 
cone— Cases  of  solid  harmonics  resolvable  into  factors— 

1 olar  hai  monies — Zonal  and  sectorial  harmonics  defined . 

Tesseral  division  of  surface  by  nodes  of  a polar  harmonic— 

Murp>hy's  analytical  invention  of  the  zonal  harmonics— 

Murphy's  analysis— Expansions  of  zonal  harmonics— 


XVI 11 


CONTENTS. 


Formula)  for  zonal  and  tesseral  harmonics — Biaxal  har- 
monic expanded  ..... 

Physical  problems  relative  to  plane  rectangular  and  circular 
plates — Examples  of  polar  harmonics— Sixth  order  : Zo- 
nal, Tesseral,  Sectorial — Seventh  order : Zonal,  Tesseral, 
Sectorial — Polar  harmonics  of  sixth  and  seventh  orders, 
tables  and  graphic  representations 

Digression  on  theory  of  potential — Sea  level — Level  surface 
relatively  to  gravity  and  centrifugal  force — Disturbance  of 
sea  level  by  denser  than  average  matter  underground— In- 
tensity and  direction  of  gravity  altered  by  underground 
local  excess  above  average  density — Effects  of  local  excess 
above  average  density  on  sea  level,  and  on  direction  and 
intensity  of  gravity : example 

Harmonic  spheroidal  levels,  of  high  orders — Undulation  of  level 
due  to  parallel  mountain-ridges  and  valleys — Practical  con- 
clusions as  to  disturbances  of  sea  level,  and  amount  and 
direction  of  gravity  . 

Determinateness  of  potential  through  space  from  its  value  over 
every  point  of  a surface — Determination  of  potential  fiom 
its  value  over  a spherical  surface  enclosing  the  mass — De- 
termination of  potential  from  the  form  of  an  appioxi- 
mately  spherical  equipotential  surface  round  the  mass 
Resultant  force — Resultant  force  at  any  point  of  approxi- 
mately spherical  level  surface,  for  gravity  alone ; foi 
gravity  and  centrifugal  force — -Clairaut  s theorems  Figuie 
of  the  sea  level  determinable  from  measurements  of 
gravity ; if  ellipsoid  with  three  unequal  axes  must  have 
one  of  them  coincident  with  axis  of  revolution  . 

Figure  of  the  sea  level  determinable  from  measurements  of 
° gravity  ; rendered  difficult  by  local  irregularities— Results 
of  geodesy  • 

Hydrostatic  examples  resumed — No  mutual  force  between  por- 
tions of  the  liquid  : Examples — Example  for  tides : result 
agrees  with  ordinary  equilibrium  theory — Correction  of 
ordinary  equilibrium  theory — The  tides,  mutual  attraction 
of  the  waters  neglected  : corrected  equilibrium  theory 
Lunar  or  solar  semi-diurnal  tide — Lunar  or  solar  diurnal 

tide Lunar  fornightly  tide  or  solar  semi-annual  tide— 

Explanation  of  the  lunar  fortnightly  and  solar  semi-annual 
tides— The  tides,  mutual  attraction  of  the  waters  neglected : 
practical  importance  of  correction  for  equilibrium  fort- 
nightly and  semi-annual  tides— Latitude  of  evanescent 
fortnightly  tide— Spring  and  neap  tides : “pruning  and 
“lagging”— Discrepancy  from  observed  results,  due  to  in- 
ertia of  water 


SECTIONS 

779—782 
783,  784 

785—788 

789—792 

793—795 
7C6,  797 


798—811 


CONTENTS. 


XIX 


Lunar  and  solar  influence  on  apparent  terrestrial  gravity 

Actual  tide-generating  influence  explained  by  method  of  centri- 
fugal force — Augmentation  of  result  by  mutual  gravitation 
of  the  disturbed  water — Stability  of  the  ocean — Augmenta- 
tions of  results  by  mutual  gravitation  of  water  calculated 
for  examples  of  § 709 — Local  influence  of  high  water  on 
direction  of  gravity — Attraction  of  high  water  on  a plum- 
met at  the  sea-side — Gravitational  Observatory  . 

Application  of  § 817  to  theory  of  the  earth’s  figure — Observa- 
tion shows  so  great  an  ellipticity  of  sea  level  that  there 
must  be  oblateness  of  the  solid  not  only  in  its  bounding 
surface,  but  also  in  interior  layers  of  equal  density 

Equilibrium  of  rotating  spheroid  of  heterogeneous  liquid,  in- 
vestigated— Spheroidal  surface  of  equal  density — Expres- 
sion of  incompressibility— Hydrostatic  equation— Part  of 
the  potential,  due  to  oblateness  : developed  in  harmonies 
— Equation  of  equilibrium  for  general  harmonic  term: 
leading  to  equation  for  general  coefficient  u{;  regarded  as  a 
function  of  r— Differential  equation  to  be  integrated— De- 
termination of  constants  to  complete  the  required  solution 
— Introduction  of  the  Newtonian  law  of  force — Simplifica- 
tion— Differential  equation  for  proportionate  deviation 
from  sphericity— Equilibrium  of  rotating  spheroid  of  hete- 
rogeneous liquid — Layers  of  greatest  and  least  proportion- 
ate deviation  from  sphericity — Proportionate  deviation  for 
case  of  centrifugal  force,  or  of  force  from  without— Case  of 
centrifugal  force  .... 

Laplace’s  hypothetical  law  of  density  within  the  earth As- 

sumed relation  between  density  and  pressure— Law  of 
density— Determination  of  ellipticities  of  surfaces  of  equal 
density— Consequences  as  regards  ellipticities  of  surfaces 
of  equal  density— liatio  of  ellipticity  of  surface  to  the 
fraction  expressing  centrifugal  force  at  equator  in  terms  of 
surface  gravity— Ellipticity  of  internal  stratum— Batio  of 
mean  to  surface  density— Ellipticity  of  strata  of  equal 
density— The  distribution  of  density  in  Jupiter  and  Saturn 

Dynamical  origin  of  Precession  and  Nutation— Precession  gives 
information  as  to  the  distribution  of  the  earth’s  mass, 
while  surface-gravity  does  not — Precession  gives  informa- 
tion as  to  the  distribution  of  the  earth’s  mass — The  con- 
stant of  Precession  deduced  from  Laplace’s  law  . 

Comparison  of  Laplace’s  hypothesis  with  observation The 

compressibility  involved  in  the  hypothesis— Compressibility 
of  lava  required  by  Laplace’s  hypothesis,  compared  with 
experimental  data  . 


SECTIONS 

812 


813—818 


819—821 


S22,  823 


824,  824' 


825—827 


828,  829 


XX 


CONTENTS. 


Numerical  estimates  of  the  amount  of  tidal  friction — Secular 
variation  of  moon’s  mean  motion  partly  explained  by  tidal 
friction — Numerical  estimate  of  amount  of  tidal  retarda- 
tion of  earth’s  rotation — Thermodynamic  acceleration  of 
earth’s  rotation — Retardation  from  fall  of  meteoric  dust — 
Causes  for  retardation  preponderant — Date  of  consolida- 
tion of  earth — Argument  from  cooling  of  the  earth — 
Abrupt  changes  of  interior  density,  not  improbable — Two 
non-mixing  liquids  of  different  densities,  each  homo- 
geneous ...... 

Rigidity  of  the  earth : great  enough  to  negative  the  geological 
hypothesis  of  a thin  solid  crust — The  internal  stress  caused 
in  the  earth  by  the  weight  of  continents — Conditions  under 
which  elasticity  breaks  down  and  solids  rupture — Pro- 
visional reckoning  of  tendency  to  rupture  by  difference 
between  greatest  and  least  principal  stresses — Weight  of 
continents  produces  internal  stress  in  the  earth— Stress 
when  the  ellipticity  of  the  spheroid  is  not  appropriate  to 
the  diurnal  rotation — Stress  due  to  a series  of  parallel 
mountain  chains — Conclusion  as  to  strength  of  the  interior 
of  earth  from  magnitude  of  actual  continents — Tidal  in- 
fluence of  sun  and  moon  on  the  earth — Elastic  solid  tides — 
Homogeneous  elastic  solid  globe  free  at  surface ; deformed 
by  bodily  harmonic  force — Separation  of  the  two  moduluses 
of  elasticity — Case  of  incompressible  elastic  solid — 
Cases: — centrifugal  force:  tide-generating  force — Homo- 
geneous elastic  solid  globe  free  at  surface ; deformed  by 
bodily  harmonic  force — Case  of  second  degree  gives  elliptic 
deformation,  diminishing  from  centre  outwards  :— higher 
degrees  give  greatest  proportionate  deviation  from  sphericity 
neither  at  centre  nor  surface— Synthetic  proof  of  maxi- 
mum ellipticity  at  centre,  for  deformation  of  second 
order — Oblateness  induced  in  homogeneous  elastic  solid 
globe,  by  rotation — Numerical  results  for  iron  and  glass — 
Rotational  or  tidal  ellipticities  but  little  influenced  by 
compressibility,  in  globes  of  metallic,  vitreous,  or  gela- 
tinous elastic  solid — Value  of  surface  ellipticities  for  globe 
same  size  and  mass  as  earth,  of  non-gravitating  material, 
homogeneous,  incompressible,  and  same  rigidity  as  steel — 
Comparison  between  spheroidal-maintaining  powers  of 
gravitation  and  rigidity,  for  large  homogeneous  solid 
globes 0,  t denote  resistances  to  deformation  due  respect- 

ively to  gravity  and  to  rigidity — Analytical  introduction  of 
effects  of  gravitation — Hypothesis  of  imperfect  elasticity 
of  the  earth— Rigidity  of  the  earth  : unless  greater  than 
that  of  steel  would  be  very  imperfectly  effective  in  main- 
taining figure  against  tide-generating  force— Influence  of 
elastic  yielding  of  the  solid  earth  on  the  surface-liquid 


BECTI0K8 


830, 831 


CONTENTS. 

tides — Rigidity  of  the  earth  : probably  greater  on  the  whole 
than  that  of  a solid  glass  globe— Dynamic  theory  of  tides 
too  imperfect  to  give  any  estimate  of  absolute  values  for 
main  phenomena : but  not  so  for  the  fortnightly  and  semi- 
annual tides— Amounts  of  fortnightly  tide  estimated  on 
various  suppositions  as  to  rigidity— Rigidity  of  the  earth  : 
probably  to  be  best  learned  from  observations  giving 
amounts  of  fortnightly  tides— Tide-gauges  to  be  esta- 
blished at  ocean  stations — Scantiness  of  information  re- 
garding fortnightly  tides,  hitherto  drawn  from  observa- 
tion . 

Advance  in  knowledge  of  tides  since  the  first  edition — The 
theoretical  value  of  the  fortnightly  and  monthly  elliptic 
tides— Definition  of  symbols—  Long-period  tides— For- 
mulas for  the  longitude  and  R.A.  of  the  intersection — 

Evaluation  of  the  function  (£— Theoretical  expressions  for 
equilibrium  value  of  fortnightly  and  monthly  tides — Maxi- 
mum and  minimum  values  in  British  feet — Preparation 
for  reduction  by  least  squares — Theoretical  expression  for 
the  tides  when  the  earth  yields  bodily,  and  when  there  is 
friction — Equations  for  reduction  by  least  squares — Nu- 
merical results  of  harmonic  analysis  of  tidal  observations 
— Results  of  reduction — Tidal  yielding  of  the  earth’s 
mass.  Rigidity  about  equal  to  or  greater  than  that  of 
steel  ......  847,  848 

Appendix  C. — Equations  of  Equilibrium  of  an  Elastic  Solid  deduced  from 
the  Principle  of  Energy. 

Appendix  D. — On  the  Secular  Cooling  of  the  Earth. 

Appendix  E. — On  the  Age  of  the  Sun’s  Heat. 

Appendix  F. — On  the  Size  of  Atoms. 

Appendix  G. — On  Tidal  Friction,  by  G.  H.  Darwin. 


xxi 

SECTIONS 


832— 84G 


SCHEDULE  OF  ALTERATIONS  AND  ADDITIONS 

IN  PART  I.,  VOL.  I. 

§ 9.  Partly  rewritten. 

§ 12.  Small  addition. 

§ 58.  Reference  to  Tide  Predicter  added. 

§ G2.  Addition. 

§ 76.  Small  addition. 

§ 90.  Some  alteration. 

§ 95.  Rodrigues’  co-ordinates  (new). 

§ 96.  Addition. 

§ 97.  Small  addition. 

§ 100.  Somewhat  altered. 

§ 101.  Rewritten  and  enlarged. 

§ 102.  Rewritten. 

§ 107.  Addition. 

§ 108.  Addition— transient  terrestrial  nutation  of  306  days  (uew). 

§ 110.  Slight  alteration. 

§ 111.  Addition — rolling  and  spinning  bodies  (new). 

§ 123.  Addition — dynamics  of  twist  in  kinks  (new). 

§ 130.  Small  alteration. 

§ 137.  Addition — integral  curvature,  horograph  (new). 

§ 184.  Some  alteration. 

§ 190j.  Addition. 

§ 198.  Rewritten— degrees  of  freedom — geometrical  slide  (new). 

§ 200.  Small  alterations. 

§ 201.  Slight  alteration. 

Appendix  A0.  Laplace’s  equation  in  generalised  co-ordinates  (new). 
Appendix  B.  Examples  of  spherical  harmonics — rewritten  and  much 
extended  (new). 

§ 212.  Slight  addition. 

§ 223.  Units  of  length  and  time  (new). 

§ 225.  Small  addition. 

§ 245.  Part  omitted. 

§ 267.  Small  addition. 

§ 276.  Footnote  (new). 

§ 282.  Definition  of  “ Principal  axes”  (new). 

§ 283.  Reference  added. 

§ 289.  Slight  addition. 

§ 293.  Considerable  addition  (new). 

§ 298.  Small  alterations  and  additions. 

§ 312.  Addition. 


SCHEDULE  OF  ALTERATIONS  AND  ADDITIONS. 


XX111 


^ ( Slight  alteration. 

§ olo  ) 

§ 317.  Small  alteration. 

§ 318.  Old  § 329  rewritten  and  extended. 

§ 319.  Old  § 330— with  considerable  additions— ignoration  of  co-ordinates 
(new). 

§ 320  to  § 324.  Same  as  old  § 331  to  § 335. 

§ 325.  Extended  from  old  § 336— addition  to  observed  phenomena  of  fluid 


§ 326  to  § 336.  Same  as  old  § 318  to  § 328,  with  some  alterations— con- 
siderable addition,  to  § 319  now  § 327. 

§ 337.  Addition  including  slightly  disturbed  equilibrium  (new). 


§ 341.  Extended  to  include  old  § 342  with  addition. 

§ 342.  Same  as  non-mathematical  portion  of  old  § 343. 

§ 343,  a to  p.  On  the  motions  of  a cycloidal  system  rewritten  and  greatly 
extended. 

§ 344.  Rewritten. 

§ 345,  i.  to  xxviii.  Oscillations  with  friction—  dissipation  of  energy — posi- 
tional and  motional  forces — gyrostatics — stability  (new). 

§ 373  and  § 374.  Same  as  old  § 373. 

§ 374  to  § 380.  Same  as  old  § 375  to  § 379,  with  alterations. 

§ 381  and  § 382.  Same  as  old  § 380. 

§ 383  to  § 386.  Same  as  old  §§  381  to  § 384.  Old  § 385  and  § 386  omitted. 

§ 398'.  Harmonic  analysis  (new). 

§ 401.  Addition  on  calculating  machines  (new). 

§ 404.  Rewritten. 

§ 405.  Foot-note  quoted  from  old  § 830;  compare  with  new  § 830. 

§ 408.  Slight  alteration. 


§ 429.  Part  rewritten. 

§ 431.  Rewritten. 

§ 435.  Extended — bifilar  balance  (new). 
Appendix  B',  I.  Tide-predicter  (new). 

,,  H.  Equation-solver  (new). 

,,  IIL  to  VI.  Mechanical  integrator  (new). 
,,  VII.  Harmonic  analyser  (new). 


motion. 


Some  addition. 


Rewritten. 


SCHEDULE  OF  ALTERATIONS  AND  ADDITIONS 
IN  PART  II,  VOL.  I. 

§ 443.  Part  rewritten. 

§ 451.  Slightly  altered  and  part  omitted. 

§ 452.  Same  as  part  of  old  § 451 — old  § 452  omitted. 

§ 453  and  § 454.  Rewritten. 

§ 455  ) . . 

Small  omission. 

§ 4o8  ) 

§ 478  and  § 479.  Small  addition. 

§ 491  (/)  and  § 492.  Slight  alteration. 

§ 493.  Integral  of  normal  attraction  over  a closed  surface  (new). 

§ 494,  a to  q.  Theory  of  potential — attraction  of  ellipsoids  (new). 

§ 495  (a),  (5),  & (c).  Same  as  old  §§  493,  494,  and  495. 

§ 496.  Small  addition. 

§ 501.  Example  added. 

§ 506.  Part  rewritten. 

§ 507.  Slight  alteration. 

§ 519.  Old  § 520  rewritten,  including  part  of  § 519. 

§ 520.  Distribution  of  electricity  on  an  ellipsoidal  conductor  (new). 

§ 521  to  § 525.  Attraction  of  Homoeoids  (new),  including  old  § 523. 

§ 526  and  § 527.  Attraction  of  ellipsoids  (new),  rewritten  for  old  § 522. 

§ 528  to  § 530.  Mathematical  part  of  old  § 519  rewritten. 

§ 531.  Old  § 524  rewritten. 

§ 532.  Old  § 521  rewritten. 

§ 533.  Same  as  old  § 525  with  small  addition. 

§ 534.  Same  as  old  § 526  and  § 527. 

§ 534(a)  to  § 534  (y).  Same  as  old  § 528  to  § 534. 

§ 551  to  § 557.  Equilibrium  of  free  and  constrained  rigid  bodies,  including 
Theory  of  Screws  (new) — old  § 551  omitted. 

§ 558  to  § 559(f).  Same  as  old  § 552  to  § 559,  partly  rewiittcn  and  slightly 
altered. 

§ 561.  Rewritten. 

§ 562  to  § 569.  Slight  alterations. 

§ 572.  Theory  of  balance — considerably  altered. 

§ 597.  Modified. 

§ 599.  Proof  added. 

§ 609.  Rewritten. 

§ 628.  Slight  alteration. 


SCHEDULE  OF  ALTERATIONS  AND  ADDITIONS. 


XXV 


§ 632.  Slightly  modified. 

§ 686.  Note  on  modulus  of  elasticity  (new). 

§ 688.  Slightly  modified. 

§ 691,  a to/.  Theory  of  elasticity— wave  propagation — resilience  (new). 

§ 737 (/<).  Small  addition. 

§ 740.  Small  addition. 

§ 755.  Note  on  cyclic  functions  (new). 

§ 771.  Somewhat  altered — includes  part  of  old  § 772. 

§ 772.  Rewritten,  table  altered. 

§ 776  and  § 777.  Rewritten. 

§ 778  and  § 778'.  Old  § 778  rewritten. 

§ 778".  Equilibrium  of  rotating  masses  of  fluid  (new). 

§ 797.  Addition — latest  results  of  geodesy  (new). 

§ 803  and  § 809.  Slight  alterations. 

§ 810.  Small  addition. 

§ 812.  Addition— lunar  disturbance  of  gravity  (new). 

§ 818'.  Gravitational  observatories  (new,  G.  H.  D.). 

§ 824,  824'.  Addition  — ellipticity  of  internal  strata  of  earth  and  other 
planets  (new,  G.  H.  D.). 

§ 830.  Entirely  rewritten  and  extended  (new,  G.  H.  D.). 

Rigidity  and  strength  of  materials  of  earth  (new,  G.  H.  D.). 
Modification  of  analysis  and  correction  (G.  H.  D.). 

Slight  alteration. 

Small  addition  (G.  H.  D.). 

Theory  of  elastic  tides  (new,  G.  H.  D.). 

§ 847  to  end.  Rigidity  of  earth  deduced  from  tidal  observations  (new,  G.H.D.) 

— old  § 847  to  end  entirely  omitted. 

Appendix  E.  Heat  of  the  Sun  (new). 

Size  of  atoms  (new). 

Tidal  friction  (new,  G.  H.  D.). 


§ 832'. 
§834. 
§835. 
§ 837. 
§ 840'. 


Appendix  F. 
Appendix  G. 


ERRATA. 


p.  79,  line  2 from  bottom,  for  (a)  read  (1). 
p.  81,  line  9 from  bottom,  for  (§  531)  read  (§  531  d). 
p.  82,  line  2 from  top,  for  (§  528)  read  (§  534  a). 
p.  82,  line  17  from  top,  for  (§  528)  read  (§  534  a). 

p.  96,  § 550,  insert  Gauss’s  investigations  here  referred  to  will  be  found  in  Vol.  V. 
of  his  collected  works,  p.  197,  in  a paper  entitled  “ Allgemeine  Lehr- 
satze  auf  die  im  verkelirten  Verhaltnisse  des  Quadrats  der  Entfernung 
wirkenden  Anziehungs-  und  Abstossuugs-Krafte;”  originally  published 
in  1839. 

p.  183,  line  10,  for  “ KSk”  read  “ ASX.” 


p.  4o9,  § 848,  foot-note.  It  appears  from  a communication  from  Major  Baird, 
B.E.,  that  the  erroneous  formula  referred  to  has  not  been  used  in  the 
reduction  of  the  Indian  Tidal  Observations  (March  20,  1883). 


p.  461.  Explanatory  Note  to  Appendix,  dele  last  sentence,  and  read  “ The 
marginal  notes  however  to  the  appendices  which  appeared  in  the  first 
edition  speak  as  at  the  date  of  issue  of  that  edition,  viz.  1867  ; in  the 
new  appendices  the  marginal  notes  are  now  added  for  the  first  time.  ” 

p.  497,  line  8 from  bottom,  for  “ 10  cent.”  read  “ 1°  cent.” 


p.  o0.,  instead  of  foot-note  substitute,  “I  find  that  M.  Loschmidt  had  preceded 
me  in  the  fourth  of  the  preceding  methods  of  estimating  the  size  of 
atoms  [Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Vienna  Acad.,  12  Oct.,  1865,  p.  3951.  He 
inds  the  diameter  of  a molecule  of  common  air  to  be  about  a ten- 
m on  of  a centimetre.  M.  Lippmann  has  also  given  a remarkably 
interesting  and  original  investigation  relating  to  the  size  of  atoms 
Comptes  Rendus,  Oct.  16th,  1882,  basing  his  argument  on  the  varia- 
ions  of  capillarity  under  electrification.  He  finds  that  the  thickness 
of  the  double  electric  layer,  according  to  Helmholtz’s  theory,  is  about 
a 3o-milhonth  of  a centimetre.”  W.  T.,  Dec.  13,  1882 


DIVISION  II. 

ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


CHAPTER  Y. 
INTRODUCTORY. 


438.  Until  we  know  thoroughly  the  nature  of  matter  and  Approxi- 
the  forces  which  produce  its  motions,  it  will  be  utterly  im-  SSJT 
possible  to  submit  to  mathematical  reasoning  the  exact  con-  SuSns. 
ditions  of  any  physical  question.  It  has  been  long  understood, 
however,  that  approximate  solutions  of  problems  in  the  ordinary 
branches  of  Natural  Philosophy  may  be  obtained  by  a species 
of  abstraction , or  rather  limitation  of  the  data , such  as  enables 
us  easily  to  solve  the  modified  form  of  the  question,  while  we 
are  well  assured  that  the  circumstances  (so  modified)  affect  the 
result  only  in  a superficial  manner. 


439.  Take,  for  instance,  the  very  simple  case  of  a crowbar 

employed  to  move  a heavy  mass.  The  accurate  mathematical 

investigation  of  the  action  would  involve  the  simultaneous 

treatment  of  the  motions  of  every  part  of  bar,  fulcrum,  and 

mass  raised  ; but  our  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  matter  and 

molecular  forces,  precludes  any  such  complete  treatment  of  the 
problem. 

It  is  a result  of  observation  that  the  particles  of  the  bar 

nearTv?!,*  retain  throughout  the  proces.^ 

nearly  the  same  relative  positions.  Hence  the  idea  of  solving 

VOL.  II.  fa 


1 


2 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[439. 


Approxi-  ^ instead  of  tlie  complete  but  infinitely  transcendent  problem, 
mentor  another,  in  reality  quite  different,  but  which,  while  amply  simple, 
questions,  obviously  leads  to  practically  the  same  results  so  far  as  con- 
cerns the  equilibrium  and  motions  of  the  bodies  as  a whole. 

440.  The  new  form  is  given  at  once  by  the  experimental 
result  of  the  trial.  Imagine  the  masses  involved  to  be  perfectly 
rigid,  that  is,  incapable  of  changing  form  or  dimensions.  Then 
the  infinite  series  of  forces,  really  acting,  may  be  left  out  of 
consideration ; so  that  the  mathematical  investigation  deals 
with  a finite  (and  generally  small)  number  of  forces  instead  of 
a practically  infinite  number.  Our  warrant  for  such  a substi- 
tution is  to  be  established  thus. 

441.  The  effects  of  the  intermolecular  forces  could  be  ex- 
hibited only  in  alterations  of  the  form  or  volume  of  the  masses 
involved.  But  as  these  (practically)  remain  almost  unchanged, 
the  forces  which  produce,  or  tend  to  produce,  them  may  be  left 
out  of  consideration.  Thus  we  are  enabled  to  investigate  the 
action  of  machinery  supposed  to  consist  of  separate  portions 
whose  form  and  dimensions  are  unalterable. 

Further  442.  If  we  go  a little  further  into  the  question,  we  find  that 
lZTima'  the  lever  bends,  some  parts  of  it  are  extended  and  others  com- 
pressed. This  would  lead  us  into  a very  seiious  and  difficult 
inquiry  if  we  had  to  take  account  of  the  whole  circumstances. 
But  (by  experience)  we  find  that  a sufficiently  accurate  solution 
of  this  more  formidable  case  of  the  problem  may  be  obtained 
by  supposing  (what  can  never  be  realized  in  practice)  the  mass 
to  be  homogeneous,  and  the  forces  consequent  on  a dilatation, 
compression,  or  distortion,  to  be  proportional  in  magnitude,  and 
opposed  in  direction,  to  these  deformations  respectively.  By 
this  further  assumption,  close  approximations  may  be  made  to 
the  vibrations  of  rods,  plates,  etc.,  as  well  as  to  the  statical 
effect  of  springs,  etc. 

443.  We  may  pursue  the  process  further.  Compression,  in 
general,  produces  heat,  and  extension,  cold.  The  elastic  forces 
of  the  material  are  thus  rendered  sensibly  different  from  what 
they  would  be  with  the  same  changes  of  bulk  and  shape,  but 


443.  J 


INTRODUCTORY. 


3 


with  no  change  of  temperature.  By  introducing  such  considera- 
tions, we  reach,  without  great  difficulty,  what  may  be  called 
a thud  approximation  to  the  solution  of  the  physical  problem 
considered. 

444.  We  might  next  introduce  the  conduction  of  the  heat, 
so  produced,  from  point  to  point  of  the  solid,  with  its  accom- 
panying modifications  of  elasticity,  and  so  on ; and  we  might 
then  consider  the  production  of  thermo-electric  currents,  which 
(as  we  shall  see)  are  always  developed  by  unequal  heating  in 
a mass  if  it  be  not  perfectly  homogeneous.  Enough,  however, 
has  been  said  to  show,  first,  our  utter  ignorance  as  to  the  true 
and  complete  solution  of  any  physical  question  by  the  only 
perfect  method,  that  of  the  consideration  of  the  circumstances 
which  affect  the  motion  of  every  portion,  separately,  of  each 
body  concerned;  and,  second,  the  practically  sufficient  manner 
in  which  practical  questions  may  be  attacked  by  limiting  their 
generality,  the  limitations  introduced  being  themselves  deduced 
from  experience,  and  being  therefore  Nature’s  own  solution  (to 
a less  or  greater  degree  of  accuracy)  of  the  infinite  additional 

number  of  equations  by  which  we  should  otherwise  have  been 
encumbered. 


445.  To  take  another  case  : in  the  consideration  of  the  pro- 
pagation of  waves  at  the  surface  of  a fluid,  it  is  impossible 
not  only  on  account  of  mathematical  difficulties,  but  on  account 
of  our  ignorance  of  what  matter  is,  and  what  forces  its  particles 
exert  on  each  other,  to  form  the  equations  which  would  oive 
us  the  separate  motion  of  each.  Our  first  approximation  to 
a solution,  and  one  sufficient  for  most  practical  purposes,  is  de- 

rom  the  consideration  of  the  motion  of  a homogeneous 
incompressi  le,  and  perfectly  plastic  mass;  a hypothetical  sub- 
stance which  may  have  no  existence  in  nature.  " 

446.  Looking  a little  more  closely,  we  find  that  the  actual 
o ion  differs  considerably  from  that  given  by  the  analytical 

ion  o the  restricted  problem,  and  we  introduce  further 
consn  erations,  such  as  the  compressibility  of  fluids,  their  inter- 
friction,  the  heat  generated  by  the  latter,  and  its  effects  in 
dilating  the  mass,  etc.  etc.  By  such  successive  corrections  we 

1—2 


Further 

approxima- 

tions. 


4 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[440. 


Further  attain,  at  length,  to  a mathematical  result  which  (at  all  events 
ttpproxmm-  ^ present  state  of  experimental  science)  agrees,  within  the 

limits  of  experimental  error,  with  observation. 

447.  It  would  be  easy  to  give  many  more  instances  sub- 
stantiating what  has  just  been  advanced,  but  it  seems  scarcely 
necessary  to  do  so.  We  may  therefore  at  once  say  that  there 
is  no  question  in  physical  science  which  can  be  completely  and 
accurately  investigated  by  mathematical  reasoning,  but  that 
there  are  different  degrees  of  approximation,  involving  assump- 
tions more  and  more  nearly  coincident  with  observation,  which 
may  be  arrived  at  in  the  solution  of  any  particular  question. 

u.  4 , 44Q  The  object  of  the  present  division  of  this  volume  is  to  deal 

d (vision with  the  first  and  second  of  these  approximations.  In  it  we  shall 
the  work.  ^ aq  solids  either  rigid,  i.e.,  unchangeable  in  form  and 

volume,  or  elastic  ; but  in  the  latter  case,  we  shall  assume  the 
law  connecting  a compression  or  a distortion  with  the  force 
which  causes  it,  to  have  a particular  form  deduced  from  experi- 
ment. And  we  shall  in  the  latter  case  neglect  the  thermal  or 
electric  effects  which  compression  or  distortion  generally  cause. 
We  shall  also  suppose  fluids,  whether  liquids  or  gases,  to  be 
either  incompressible  or  compressible  according  to  certain 
known  laws ; and  we  shall  omit  considerations  of  fluid  friction, 
although  we  admit  the  consideration  of  friction  between  solids. 
Fluids°will  therefore  be  supposed  perfect,  i.e.,  such  that  any  par- 
ticle may  be  moved  amongst  the  others  by  the  slightest  force. 


T.nws  of 
friction. 


449.  When  we  come  to  Properties  of  Matter  and  the  various 
onus  of  Energy,  we  shall  give  in  detail,  as  far  as  they  are  yet 
mown,  the  modifications  which  further  approximations  have 
ntroduced  into  the  previous  results. 

450.  The  laws  of  friction  between  solids  were  very  ably  in- 
restated  by  Coulomb  ; and,  as  we  shall  require  them  in  the 
succeeding  chapters,  we  give  a brief  summary  of  them  heie  , 
■eserving  the  more  careful  scrutiny  of  experimental  results  to 
nir  chapter  on  Properties  of  Matter. 

451.  To  produce  and  to  maintain  sliding  of  one  solid  body 
another  requires  a tangential  force  which  depends— (1)  upon 


4.51.] 


INTRODUCTORY". 


the  nature  of  the  bodies;  (2)  upon  their  polish,  or  the  species  and  Laws  of 
quantity  of  lubricant  which  may  have  been  applied  ; (3)  upon  the  f“ct1011' 
normal  pressure  between  them,  to  which  it  is  in  general  directly 
proportional.  It  does  not  (except  in  some  extreme  cases  where 
scratching  or  excessive  abrasion  takes  place)  depend  sensibly 
upon  the  area  of  the  surfaces  in  contact.  When  two  bodies  are 
pressed  together  without  being  caused  to  slide  one  on  another, 
the  force  which  prevents  sliding  is  called  Statical  Friction.  It 
is  capable  of  opposing  a tangential  resistance  to  motion  which 
may  be  of  any  amount  less  than  or  at  most  equal  to  /xR ; where 
R is  the  whole  normal  pressure  between  the  bodies ; and 
(which  depends  mainly  upon  the  nature  of  the  surfaces  in 
contact)  is  what  is  commonly  called  the  coefficient  of  Statical 
Friction.  This  coefficient  varies  greatly  with  the  circumstances, 
being  m some  cases  as  low  as  0-03,  in  others  as  high  as  0‘80. 

.Later,  we  shall  give  a table  of  its  values.  When  the  applied 
forces  are  insufficient  to  produce  motion,  the  whole  amount  of 
statical  friction  is  not  called  into  play ; its  amount  then  just 
reaches  what  is  sufficient  to  equilibrate  the  other  forces,  and 
its  direction  is  the  opposite  of  that  in  which  their  resultant 
tends  to  produce  motion. 

452.  W hen  the  statical  friction  has  been  overcome,  and 
sliding  is  produced,  experiment  shows  that  a force  of  friction 
continues  to  act,  opposing  the  motion;  that  this  force  of  Kinetic 
Friction  is  m most  cases  considerably  less  than  the  extreme 
force  of  static  friction  which  had  to  be  overcome  before  the 
sliding  commenced  ; that  it  too  is  sensibly  proportional  to  the 
noimal  pressure;  and  that  it  is  approximately  the  same  what- 
ever be  the  velocity  of  the  sliding. 

453.  In  the  following  Chapters  on  Abstract  Dynamics  we  con-  Rejection 
fine  ourselves  mainly  to  the  general  principles,  and  the  fundamen- 

tal [formulas  and  equations  of  the  mathematics  of  this  extensive  E!’** 
subject;  and,  neither  seeking  nor  avoiding  mathematical  exer- 
citations,  we  enter  on  special  problems  solely  with  a view  to  pos- 
sible usefulness  for  physical  science,  whether  in  the  way  of  the 
material  of  experimental  investigation,  or  for  illustrating  physical 
pi  in  ci  pies,  or  for  aiding  in  speculations  of  Natural  Philosophy 


CHAPTER  VI. 


Objects  of 
the  chapter. 


Conditions 
of  equili- 
brium of  a 
particle. 


Equili- 
brium of  a 
particle. 


STATICS  OF  A PARTICLE. — ATTRACTION. 

454.  We  naturally  divide  Statics  into  two  parts — the  equi- 
librium of  a particle,  and  that  of  a rigid  or  elastic  body  or 
system  of  particles  whether  solid  or  fluid.  In  a very  few  sec- 
tions we  shall  dispose  of  the  first  of  these  parts,  and  the  rest  of 
this  chapter  will  be  devoted  to  a digression  on  the  important 
subject  of  Attraction. 

455.  By  § 255,  forces  acting  at  the  same  point,  or  on  the 
same  material  particle,  are  to  be  compounded  by  the  same  laws 
as  velocities.  Hence,  evidently,  the  sum  of  their  components 
in  any  direction  must  vanish  if  there  is  equilibrium  ; and  there 
is  equilibrium  if  the  sums  of  the  components  in  each  of  three 
lines  not  in  one  plane  are  each  zero.  And  thence  the  necessary 
and  sufficient  mathematical  equations  of  equilibrium. 

Thus,  for  the  equilibrium  of  a material  particle,  it  is  necessary , 
and  sufficient,  that  the  (algebraic)  sums  of  the  components  of 
the  applied  forces,  resolved  in  any  three  rectangular  directions, 
should  vanish. 

If  P be  one  of  the  forces,  l,  m,  n its  direction-cosines,  we 
have 

21P=  0,  3»iP  = 0,  %nP  = 0. 

If  there  be  not  equilibrium,  suppose  It,  with  direction-cosines 
A,  ix,  v,  to  be  the  resultant  force.  If  reversed  in  direction,  it 
will,  with  the  other  forces,  produce  equilibrium.  Hence 

$IP-\R  = 0,  %mP  - fxR  — 0,  'ZnP-vR=  0. 


455.] 


STATICS. 


And 

while 


IP  - (ZIP)2  + (ZmP)2  + (ZuP)2, 

A.  [A 

ZIP  ~ 


ZmP 


v 

ZnP  ‘ 


456.  We  may  take  one  or  two  particular  cases  as  examples 
of  the  general  results  above.  Thus, 

(1)  If  the  particle  rest  on  a frictionless  curve,  the  com- 
ponent force  along  the  curve  must  vanish. 

li  x,  y,  z be  the  co-ordinates  of  the  point  of  the  curve  at  which 
the  particle  rests,  we  have  evidently 


ZP 


os 


dx  dii  dz 
+ m -f-  + n 
ds  da 


= 0. 


When  P,  l,  m,  n are  given  in  terms  of  x,  y,  z,  this,  with  the  tivo 

equations  to  the  curve,  determines  the  position  of  equilibrum. 

/ 

(2)  If  the  curve  be  frictional,  the  resultant  force  along  it 
must  be  balanced  by  the  friction. 

If  F be  the  friction,  the  condition  is 

x „ / dx  dy  dz\  _ . 

ZP  (I  — +vi-d  +n-)-  F=  0. 

\ ds  ds  dsj 

This  gives  the  amount  of  friction  which  will  be  called  into  play; 
and  equilibrium  will  subsist  until,  as  a limit,  the  friction  is  y times 
the  normal  pressure  on  the  curve.  But  the  normal  pressure  is 


ZP 


dz 


mds~n  t) 


2 

) + 


( dx  dz\a  [ dy  cfa:\2)i 
\ndi~lds)  +(lTs-mn))  ■ 


Hence,  the  limiting  positions,  between  which  equilibrium  is  pos- 
sible, are  given  by  the  two  equations  to  the  curve,  combined  with 

(3)  If  the  particle  rest  on  a.  smooth  surface,  the  resultant 

of  the  applied  forces  must  evidently  be  perpendicular  to  the 
surface. 

If  <f)(x,  y,  z)  = 0 be  the  equation  of  the  surface,  we  must  there- 
fore have 


d(f> 

dx 

WJ 


d<f> 

ZmP 


d(f> 

dz 

ZnP  1 


and  these  three  equations  determine  the  position  of  equilibrium. 


Equili- 
brium of  a 
particle. 


8 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[456. 


Equili- 
brium of  a 
particle. 


(4)  If  it  rest  on  a rough  surface,  friction  will  be  called  into 
play,  resisting  motion  along  the  surface ; and  there  will  be 
equilibrium  at  any  point  within  a certain  boundary,  determined 
by  the  condition  that  at  it  the  friction  is  /a  times  the  normal 
pressure  on  the  surface,  while  within  it  the  friction  bears  a less 
ratio  to  the  normal  pressure.  When  the  only  applied  force  is 
gravity,  we  have  a very  simple  result,  which  is  often  practically 
useful.  Let  0 be  the  angle  between  the  normal  to  the  surface 
and  the  vertical  at  any  point ; the  normal  pressure  on  the  sur- 
face is  evidently  W cos0,  where  W is  the  weight  of  the  particle; 
and  the  resolved  part  of  the  weight  parallel  to  the  surface, 
which  must  of  course  be  balanced  by  the  friction,  is  W sin#. 
In  the  limiting  position,  when  sliding  is  just  about  to  com- 
mence, the  greatest  possible  amount  of  statical  friction  is  called 
into  play,  and  we  have 

W sin  6 = g W cos  0, 


Angle  of 
repose. 


or  tan  0 — ii. 

The  value  of  0 thus  found  is  called  the  Angle  of  Repose. 

Let  c}>  (x,  y , z)  = 0 be  the  surface : P,  with  direction-cosines 
l,  m,  n,  the  resultant  of  the  applied  forces.  The  normal  pressure  is 

, dch  dd>  dd> 
l — - + m -7-  + n -y- 
dx  dy  dz 


■v/ffiHs) 


+ 


dj>  v ‘ 

dz) 


Attraction. 


The  resolyed  part  of  P parallel  to  the  surface  is 


Hence,  for  the  boundary  of  the  portion  of  the  surface  within 
which  equilibrium  is  possible,  we  have  the  additional  equation 


cld)  , dip 

nTx~lTz 


dtp  dip  dipY 
dx  + M dij  + U dz) 


457.  A most  important  case  of  the  composition  of  forces 
acting  at  one  point  is  furnished  by  the  consideration  of  the 
attraction  of  a body  of  any  form  upon  a material  particle  any- 


STATICS. 


9 


457.] 


where  situated.  Experiment  has  shown  that  the  attraction  Attraction, 
exerted  by  any  portion  of  matter  upon  another  is  not  modified 
by  the  proximity,  or  even  by  the  interposition,  of  other 
matter ; and  thus  the  attraction  of  a body  on  a particle  is  the 
resultant  of  the  attractions  exerted  by  its  several  parts.  To 
treatises  on  applied  mathematics  we  must  refer  for  the  examina- 
tion of  the  consequences,  often  very  curious,  of  various  laws  of 
attraction;  but,  dealing  with  Natural  Philosophy,  we  confine 
ourselves  mainly,  (and  except  where  we  give  the  mathematics  of 
Laplace’s  beautiful  and  instructive  and  physically  important, 
though  unreal,  theory  of  capillary  attraction,)  to  the  law  of  the 
inverse  square  of  the  distance  which  Newton  discovered  for  gra- 
vitation. This,  indeed,  furnishes  us  with  an  ample  supply 
of  most  interesting  as  well  as  useful  results. 


458.  The  law,  which  (as  a property  of  matter)  is  to  be  care-  Universal 
fully  considered  in  the  next  proposed  Division  of  this  Treatise,  attraction, 
may  be  thus  enunciated. 

Every  particle  of  matter  in  the  universe  attracts  every  other 
particle,  with  a force  whose  direction  is  that  of  the  line  joining 
the  two,  and  ivliose  magnitude  is  directly  as  the  product  of  their 
masses,  and  inversely  as  the  square  of  their  distance  from  each 
other. 

Experiment  shows  (as  will  be  seen  further  on)  that  the  same 
law  holds  for  electric  and  magnetic  attractions  under  properly 
defined  conditions. 

459.  For  the  special  applications  of  Statical  principles  to  Sp  ecial  unit 
which  we  proceed,  it  will  be  convenient  to  use  a special  unit  ofofSer!y 
mass,  or  quantity  of  matter,  and  corresponding  units  for  the 
measurement  of  electricity  and  magnetism. 

Ihus  if,  in  accordance  with  the  physical  law  enunciated  in 
§ 458,  we  take  as  the  expression  for  the  forces  exerted  on  each 
other  by  masses  M and  m,  at  distance  I), 

Mm 

IF’ 

it  is  obvious  that  our  unit  force  is  the  mutual  attraction  of  two 
units  of  mass  placed  at  unit  of  distance  from  each  other. 


10 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Linear, 
surface,  and 
volume, 
densities. 


Electric  and 
magnetic 
reckonings 
of  quantity. 


Positive  and 
negative 
masses  ad- 
mitted in 
abstract 
theory  of 
attraction. 


Uniform 
spherical 
shell.  At- 
traction on 
internal 
point. 


[460. 


460.  It  is  convenient  for  many  applications  to  speak  of  the 
density  of  a distribution  of  matter,  electricity,  etc.,  along  a line, 
over  a surface,  or  through  a volume. 

Here  line-density  = quantity  of  matter  per  unit  of  length, 
surface-density  = „ ,,  ,,  area, 

volume-density  = ,,  ,,  ,,  volume. 


461.  In  applying  the  succeeding  investigations  to  electricity 
or  magnetism,  it  is  only  necessary  to  premise  that  M and  m stand 
for  quantities  of  free  electricity  or  magnetism,  whatever  these 
may  be,  and  that  here  the  idea  of  mass  as  depending  on  inertia 

Mm 

is  not  necessarily  involved.  The  formula  will  still  repre- 
sent the  mutual  action,  if  we  take  as  unit  of  imaginary  electric 
or  magnetic  matter,  such  a quantity  as  exerts  unit  force  on  an 
equal  quantity  at  unit  distance.  Here,  however,  one  or  both 
of  M,  m may  be  negative ; and,  as  in  these  applications  like 
kinds  repel  each  other,  the  mutual  action  will  be  attraction 
or  repulsion,  according  as  its  sign  is  negative  or  positive.  With 
these  provisos,  the  following  theory  is  applicable  to  any  of  the 
above-mentioned  classes  of  forces.  We  commence  with  a few 
simple  cases  which  can  be  completely  treated  by  means  of  ele- 
mentary geometry. 


462.  If  the  different  points  of  a spherical  surface  attract 
equally  with  forces  varying  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  dis- 
tances, a particle  placed  within  the  surface  is  not  attracted  in  any 


direction. 

Let  HIKL  be  the  spherical  surface,  and  P the  particle 
within  it.  Let  two  lines  HK,  I L,  intercepting  very  small  arcs 

HI,  KL,  be  drawn  through  P;  then, 
on  account  of  the  similar  triangles 
HP  I,  K PL,  those  arcs  will  be  propor- 
tional to  the  distances  HP,  IP ; and 
any  small  elements  of  the  spherical 
surface  at  III  and  KL,  each  bounded 
all  round  by  straight  hues  passing 
through  P [and  very  nearly  coincid- 
ing with  I1K],  will  be  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  those  lines. 


STATICS. 


11 


462.] 

Hence  the  forces  exercised  by  the  matter  of  these  elements  Uniform 
on  the  particle  P are  equal;  for  they  are  as  the  quantities  8"elL.  At- 
of  matter  directly,  and  the  squares  of  the  distances,  inversely ; 
and  these  two  ratios  compounded  give  that  of  equality. 

The  attractions  therefore,  being  equal  and  opposite,  balance  one 
another : and  a similar  proof  shows  that  the  attractions  due  to 
all  parts  of  the  whole  spherical  surface  are  balanced  by  contrary 
attractions.  Hence  the  particle  P is  not  urged  in  any  direc- 
tion by  these  attractions. 

463.  The  division  of  a spherical  surface  into  infinitely  small  Digression 
elements  will  frequently  occur  in  the  investigations  which  sion  of  sur- 
follow  : and  Newton’s  method,  described  in  the  preceding  de-  elements? 
monstration,  in  which  the  division  is  effected  in  such  a manner 

that  all  the  parts  may  be  taken  together  in  pairs  of  opposite 
elements  with  reference  to  an  internal  point;  besides  other 
methods  deduced  from  it,  suitable  to  the  special  problems  to  be 
examined ; will  be  repeatedly  employed.  The  present  digres- 
sion, in  which  some  definitions  and  elementary  geometrical 
propositions  regarding  this  subject  are  laid  down,  will  simplify 
the  subsequent  demonstrations,  both  by  enabling  us,  through 
the  use  of  convenient  terms,  to  avoid  circumlocution,  and  by 
affording  us  convenient  means  of  reference  for  elementary 
piinciples,  regarding  which  repeated  explanations  might  other- 
wise be  necessary. 

464.  If  a straight  line  which  constantly  passes  through  a Expiana- 
fixed  point  be  moved  in  any  manner,  it  is  said  to  describe,  or 

geneiate,  a conical  surface  of  which  the  fixed  point  is  the  conesdins 
vertex. 

. ^ genei'a-ting  line  be  carried  from  a given  position  con- 
tinuously through  any  series  of  positions,  no  two  of  which 
coincide,  till  it  is  brought  back  to  the  first,  the  entire  line  on 
the  two  sides  of  the  fixed  point  will  generate  a complete  conical 
surface,  consisting  of  two  sheets,  which  are  called  vertical  or 
opposite  cones.  Thus  the  elements  HI  and  KL,  described  in 
Newton’s  demonstration  given  above,  may  be  considered  as  bein<r 
cut  from  the  spherical  surface  by  two  opposite  cones  having  P 
for  their  common  vertex. 


12 


A BSTR ACT  DYN  A M ICS. 


[40 


)J. 


The  solid 
angle  of  a 
cone,  or  of 
a complete 
conical 
surface. 


465.  If  any  number  of  spheres  be  described  from  the  ver- 
tex of  a cone  as  centre,  the  segments  cut  from  the  concentric 
spherical  surfaces  will  be  similar,  and  their  areas  will  be  as  the 
squares  of  the  radii.  The  quotient  obtained  by  dividing  the 
area  of  one  of  these  segments  by  the  square  of  the  radius  of  the 
spherical  surface  from  which  it  is  cut,  is  taken  as  the  measure 
of  the  solid  angle  of  the  cone.  The  segments  of  the  same 
spherical  surfaces  made  by  the  opposite  cone,  are  respectively 
equal  and  similar  to  the  former  (but  “ perverted”).  Hence  the 
solid  angles  of  two  vertical  or  opposite  cones  are  equal : either 
may  be  taken  as  the  solid  angle  of  the  complete  conical  surface 
of  which  the  opposite  cones  are  the  two  sheets. 


Sum  of  ail  466.  Since  the  area  of  a spherical  surface  is  equal  to  the 
angles  square  of  its  radius  multiplied  by  47t,  it  follows  that  the  sum  of 
point=47r.  the  solid  angles  of  all  the  distinct  cones  which  can  be  described 
with  a given  point  as  vertex,  is  equal  to  47t. 


Sum  of  the  467.  The  solid  angles  of  vertical  or  opposite  cones  being 
of  ail  theles  equal,  we  may  infer  from  what  precedes  that  the  sum  of  the 
comcafsur-  solid  angles  of  all  the  complete  conical  surfaces  which  can  be 
faces — -a-.  (jescrj|;)e(j  without  mutual  intersection,  with  a given  point  as 
vertex,  is  equal  to  27 r. 


Solid  angle 
subtended 
at  a point 
by  a 

terminated 

surface. 


468.  The  solid  angle  subtended  at  a point  by  a superficial . 
area  of  any  kind,  is  the  solid  angle  of  the  cone  generated  by  a 
straight  line  passing  through  the  point,  and  carried  entirely 
round  the  boundary  of  the  area. 


Orthogonal  469.  A very  small  cone,  that  is,  a cone  such  that  any  two 
sections  of  a positions  of  the  generating  line  contain  but  a veiy  small  angle, 
small  cone.  .g  ga^  tQ  ke  cut  at  right  angles,  or  orthogonally,  by  a spherical 

surface  described  from  its  vertex  as  centre,  or  by  any  surface, 
whether  plane  or  curved,  which  touches  the  spherical  surface  at 
the  part  where  the  cone  is  cut  by  it. 

A very  small  cone  is  said  to  be  cut  obliquely,  when  the  section 
is  inclined  at  any  finite  angle  to  an  orthogonal  section  ; and  this 
angle  of  inclination  is  called  the  obliquity  of  the  section. 

The  area  of  an  orthogonal  section  of  a very  small  cone  is  equal 


STATICS. 


13 


4G9.] 


to  the  area  of  an  oblique  section  in  the  same  position,  multiplied  Orthogormi 

1 . . and  oblique 

by  the  cosine  of  the  obliquity.  sections  of  a 

j a */  8iHfl.ll  cone. 

Hence  the  area  of  an  oblique  section  of  a small  cone  is  equal 
to  the  quotient  obtained  by  dividing  the  product  of  the  square 
of  its  distance  from  the  vertex,  into  the  solid  angle,  by  the 
cosine  of  the  obliquity. 


470.  Let  E denote  the  area  of  a very  small  element  of  a Area  of  sog- 
spherical  surface  at  the  point  E (that  is  to  say,  an  element  from  spher- 

^ * ' * icfll  surface 

every  part  of  which  is  very  near  the  point  E ),  let  w denote  by  small 
the  solid  angle  subtended  by  E at  any  point  P,  and  let  PE, 
produced  if  necessary,  meet  the  surface  again  in  E' : then,  a 
denoting  the  radius  of  the  spherical  surface,  we  have 

„ _ 2 a . (i) . PE2 

L = EE'  • 


For,  the  obliquity7-  of  the  element  E , considered  as  a section 
of  the  cone  of  which  P is  the  vertex  and 
the  element  E a section ; being  the  angle 
between  the  given  spherical  surface  and 
another  described  from  P as  centre,  with 
PE  as  radius ; is  equal  to  the  angle  be- 
tween the  radii,  EP  and  EC,  of  the  two 
spheres.  Hence,  by  considering  the  iso- 
sceles triangle  ECE',  we  find  that  the  cosine  of  the  obliquity 
. . \EE'  EE'  , 

is  equal  to  oi  to  ^ > and  we  arrive  at  the  preceding 

expression  for  E. 


471.  J he  attraction  of  a uniform  spherical  surface  on  an  uniform 

external  point  is  the  same  as  if  the  whole  mass  were  collected  at  finCAt- 

the  Centre*.  traction  on 

external 

point. 

Tins  theorem,  which  is  more  comprehensive  than  that  of  Newton  in  his 
fust  proposition  regarding  attraction  on  an  external  point  (Prop.  LXXI.),  is 
fully  established  as  a corollary  to  a subsequent  proposition  (Prop.  LXXIII. 
cor.  2).  If  we  had  considered  the  proportion  of  the  forces  exerted  upon  two 
external  points  at  different  distances,  instead  of,  as  in  the  text,  investigating 
the  absolute  force  on  one  point,  and  if  besides  we  had  taken  together  all  tlio 
pairs  of  elements  which  would  constitute  two  narrow  annular  portions  of  the 
surface,  in  planes  perpendicular  to  PC,  the  theorem  and  its  demonstration 
would  have  coincided  precisely  with  Prop.  LXXI.  of  the  Principia. 


14 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Uniform 
spherical 
shell.  At- 
traction on 
external 
point. 


— [471. 

Let  P be  the  external  point,  C the  centre  of  the  sphere,  and 

CAP  a straight  line  cutting 
the  spherical  surface  in  A. 
Take  I in  CP , so  that  CP, 
CA,  Cl  may  he  continual  pro- 
portionals, and  let  the  whole 
spherical  surface  be  divided 
into  pairs  of  opposite  elements 
with  reference  to  the  point  I. 
Let  II  and  H'  denote  the  magnitudes  of  a pair  of  such 
elements,  situated  respectively  at  the  extremities  of  a chord 
HH' and  let  to  denote  the  magnitude  of  the  solid  angle  sub- 
tended by  either  of  these  elements  at  the  point  I. 

We  have  (§  469), 

IH 2 , cn.IH'2 


H = 


&) 


cos  CHI  ’ 


and  H'  = 


cos  CH I 


Hence,  if  p denote  the  density  of  the  surface,  the  attractions  of 
the  two  elements  II  and  H'  on  P are  respectively 

« IH2  ft)  IH'2 

p cos  CHI  PH2'  am  p cos  CH'  I ‘PH2’ 

Now  the  two  triangles  PCH,  HGI  have  a common  angle  at  C, 
and,  since  PC  : CH  ::  CH  : Cl,  the  sides  about  this  angle  are 
proportional.  Hence  the  triangles  are  similar;  so  that  the 
angles  CPH  and  CHI  are  equal,  and 

IH  CH  a 
HP  ~ CP  ~ CP  ' 

In  the  same  way  it  may  be  proved,  by  considering  the  triangles 
PCH',  II  Cl,  that  the  angles  CPH'  and  CH  I are  equal,  and 
that 

IH'  CH'  a 
HP  ~ CP  ~ CP’ 

Hence  the  expressions  for  the  attractions  of  the  elements  H 
and  H'  on  P become 

w a2  , ft)  d 2 

p cos  CHIUF2’  P cos  OPT  I ’ UP2  * 

which  are  equal,  since  the  triangle  HCH’  is  isosceles;  and,  for 


471.] 


STATICS. 


15 


the  same  reason,  the  angles  CPU,  CPU',  which  have  been  uniform 
proved  to  be  respectively  equal  to  the  angles  CHI,  CH'I , are  “Eefrtt- 
equal.  We  infer  that  the  resultant  of  the  forces  due  to  the  S fm™ 
two  elements  is  in  the  direction  PC,  and  is  equal  to  point# 


To  find  the  total  force  on  P,  we  must  take  the  sum  of  all  the 
fuces  along  PC  due  to  the  pairs  of  opposite  elements;  and, 
since  the  multiplier  of  u>  is  the  same  for  each  pair,  we  must 
add  all  the  values  of  w,  and  we  therefore  obtain  (§  4G7),  for  the 
required  resultant, 

47 rpol 
UPr‘ 

The  numerator  of  this  expression  ; being  the  product  of  the 
density,  into  the  area  of  the  spherical  surface ; is  equal  to  the 
whole  mass ; and  therefore  the  force  on  P is  the  same  as  if  the 
whole  mass  were  collected  at  C. 

Cor.  The  force  on  an  external  point,  infinitely  near  the  surface 
is  equal  to  4ttp,  and  is  in  the  direction  of  a normal  at  the  point! 
The  force  on  an  internal  point,  however  near  the  surface,  is,  by  a 
preceding  proposition,  nil. 


472.  Let  a be  the  area  of  an  infinite’y  small  element  of  the 
suiface  at  any  point  P,  and  at  any  other 
point  II  of  the  surface  let  a small  element 
subtending  a solid  angle  co,  at  P,  be  taken. 

The  area  of  this  element  will  be  equal  to 
« . PIP 
co ITCTlP' 

and  therefore  the  attraction  along  IIP, 
which  it  exerts  on  the  element  a at P,  will 
be  equal  to 


Attraction 
on  an  ele- 
ment of  the 
surface. 


pw.  per  a)  2 

cosCHP • or  ^Cirpp  a ■ 

Now  the  total  attraction  on  the  element  at  P is  in  the  direction 

U ; the  component  in  this  direction  of  the  attraction  due  to 
the  element  II,  is 


w . pV ; 


16 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[472. 


Attraction  and,  since  all  the  cones  corresponding  to  the  different  elements 
mont  of  the  of  the  spherical  surface  lie  on  the  same  side  of  the  tangent 
plane  at  P,  we  deduce,  for  the  resultant  attraction  on  the 
element  a, 

27 rp2<r. 

From  the  corollary  to  the  preceding  proposition,  it  follows  that 
this  attraction  is  half  the  force  which  would  be  exerted  on  an 
external  point,  possessing  the  same  quantity  of  matter  as  the 
element  cr,  and  placed  infinitely  near  the  surface. 

473.  In  some  of  the  most  important  elementary  problems 
of  the  theory  of  electricity,  spherical  surfaces  with  densities 
varying  inversely  as  the  cubes  of  distances  fiom  eccentnc  points 
occur : and  it  is  of  fundamental  importance  to  find  the  attrac- 
tion of  such  a shell  on  an  internal  or  external  point.  This  may 
be  done  synthetically  as  follows ; the  investigation  being,  as  we 
shall  see  below,  virtually  the  same  as  that  of  § 462,  or  § 471. 

Attraction  474.  Let  us  first  consider  the  case  in  which  the  given  point 
spherical  S and  the  attracted  point  P are  separated  by  the  spherical  sur-  ! 
Sdfthe  face.  The  two  figures  represent  the  varieties  of  this  case  in 
JSteRn-  which,  the  point  8 being  without  the  sphere,  P is  within  ; and, 
Ihe'cibeof  S being  within,  the  attracted  point  is  external.  The  same  de- 
from  agiven  monstration  is  applicable  literally  with  reference  to  the  two 
pomt"  figures;  but,  to  avoid  the  consideration  of  negative  quan- 
tities, some  of  the  expressions  may  be  conveniently  modified  to 
suit  the  second  figure.  In  such  instances  the  two  expressions 
are  given  in  a double  line,  the  upper  being  that  which  is  most 
convenient  for  the  first  figure,  and  the  lower  for  the  second. 

Let  the  radius  of  the  sphere  be  denoted  by  a,  and  let  / be 
the  distance  of  8 from  C,  the  centre  of  the  sphere  (not  repre- 
sented in  the  figures).  _ 

Join  SP  and  take  T in  this  line  (or  its  continuation)  so  that 

(fig.  1)  SP  . ST=f*-a?. 

(fig.  2)  SP.TS  = a*-f*. 

Through  T draw  any  line  cutting  the  spherical  surface  at  A,  K . 
Join  SK,  SIC,  and  let  the  lines  so  drawn  cut  the  spherica 

surface  again  in  E,  E . 


474.] 


STATICS. 


17 


Let  the  whole  .spherical  surface  be  divided  into  pairs  of  Attraction 
opposite  elements  with  reference  to  the  point  T.  Let  K and  spherical 
K'  be  a pair  of  such  elements  situated  at  the  extremities  of  the  which  the 
chord  KK\  and  subtending  the  solid  angle  o>  at  the  point  T : varies  in- 
ami  let  elements  i^and  E'  be  taken  subtending  at  S the  same  cube  of 
solid  angles  respectively  as  the  elements  K and  K'.  Bv  this  fro,naKiven 

t • i i i i J point. 

means  we  may  divide  the  whole  spherical  surface  into  pairs  of 
conjugate  elements,  E,  E',  since  it  is  easily  seen  that  when  we 
have  taken  every  pair  of  elements,  K,  K\  the  whole  surface 


will  have  been  exhausted,  without  repetition,  by  the  deduced 
elements,  E,  E'.  Hence  the  attraction  on  P will  be  the 
final  resultant  of  the  attractions  of  all  the  pairs  of  elements 
E,  E\  ’ 

Now  if  p be  the  surface  density  at  E,  and  if  F denote  the 
attraction  of  the  element  E on  P,  we  have 

E=EjJ? 

EP '• 

i According  to  the  given  law  of  density  we  shall  have 

A 

P~  SE3) 

[where  A is  a constant.  Again,  since  SEE  is  equally  inclined 
to  the  spherical  surface  at  the  two  points  of  intersection,  we 

have  E = K — ^ aco  • TK2 

SIC'  SIC  • KIC  ; 

and  hence 


SE 2 2 aw  . TK2 


F = 


SE3  • SIC 


KK 


El> 


A. 


2 a 


TIC 


ICE"  SE . SJC  TEP* 


irfi  ■ (O. 


VOL.  II. 


2 


18 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[474. 


Attraction 
of  a 

spherical 
surface  of 
which  tho 
density 
varies  in- 
versely as 
the  cube  of 
the  distance 
from  a given 
point. 


Now,  by  considering  the  great  circle  in  which  the  sphere  is  cut 
by  a plane  through  the  line  SK,  we  find  that 

(fig.  1)  SIC . SE  =/2  — cl2, 

(fig.  2)  KS . SE  = a2  —f2, 

and  hence  SK.  SE  = SP.  ST,  from  which  we  infer  that  the  tri- 
angles KST,  PSE  are  similar;  so  that  TIC  : SK  ::  PE  : SP. 

TIP  _ 1 

Hence  SK.PE'1  SP2  ’ 

and  the  expression  for  F becomes 

2 a 1 


F=\. 


M. 


KK  ‘ SE.SP2 

Modifying  this  by  preceding  expressions  we  have 

. „ 2 CL  <0  q TT 

(fig.  1 )F=x-KK'-JJFE^YSP2'b’ 


. _ 2 a 

(fig.  2)  F=  A . 


(0 


, . ICS. 


r • (a2  -yfsp2 

Similarly,  if  F'  denote  the  attraction  of  E'  on  P,  we  have 

2a  Ci)  q jr, 

(fig.  1 )K  =^^'-(J^Ta*)SF'h  ’ 


Za  Ci)  Tf,  q 

(fig.  2 )F  =\^.-^rrjYsP'K  ' 

Now  in  the  triangles  which  have  been  shown  to  be  similar,  the 
angles  TKS,  EPS  are  equal;  and  the  same  may  be  proved  ot 
the  angles  TICS,  E'  PS.  Hence  the  two  sides  SK,  bh  ol  the 
triangle  ICSIC  are  inclined  to  the  third  at  the  same  angles 
a “o  e between  the  line  PS  and  directions  PE,  PE'  of  the  two 
forces  on  the  point  P;  and  the  sides  SK.  SK'  are  to  one 
another  as  the  forces,  F,  F',  in  the  directions  PE 
follows,  by  “the  triangle  of  forces,”  that  the  resultant  of  F and, 
r is  along  PS,  and  that  it  bears  to  the  component  forces  the 
same  ratios  as  the  side  ICK  of  the  triangle  bears  to  the  other 
two  sides.  Hence  the  resultant  force  due  to  the  two  elemen 
E and  E'  on  the  point  P,  is  towards  S,  and  is  equal  to 

KK  • {f^yrsp^  • KK>>  or  ■ 


A. 


474.] 


STATICS. 


19 


The  total  resultant  force  will  consequently  be  towards  S 
we  find,  by  summation  (§  4G7)  for  its  magnitude, 


and 


X . 4<Tra 
(/*  ~ a2)  SP*  ' 

Hence  we  infer  that  the  resultant  force  at  any  point  P, 
separated  from  S by  the  spherical  surface,  is  the  same  as  if  a 

quantity  of  matter  equal  to  were  concentrated  at  the 

J ~ a 

point  S. 


475.  To  find  the  attraction  when  S and  P are  either  both 
without  or  both  within  the  spherical  surface. 

Take  in  CS,  or  in  CS  produced  through  S,  a point  Slt  such 
i that  CS . CSX  = a2. 

Then,  by  a well-known  geometrical  theorem,  if  E be  any  point 
on  the  spherical  surface,  we  have 


Hence  we  have 


SE  _f 
StE~  a • 


X _ Xa* 
SE3~fr7S1Ea’ 

i Hence,  p being  the  surface-density  at  E,  we  have 


Xa3 


P = 


/l  = Jb_ 

S,E3  S^E*  ’ 


if  x=^3 

1 r ' 


2—2 


Attraction 
of  a 

spherical 
s urface  of 
which  the 
density 
varies  in- 
versely as 
the  cube  of 
the  distance 
frotn  a given 
point. 


20 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[475. 


Attraction 
of  a 

spherical 
surface  of 


of  matter  equal  to  were  concentrated  at  that  point; 


SB,  f being  taken  to  denote  C8r  If  for  /,  and  X,  we  substitute 

density  J 1 ° „ ^ * 


their  values,  £ and  ^ , we  have  the  modified  expression 

the  cube  of  T J 

the  distance  J 


the  distance 
from  a given 
point. 


\j  . 47 ra 


an 
point. 


a-~r 

for  the  quantity  of  matter  which  we  must  conceive  to  be  col- 
lected  at  S1. 

uninsuiat-  476.  If  a spherical  surface  be  electrified  in  such  a way 
*dXT,  that  the  electrical  density  varies  inversely  as  the  cube  ot  t 
‘""Si”'  distance  from  an  internal  point  8,  or  from  the  correspond. 

external  point  S„  it  will  attract  any  external  point,  a t its 
whole  electricity  were  concentrated  at  8,  and  any  internal  point 
as  if  a quantity  of  electricity  greater  than  its  own  in  era 
of  a to  f were  concentrated  at  Sv 

J ^ 

Let  the  density  at  E be  denoted,  as  before,  by  ggi-  Then’ 

if  we  consider  two  opposite  elements  at  E and  E' , wl“h  sl'^ 
tend  a solid  angle  « at  the  point  8 the  areas  of  these 

CO  . 2 a SE 2 A (O  .jla . SE__  ^ quantity  of  elec- 
elements  being — ana  ztt?'  ’ 1 


eet  “““  EE> 

tricity  which  they  possess  will  be 

\.2a  . w f 1 , 1 

SE'J  SE  .SE 


EE'  \SE 

Now  SE  SE'  is  constant  (Euc.  III.  35)  and  its  value  is  a - / • 
Hence,  by  i summation,  we  find  for  the  total  quantity  of  elec- 

tricity  on  the  spherical’ surface 

A, . 47 ra 

~j2  * 

Hence  if  this  be  denoted  by  m,  the  expressions  in  the  preml- 
iug  paragraphs,  for  the  quantities  of  electricity  wWhwe  must 

“ respectively 


in. 


and 


a 


m. 


STATICS. 


21 


477.] 

477.  The  direct  analytical  solution  of  such  problems  con- 
sists in  the  expression,  by  § 455,  of  the  three  components  of 
the  whole  attraction  as  the  sums  of  its  separate  parts  due  to  the 
several  particles  of  the  attracting  body ; the  transformation,  by 
the  usual  methods,  of  these  sums  into  definite  integrals;  and  the 
evaluation  of  the  latter.  This  is,  in  general,  inferior  in  elegance 
and  simplicity  to  the  less  direct  mode  of  solution  depending 
upon  the  determination  of  the  potential  energy  of  the  attracted 
particle  with  reference  to  the  forces  exerted  upon  it  by  the 
attracting  body,  a method  which  we  shall  presently  develop 
with  peculiar  care,  as  being  of  incalculable  value  in  the  theories 
of  Electricity  and  Magnetism  as  well  as  in  -that  of  Gravitation. 
But  before  we  proceed  to  it,  we  give  some  instances  of  the 
direct  method,  beginning  with  the  case  of  a spherical  shell. 


(a)  Let  P be  the  attracted  point,  0 the  centre  of  the  shell. 
Let  any  plane  perpendicular  to  OP  cut  it  in  N,  and  the  sphere 
in  the  small  circle  Qli. 

Let  QOP-O,  OQ  = a, 

OP  = D.  Then  as  the 
whole  attraction  is  evi- 
dently along  PO,  we 
may  at  once  resolve 
the  parts  of  it  in  that 
direction.  The  circular 
hand  corresponding  to 
6,  6 +d6  has  for  area 
2ira2  sin  Odd.  Hence  if  M be  the  mass  of  the  shell,  the  component 
attraction  of  the  band  on  P , along  PO,  is 


M . PN 

~2  sin  QdO  . ~jJq3  > and  PQ 2 = a2  + D2  - 2aD  cos  6. 
Hence  if  PQ  = x,  xdx  — aD  sin  OdO. 

Also  PN  - D - a cos  0 = — ; 


hence  the  attraction  of  the  band  is 


Direct  ana- 
lytical cal- 
culation of 
attractions. 


Uniform 

spherical 

shell. 


22 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[477 


Uniform 

spherical 

shell. 


Uniform 
circular 
disc,  on 
particle  in 
its  axis. 


Cylinder  on 
particle  in 
axis. 


This  divides  itself,  on  integration,  into  two  cases, 

(1)  P external,  i.e.,  D > a.  Here  the  limits  of  x are  D -a 


. . M 

and  D + a,  and  the  attraction  is 

before. 


x 

a 


I)2  - a 2‘ 


ax 


D+a 

D-a 


M 

D" 


as 


(2)  P internal,  i.e.,  D < a.  Here  the  limits  are  a-D  and 


M 


a+  D,  and  the  attraction  is 


X a8  - D 2‘ 

— I 

a ax 


a+D 


= 0. 


a-D 


(b)  A useful  case  is  that  of  the  attraction  of  a circular  plate 
of  uniform  surface  density  on  a point  in  a line  through  its  centre, 
and  perpendicular  to  its  plane. 

If  a be  the  radius  of  the  plate,  h the  distance  of  the  point  from 
it,  and  M its  mass,  the  attraction  (which  is  evidently  in  a direc- 
tion perpendicular  to  the  plate)  is  easily  seen  to  be 

M fa  2hrdr  _ 2 M 1 1 ^ j 

~a2  Jo  (, h 3 + r2)$  ~ a3  l Jh2  + a*>  * 


If  p denote  the  surface  density  of  the  plate,  this  becomes 


2irp 


which,  for  an  infinite  plate,  becomes 

27rp. 

From  the  preceding  formula  many  useful  results  may  easily 
be  deduced  : thus, 

(c)  A uniform  cylindev  of  length  l,  and  diameter  a,  attracts 
a point  in  its  axis  at  a distance  x from  the  nearest  end  with  a 

force 

2irp  j 'X+l  dh  = 27rP  {l-J(x  + iy  + a2  + Jxs  + a8}. 

When  the  cylinder  is  of  infinite  length  (in  one  direction)  the 
attraction  is  therefore 

2t rp  ( Jx 2 + a2-x); 

and,  when  the  attracted  particle  is  in  contact  with  the  centre  of 
the  end  of  the  infinite  cylinder,  this  is 

‘lirpa. 


477.] 


STATICS. 


23 


(d)  A right  cone,  of  semivertical  angle  a,  and  length  l, 
attracts  a particle  at  its  vertex.  Here  we  have  at  once  for  the 
attraction,  the  expression 

2-npl  (1  - cos  a), 

which  is  simply  proportional  to  the  length  of  the  axis. 

It  is  of  course  easy,  when  required,  to  find  the  necessarily  less 
simple  expression  for  the  attraction  on  any  point  of  the  axis. 

(e)  For  magnetic  and  electro-magnetic  applications  a very 
useful  case  is  that  of  two  equal  discs,  each  perpendicular  to  the 
line  joining  their  centres,  on  any  point  in  that  line — their  masses 
(§  461)  being  of  opposite  sign — that  is,  one  repelling  and  the 
other  attracting. 

Let  a be  the  radius,  p the  mass  of  a superficial  unit,  of  either, 
c their  distance,  x the  distance  of  the  attracted  point  from  the 
nearest  disc.  The  whole  action  is  evidently 


x + c 

(x  + c)2+a* 


In  the  particular  case  when  c is  diminished  without  limit,  this 
becomes 

a 2 


2irpc 


(x2  + as)$ 


478.  Let  P and  P'  be  two  points  infinitely  near  one  another 
on  two  sides  of  a surface  over  which  matter  is  distributed ; and 
let  p be  the  density  of  this  distribution  on  the  surface  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  these  points.  Then  whatever  be  the  resultant 
attraction,  R , at  P,  due  to  all  the  attracting  matter,  whether 
lodging  on  this  surface,  or  elsewhere,  the  resultant  force,  R',  on 
P is  the  resultant  of  a force  equal  and  parallel  to  R,  and  a 
force  equal  to  47 rp,  in  the  direction  from  P'  perpendicularly 
towards  the  surface.  For,  suppose  PP'  to  be  perpendicular  to 
the  surface,  which  will  not  limit  the  generality  of  the  pro- 
position, and  consider  a circular  disc,  of  the  surface,  having  its 
centre  in  PP',  and  radius  infinitely  small  in  comparison  with 
the  radii  of  curvature  of  the  surface  but  infinitely  great  in  com- 
parison with  PP'.  This  disc  will  [§  477,  (&)]  attract  P and  F 
with  forces,  each  equal  to  27 rp  and  opposite  to  one  another  in 
the  line  PP'.  Whence  the  proposition.  It  is  one  of  much  im- 
portance in  the  theory  of  electricity. 


Right  cone 
on  particle 
at  vertex. 


Positive 

and 

negative 

discs. 


Variation  of 
force  in 
crossing  an 
attracting 
surface. 


24 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[478. 


Uniform 
hemisphere 
attracting 
particle  at 
edge. 


Alteration 
of  latitude; 
by  hemi- 
spherical 
hill  or 
cavity. 


(a)  As  a further  example  of  the  direct  analytical  process,  let 

us  find  the  components  of  the 
attraction  exerted  by  a uni- 
form hemisphere  on  a particle 
at  its  edge.  Let  A be  the 
particle,  AB  a diameter  of 
the  base,  AC  the  tangent  to 
the  base  at  A ; and  AD  per- 
pendicular to  AC,  and  AB. 
Let  RQA  be  a section  by  a 
plane  passing  through  AC;  A Q any  radius- vector  of  this  section  ; 
P a point  in  A Q.  Let  AP  = r,  CAQ  = 6,  RAB  = <£.  The  volume 
of  an  element  at  P is 

rdO  . r sin  9d<f> . dr  = r~  sin  6 c tydddr. 

The  resultant  attraction  on  unit  of  matter  at  A has  zero  com- 
ponent along  AC.  Along  AB  the  component  is 

pfff  sin  6d<f>d6dr  cos  <£  sin  6, 

between  proper  limits.  The  limits  of  r are  0 and  2 a sin  6 cos  <£, 
tliose  of  c p are  0 and  £ , and  those  of  6 are  0 and  t r.  Hence, 
Attraction  along  AB  = fir pci . 

Along  AD  the  component  is 


7 r 

r+n  r%  /-2asin0cos 

PJo  Jo  Jo 


sin  6d6d<j)dr  sin  $ sin  6 = ±pa. 


(b)  Hence  at  the  southern  base  of  a hemispherical  hill  of 
radius  a and  density  p,  the  true  latitude  (as  measured  by  the 
aid  of  the  plumb-line,  or  by  reflection  of  starlight  in  a trough  of 
mercury)  is  diminished  by  the  attraction  of  the  mountain  by  the 

angle 

yfirpct 

Tt^p~a 


where  G is  the  attraction  of  the  earth,  estimated  in  the  same 
units.  Hence,  if  R be  the  radius  and  a the  mean  density  of  the 

earth,  the  angle  is 


A7 TPa 


- — , or  4 - approximately. 

^naR  — -gpco  "ah 


STATICS. 


25 


478.] 


Hence  the  latitudes  of  stations  at  the  base  of  the  hill,  north  and  Alteration^ 

d / p\  by  hemi- 

south  of  it,  differ  by  ( 2 + ; instead  of  by  - , as  they  would  sphered 

cavity, 

do  if  the  hill  were  removed. 

In  the  same  way  the  latitude  of  a place  at  the  southern  edge 
of  a hemispherical  cavity  is  increased  on  account  of  the  cavity 

by  4 where  p is  the  density  of  the  superficial  strata. 

(c)  For  mutual  attraction  between  two  segments  of  a homo- 
geneous solid  sphere,  investigated  indirectly  on  a hydrostatic 
principle,  see  § 753  below. 


479.  As  a curious  additional  exanqrle  of  the  class  of  ques-  by  crevasse, 
tions  considered  in  § 478  ( a ) (5),  a deep  crevasse,  extending  east 
and  west,  increases  the  latitude  of  places  at  its  southern  edge 

by  (approximately)  the  angle  § where  p is  the  density  of 

the  crust  of  the  earth,  and  a is  the  width  of  the  crevasse.  Thus 
the  north  edge  of  the  crevasse  will  have  a lower  latitude  than 


the  south  edge  if  f £ > 1,  which  might  be  the  case,  as  there 

are  rocks  of  density  § x 5‘5  or  3 67  times  that  of  water.  At  a 
considerable  depth  in  the  crevasse,  this  change  of  latitudes  is 
nearly  doubled,  and  then  the  southern  side  has  the  greater 
latitude  if  the  density  of  the  crust  be  not  less  than  T83  times 
that  of  water.  The  reader  may  exercise  himself  by  drawing 
lines  of  equal  latitude  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  crevasse  in 
this  case  : and  by  drawing  meridians  for  the  corresponding  case 
of  a crevasse  running  north  and  south. 

480.  It  is  interesting,  and  will  be  useful  later,  to  consider  Attraction 
as  a particular  case,  the  attraction  of  a sphere  whose  mass  is  com  posed  of 
composed  of  concentric  layers,  each  of  uniform  density.  shen'sof10 

Let  R be  the  radius,  r that  of  any  layer,  p — F (rj  its  density,  density. 

Then,  if  o-  be  the  mean  density, 

Tj7rcr R3  = 47 r f pr2dr, 

Jo 

from  which  cr  may  be  found. 

The  surface  attraction  is  ^ircrR,  = G,  suppose. 

At  a distance  r from  the  centre  the  attraction  is  — f pr2  dr 

ra  Jo  ' 


26 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[480. 


Attraction 
of  a sphere 
composed  of 
concentric 
shells  of 
uniform 
density. 


Attraction 
of  a uniform 
circular  arc, 


If  it  is  to  be  the  same  for  all  points  inside  the  sphere 

G 

pr'dr  = 
to 


f 


pr~dr  = ~ r2. 


1 G 

Hence  p = F (r)  = — . — is  the  requisite  law  of  density. 

If  the  density  of  the  upper  crust  be  t,  the  attraction  at  a 
depth  h,  small  compared  with  the  radius,  is 

al(E-h)  = Gli 

where  cr  is  the  mean  density  of  nucleus  when  a shell  of  thick- 
ness h is  removed  from  the  sphere.  Also,  evidently, 

^TTCTx  (R  — h)3  + 47TT  ( R — k)2  k = TTCtR3, 
or  Gx  (R  - h)2  + 4ttt  (R  - h)2h  = GR2, 

2 h\ 


whence 


G1  = G ^1  + — 47tt h. 


The  attraction  is  therefore  unaltered  at  a depth  h if 

G 4 0 

-p.  = £ 7TCT  = ll TT. 

R d 


481.  Some  other  simple  cases  may  be  added  here,  as  their 

results  will  be  of  use  to  us  subsequently. 

(a)  The  attraction  of  a circular  arc,  AB,  of  unifoi'm  density, 

on  a particle  at  the  centre,  C , of  the 

circle,  lies  evidently  in  the  line  CD 

bisecting  the  arc.  Also  the  resolved 

part  parallel  to  CD  of  the  attraction 

of  an  element  at  P is 

mass  of  element  at  P ^ n 
m, cos  . PCD. 

Now  suppose  the  density  of  the  chord  AB 

to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  arc.  Then 

< 

for  (mass  of  element  at  P x cos  PCD) 
we  may  put  mass  of  projection  of  element 

< < 

on  AB  at  Q j since,  if  PT  be  the  tangent  at  P,  PTQ  = PCD. 

„ ^ Sum  of  projected  elements 
Hence  attraction  along  CD—  CD2 

_ pAB 

~ CD2’ 


481.] 


STATICS. 


27 


if  p be  the  density  of  the  given  arc, 


2 p sin  AC  D 
= CD  ' 

It  is  therefore  the  same  as  the  attraction  of  a mass  equal  to  the 
chord,  with  the  arc’s  density,  concentrated  at  the  point  D. 

( b ) Again  a limited  straight  line  of  uniform  density  attracts 
any  external  point  in  the  same  direction  and  with  the  same 
force  as  the  corre- 
sponding arc  of  a 
circle  of  the  same 
density,  which  has 
the  point  for  cen- 
tre, and  touches  the 
straight  line. 


For  if  CpP  be 
drawn  cutting  the  circle  in  p and  the  line  in  P ; Element  at 

CP 

p : element  at  P ::  Cp  : CP  ; that  is,  as  Cp 2 : CP2.  Hence 


CD 

the  attractions  of  these  elements  on  C are  equal  and  in  the  same 
line.  Thus  the  arc  ab  attracts  C as  the  line  A B does;  and,  by 
the  last  proposition,  the  attraction  of  AB  bisects  the  angle  ACBf 
and  is  equal  to 

2o  < 

(Tjj  sin  \acb. 

(c)  This  may 
be  put  into  other 
useful  forms  — 
thus,  let  CKF 
bisect  the  angle 
ACB , and  let 
A a,  Bb , A A,  be 
drawn  perpen  - 
dicular  to  CF 
from  the  ends 
and  middle  point 
of  AB.  We 


have  sin  KCB  = sin  CKD  = 

G it 


AB  CD 


AC+CB  CK' 


Attraction 
of  a uniform 
circular  arc, 


straight 

line. 


28 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[481. 


Attraction 
of  a uniform 
straight 
line. 


Potential. 


Hence  the  attraction,  which  is  along  C K,  is 


2pAB  _ pAB (<F 

{AC + CB)  GK  ~ 8 (AC  + CB)  (AC  + 67/  -AB1)' 

For,  evidently, 

bK  : Ka  ::  BK  : KA  ::  BC  : CA  ::  bC  : Ca, 


(1) 


i.e.,  cob  is  divided,  externally  in  C,  and  internally  in  K,  in  the 
same  ratio.  Hence,  by  geometry, 


KC  .CF=aC  .Cb  = \ [AC+CB*  -AB2), 

which  gives  the  transformation  in  (1). 

(cl)  CF  is  obviously  the  tangent  at  C to  a hyperbola,  passing 
through  that  point,  and  having  A and  B as  foci.  Hence,  if  in 
any  plane  through  AB  any  hyperbola  be  described,  with  foci  A 
and  B,  it  will  be  a line  of  force  as  regards  the  attraction  of  the 
line  AB ; that  is,  as  will  be  more  fully  explained  later,  a curve 
which  at  every  point  indicates  the  direction  of  attraction. 

(e)  Similarly,  if  a prolate  spheroid  be  described  with  foci  A 
and  B,  and  passing  through  C,  CF  will  evidently  be  the  normal 
at  C ; thus  the  force  on  a particle  at  C will  be  perpendicular  to 
the  spheroid;  and  the  particle  would  evidently  rest  in  equilibrium 
on  the  surface,  even  if  it  were  smooth.  This  is  an  instance  of 
(what  we  shall  presently  develop  at  some  length)  a surface  of 
equilibrium,  a level  surface,  or  an  equipotential  surface. 

(/)  We  may  further  prove,  by  a simple  application  of  the 
preceding  theorem,  that  the  lines  of  force  due  to  the  attraction 
of  two  infinitely  long  rods  in  the  line  AB  produced,  one  of  which 
is  attractive  and  the  other  repulsive,  are  the  series  of  ellipses 
described  from  the  extremities,  A and  B,  as  foci,  while  the 
surfaces  of  equilibrium  are  generated  by  the  revolution  of  the 

confocal  hyperbolas. 


482.  As  of  immense  importance,  in  the  theory  not  only  of 
gravitation  but  of  electricity,  of  magnetism,  of  fluid  motion  of 
the  conduction  of  heat,  etc.,  we  give  here  an  investigation  of  the 
most  important  properties  of  the  Potential. 


483.  This  function  was  introduced  for  gravitation  by  Laplace, 
but  the  name  was  first  given  to  it  by  Green,  who  may  almost 
be  said  to  have  in  1828  created  the  theory,  as  we  now  have  it. 


STATICS. 


29 


483.] 


Green’s  work  was  neglected  till  1846,  and  before  that  time  most  Potential, 
of  its  important  theorems  had  been  re-discovered  by  Gauss, 
Chasles,  Sturm,  and  Thomson. 

In  § 273,  the  potential  energy  of  a conservative  system  in  any 
configuration  was  defined.  When  the  forces  concerned  are 
forces  acting,  either  really  or  apparently,  at  a distance,  as 
attraction  of  gravitation,  or  attractions  or  repulsions  of  electric 
or  magnetic  origin,  it  is  in  general  most  convenient  to  choose, 
for  the  zero  configuration,  infinite  distance  between  the  bodies 
concerned.  We  have  thus  the  following  definition  : 


484.  The  mutual  potential  energy  of  two  bodies  in  any 
relative  position  is  the  amount  of  work  obtainable  from  their 
mutual  repulsion,  by  allowing  them  to  separate  to  an  infinite 
distance  asunder.  When  the  bodies  attract  mutually,  as  for 
instance  when  no  other  force  than  gravitation  is  operative,  their 
mutual  potential  energy,  according  to  the  convention  for  zero 
now  adopted,  is  negative,  or  (§  547  below)  their  exhaustion  of 
potential  energy  is  positive. 

485.  The  Potential  at  any  point,  due  to  any  attracting  or 
repelling  body,  or  distribution  of  matter,  is  the  mutual  potential 
energy  between  it  and  a unit  of  matter  placed  at  that  point. 
But  in  the  case  of  gravitation,  to  avoid  defining  the  potential 
as  a negative  quantity,  it  is  convenient  to  change  the  sign. 
Thus  the  gravitation  potential,  at  any  point,  due  to  any  mass, 
is  the  quantity  of  work  required  to  remove  a unit  of  matter 
from  that  point  to  an  infinite  distance. 

486.  Hence  if  V be  the  potential  at  any  point  P,  and  V1 
that  at  a proximate  point  Q,  it  evidently  follows  from  the  above 
definition  that  V—  V1  is  the  work  required  to  remove  an  inde- 
pendent unit  of  matter  from  P to  Q ; and  it  is  useful  to  note 
that  this  is  altogether  independent  of  the  form  of  the  path 
chosen  between  these  two  points,  as  it  gives  us  a preliminary 
idea  of  the  power  we  acquire  by  the  introduction  of  this  mode 
of  representation. 

Suppose  Q to  be  so  near  to  P that  the  attractive  forces 
exerted  on  unit  of  matter  at  these  points,  and  therefore  at  any 


30 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[486. 


Potential,  point  in  the  line  P Q,  may  be  assumed  to  be  equal  and  parallel. 

Then  if  F represent  the  resolved  part  of  this  force  along  PQ, 
F . PQ  is  the  work  required  to  transfer  unit  of  matter  from  P 
to  Q.  Hence 

V-VX  = F.PQ, 


or 


F~  PQ  ’ 


Porce  in 
terms  of  the 
potential. 


Equipoten- 
tial  surface. 


Relative  in- 
tensities of 
force  at 
different 
points  of 
an  equi- 
potential 
surface. 


Line  of 
force. 


that  is,  the  attraction  on  unit  of  matter  at  P in  any  direction 
PQ,  is  the  rate  at  which  the  potential  at  P increases  per  unit 
of  length  of  P Q. 

487.  A surface,  at  every  point  of  which  the  potential  has  the 
same  value,  and  which  is  therefore  called  an  Equipotential  Sur- 
face, is  such  that  the  attraction  is  everywhere  in  the  direction 
of  its  normal.  For  in  no  direction  along  the  surface  does  the 
potential  change  in  value,  and  therefore  there  is  no  force  in 
any  such  direction.  Hence  if  the  attracted  particle  be  placed 
on  such  a surface  (supposed  smooth  and  rigid),  it  will  rest  in 
any  position,  and  the  surface  is  therefore  sometimes  called  a 
Surface  of  Equilibrium.  We  shall  see  later,  that  the  force 
on  a particle  of  a liquid  at  the  free  surface  is  always  in  the 
direction  of  the  normal,  hence  the  term  Level  Surface,  which 
is  often  used  for  the  other  terms  above. 

488.  If  a series  of  equipotential  surfaces  be  constructed  for 
values  of  the  potential  increasing  by  equal  small  amounts,  it  is 
evident  from  § 486  that  the  attraction  at  any  point  is  inversely 
proportional  to  the  normal  distance  between  two  successive 
surfaces  close  to  that  point ; since  the  numerator  of  the  ex- 
pression for  F is,  in  this  case,  constant. 

489.  A line  drawn  from  any  origin,  so  that  at  every  point  of 
its  length  its  tangent  is  the  direction  of  the  attraction  at  that 
point,  is  called  a Line  of  Force ; and  it  obviously  cuts  at  right 
angles  every  equipotential  surface  which  it  meets. 

These  three  last  sections  are  true  whatever  be  the  law  of 
attraction ; in  the  next  we  are  restricted  to  the  law  of  the 

inverse  square  of  the  distance. 


490.] 


STATICS. 


31 


490.  If,  through  every  point  of  the  boundary  of  an  infinitely 
small  portion  of  an  equipotential  surface,  the  corresponding 
lines  of  force  be  drawn,  we  shall  evidently  have  a tubular 
surface  of  infinitely  small  section.  The  force  in  any  direction, 
at  any  point  within  such  a tube,  so  long  as  it  does  not  cut 
through  attracting  matter,  is  inversely  as  the  section  of  the 
tube  made  by  a plane  jessing  through  the  point  and  perpen- 
dicular to  the  given  direction.  Or,  more  simply,  the  whole 
force  is  at  every  point  tangential  to  the  direction  of  the  tube, 
and  inversely  as  its  transverse  section : from  which  the  more 
general  statement  above  is  easily  seen  to  follow. 

This  is  an  immediate  consequence  of  a most  important 
theorem,  which  will  be  proved  later,  § 492.  The  surface  in- 
tegral of  the  attraction  exerted  hy  any  distribution  of  matter  in 
the  direction  of  the  normal  at  every  point  of  any  closed  surface 
is  4>irM ; where  M is  the  amount  of  matter  within  the  surface, 
while  the  attraction  is  considered  positive  or  negative  according 
as  it  is  inwards  or  outwards  at  any  point  of  the  surface. 

For  in  the  present  case  the  force  perpendicular  to  the  tubular 
part  of  the  surface  vanishes,  and  we  need  consider  the  ends 
only.  When  none  of  the  attracting  mass  is  within  the  portion 
of  the  tube  considered,  we  have  at  once 

Fvt  — F'vt'  = 0, 

F being  the  force  at  any  point  of  the  section  whose  area  is  vr. 
This  is  equivalent  to  the  celebrated  equation  of  Laplace — 
App.  B (a);  and  below,  § 491  (c). 

When  the  attracting  body  is  symmetrical  about  a point,  the 
lines  of  force  are  obviously  straight  lines  drawn  from  this 
point.  Hence  the  tube  is  in  this  case  a cone,  and,  by  § 469, 
■gt  is  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance  from  the  vertex. 
Hence  F is  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  for  points 
external  to  the  attracting  mass. 

When  the  mass  is  symmetrically  disposed  about  an  axis  in 
infinitely  long  cylindrical  shells,  the  lines  of  force  are  evidently 
perpendicular  to  the  axis.  Hence  the  tube  becomes  a wedge, 
whose  section  is  proportional  to  the  distance  from  the  axis, 

and  the  attraction  is  therefore  inversely  as  the  distance  from 
the  axis. 


Variation  of 
intensity 
along  a line 
of  force. 


32 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[490. 


Variation  of 
intensity 
alonK  a line 
of  forco. 


Potential 
due  to  an 
attracting 
point, 


When  the  mass  is  arranged  in  infinite  parallel  planes,  each 
of  uniform  density,  the  lines  of  force  are  obviously  perpen- 
dicular to  these  planes;  the  tube  becomes  a cylinder;  and, 
since  its  section  is  constant,  the  force  is  the  same  at  all  dis- 
tances. 

If  an  infinitely  small  length  l of  the  portion  of  the  tube 
considered  pass  through  matter  of  density  p,  and  if  a>  be  the 
area  of  the  section  of  the  tube  in  this  part,  we  have 

F'sr  — F'  is  — - 47 rlwp. 


This  is  equivalent  to  Poisson’s  extension  of  Laplace  s equation 
[§  491  (c)]. 

491.  In  estimating  work  done  against  a force  which  varies 
inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  from  a fixed  point,  the 
mean  force  is  to  be  reckoned  as  the  geometrical  mean  between 
the  forces  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  path  : and,  what- 
ever may  be  the  path  followed,  the  effective  space  is  to  be 
reckoned  as  the  difference  of  distances  from  the  attracting  point 
Thus  the  work  done  in  any  course  is  equal  to  the  pioduct  o 
the  difference  of  distances  of  the  extremities  from  the  attract- 
ing point,  into  the  geometrical  mean  of  the  forces  at  these 
distances-  or,  if  0 be  the  attracting  point,  and  m its  force 
on  a unit  mass  at  unit  distance,  the  work  done  m moving 
a particle,  of  unit  mass,  from  any  position  P to  any  othei 

position  P',  is 

/ m2  m m 

(OP'-OP)  opopi-  mOP~OP" 

To  prove  this  it  is  only  necessary  to  remark,  that  for  any 
inanitely  small  step  of  the  motion,  the  effective  space  is  cleaily 
the  Sence  of  distances  from  the  centre,  and  the  working 
force  may  be  taken  as  the  force  at  either  end,  or  of  any  inte  - 
,•  t value  the  geometrical  mean  for  instance:  am  a 
preceding  evasion  applied  to  each  infinitely  small  step  shows 
that  the  same  rule  holds  for  the  sum  making  up  the  whole  wo  . 
done  through  any  finite  range,  and  by  any  path. 

Henc"  by  § 485,  it  is  obvious  that  the  potential  at  P of  a 

mass  m situated  at  0,  is  ^i  and  thus  that  the  potential  of  any 


491.] 


STATICS. 


33 


mass  at  a point  P is  to  be  found  by  adding  the  quotients  of  every  Potential 
portion  of  the  mass,  each  divided  by  its  distance  from  P.  attracting 

point. 

a.  For  the  analytical-  proof  of  these  propositions,  consider,  Analytical 
first,  a pair  of  particles,  0 and  P,  whose  masses  are  m and  unity,  tion  of  the 
and  co-ordinates  abc,  xyz.  If  1)  be  their  distance  potential!  6 

D'  = {x-  a )2  + {y  - b)2  + (z  - c)*. 

The  components  of  the  mutual  attraction  are 


X=m 


x — a 


Y=m 


y-b 


Z = 


vi- 


z — c 


D3  ’ " l)  3 ’ " ""  D 3 * 

and  therefore  the  work  required  to  remove  P to  infinity  is 
f(x~  °)  dx  + ( V ~ b)  dy  +(z-  c)dz 

] IP 


[dJD 

J~PS 


which,  since  the  superior  limit  is  D = oo,  is  equal  to 


m 

D' 

The  mutual  potential  energy  is  therefore,  in  this  case,  the 
product  of  the  masses  divided  by  their  mutual  distance ; and 

therefore  the  potential  at  x,  y,  z,  due  to  m,  is  ^ . 

Again,  if  there  be  more  than  one  fixed  particle  m,  the  same 
investigation  shows  us  that  the  potential  at  xyz  is 


And  if  the  particles  form  a continuous  mass,  whose  density  at 
a,  b,  c is  p,  we  have  of  course  for  the  potential  the  expression 


dadbdc 
~D~  ’ 


the  limits  depending  on  the  boundaries  of  the  mass. 


If  we  call  V the  potential  at  any  point  P (x,  y,  z),  it  is  Force  at 
evident  (from  the  way  in  which  we  have  obtained  its  value)  anypoi,lt 
t at  the  components  of  the  attraction  on  unit  of  matter  at  P are 


X = - 


dV 
dy * 


VOL.  II. 


3 


34 


Force  at 
any  point. 


Force  with- 
in a homo- 
geneous 
sphere. 


Rate  of  in- 
crease of  the 
force  in  any 
direction. 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [401 

Hence  the  force,  resolved  along  any  curve  of  which  s is  the  arc, 


is 


M vdy  JL7dz__(dVdx  dVdy  + d_Vdz\ 
Js+Yd^  Zds~  \dx  ds  + dy  ds  dz  dsj 


_dV 
" ds’ 

All  this  is  evidently  independent  of  the  question  whether  P lies 
within  the  attracting  mass  or  not. 

b.  If  the  attracting  mass  be  a sphere  of  density  p,  and  centre 
a,  b,  c,  and  if  P be  within  its  surface,  we  have,  since  the  exterior 

shell  has  no  effect, 

dV  4 x-a 
dx 


X=--r  =zlrpD  '~~V 


Hence 

c.  Now  if 


4 / \ 

= 3 irp{n-  a)- 

dX  d2V  4 


dx 


dx 2 3 np’ 


- _*  + ^ 

^ dx 2 


d2 


dy 


■2  + dz2  ’ 


we  have  V2-^  = 0,  as  was  proved  before,  App.  B g (14)  ab  a 

particular  case  of  g.  The  proof  for  this  case  alone  is  as  follows : 

d 1 x-a 
dx  D 


D 


,3  > 


d2  1 _ 1 3 {x  - a )2 . 

d^D~  D3  Ds 


and  from  this,  and  the  similar  expressions  for  the  second  differ- 
entials in  y and  «,  the  theorem  follows  by  summation. 

dadbdc 


Hence  as 


'■///' 


D 


and  p does  not  involve  a;,  y,  z,  we  see  that  as  long  as  D doe°™0t 
vanish  within  the  limits  of  integration , ^e.,  as  long  as  1 
point  of  the  attracting  mass 

V2F=  0 ; 

or,  in  terms  of  the  components  of  the  force, 

dX  cVf  + dZ^  _ q 
dx  + dy  dz 


Laplace’a 

equation. 


491  c.] 


STATICS. 


35 


If  P be  within  the  attracting  mass,  suppose  a small  sphere  Laplace’s 
to  be  described  so  as  to  contain  P.  Divide  the  potential  into  equation’ 
two  parts,  Vl  that  of  the  sphere,  Va  that  of  the  rest  of  the  body. 

The  expression  above  shows  that 

V2F8  = 0. 

Also  the  expressions  for  tl,  etc.,  in  the  case  of  a sphere  ( b ) 

g‘ve  V’F,  = - 4jt p, 

where  p is  the  density  of  the  sphere. 

Hence  as  jr_  V + V 

1 2 Poisson’s 

**»"--*•*  ss/ 

which  is  the  general  equation  of  the  potential,  and  includes  the 
case  of  P being  wholly  external  to  the  attracting  mass,  since 

there  p = 0.  In  terms  of  the  components  of  the  force  this 
equation  becomes 

dX  clY  dZ 
dx  + dy  + dz  ~ ^P' 


d.  We  have  already,  in  these  most  important  equations, 

the  means  of  verifying  various  former  results,  and  also  of  adding 
new  ones.  a 

Thus  to  find  the  attraction  of  a hollow  sphere  composed  of  Potential 
concentric  shells,  each  of  uniform  density,  on  an  external  point  .“'CSn 
( y ich  we  mean  a point  not  part  of  the  mass).  In  this  case  JS" 

tTrf7  1 7s  *7*  r,must  depend  upon  the  distance  -K 

n le  o the  sphere  alone.  Let  the  centre  of  the  sphere  he  deMitr- 
origin,  and  let  1 e 

r2  = x2  + if  + z \ 

Then  Y is  a function  of  r alone,  and  consequently 

dV=  dV dr  x dV 
dx  dr  dx  ~ r dr  ’ 
d*V  __  1 dV 
dx 2 r dr 


x2  dV  x2  d2V 

“t” 


rA  dr 


r2  dr2  ’ 


and 


r dr  dr‘  ' 


Hence,  when  P is  outside^the  sphere,  or  in  the  hollow  space 


2 dV  d2V 

L 0 

r dr  di*~  ‘ 


3 — 2 


36 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[491  d. 


Potential 
of  matter 
arranged  in 
concentric 
spherical 
shells  of 
uniform 
density. 


dV 

A first  integral  of  this  is  r2  = C. 

For  a point  outside  the  shell  C has  a finite  value,  which  is  easily- 
seen  to  be  - M,  where  M is  the  mass  of  the  shell. 

For  a point  in  the  internal  cavity  (7  = 0,  because  evidently  at 

dV 

the  centre  there  is  no  attraction — i.e.,  there  r=0,  ~ = 0 together. 

Hence  there  is  no  attraction  on  any  point  in  the  cavity. 

We  need  not  be  surprised  at  the  apparent  discontinuity  of  this 
solution.  It  is  owing  to  the  discontinuity  of  the  given  distribution 
of  matter.  Thus  it  appears,  by  § 491  c,  that  the  true  general 
equation  of  the  potential  is  not  what  we  have  taken  above,  but 

d2V  2 dV  . 
d?r+rd;=-i’p’ 

where  p,  the  density  of  the  matter  at  distance  r from  the  centre, 
is  zero  when  r < a the  radius  of  the  cavity  : has  a finite  value  cr, 
which  for  simplicity  we  may  consider  constant,  when  r > a and 
< a'  the  radius  of  the  outer  bounding  surface  : and  is  zero,  again, 
for  all  values  of  r exceeding  a.  Hence,  integrating  from  r = 0, 

„ dV 

to  r = r,  any  value,  we  have  (since  r2  = 0 when  r = 0), 

„dV 


jr 


pr'dr  — — Mx , 


if  M denote  the  whole  amount  of  matter  within  the  spherical 
surface  of  radius  r;  which  is  the  discontinuous  function  of  r 
specified  as  follows  : — 

From  r = 0 to  r = a,  r = a to  r = a',  r = a'  to  r = go, 

M1  = 0,  Mx  = ^ (r3  - a3),  Mx  = ^ (a3 - a3). 

The  corresponding  values  of  V are,  in  order, 

„ Tr  4tto-  /3a2 -r3  a3\  v 4tto-  , /3  3. 

F=  27rcr (a  - a ),  3 - -J.  7 ~a> 

We  have  entered  thus  into  detail  in  this  case,  because  suet 
apparent  anomalies  are  very  common  in  the  analytical  solutioi 
of  physical  questions.  To  make  this  still  more  clear,  we  sub 

£ Tr  dV  , 1 d2J  , 

join  a graphic  representation  of  the  values  of  V,  , anci  ^ f 

for  this  case.  ABQC,  the  curve  for  V,  is  partly  a straight  line  j 
and  has  a point  of  inflection  at  Q : but  there  is  no  discontinuity 


STATICS. 


37 


91  d.] 


and  no  abrupt  change  of  direction. 


OEFD,  that  for  is 
dr 


continuous,  but  its  direction  twice  changes  abruptly. 


d*V 
dr 2 


consists  of  three  detached  portions,  0E>  GH,  KL. 


That  for 


Potential 
of  matter 
arranged  in 
concentric 
spherical 
shells  of 
uniform 
density. 


e.  For  a mass  disposed  in  infinitely  long  concentric  cylin-  Coaxal  right 

drical  shells,  each  of  uniform  density,  if  the  axis  of  the  cylinders  uniform 

be  2,  we  must  evidently  have  V a function  of  a;2  + y2  only.  infinite  and 

dy  length. 

^ence  ^ = or  ^he  attraction  is  wholly  perpendicular  to  the 


axis. 


d2V 


Also,  = 0 ; and  therefore  by  (d) 


dr * 


1 dV 

rd?=~ilrl'- 


Hence  r ~ = C - iir  Jprdr, 

from  which  conclusions  similar  to  the  above  may  be  drawn. 


f If,  finally,  the  mass  be  arranged  in  infinite  parallel 
planes,  each  of  uniform  density,  and  perpendicular  to  the  axis 


38 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[491/ 


Matter  ar- 
ranged in 
infinite 
parallel 
planes  of 
uniform 
density. 


Equi- 

potential 

surface. 


Integral  of 

normal 

attraction 


of  x ; tlie  resultant  force  must  be  parallel  to  this  direction  : that 
is  to  say,  Y=  0,  Z — 0,  and  therefore 

dX 


dx 


= AttP, 


which,  if  p is  known  in  terms  of  x , is  completely  integrable. 
Outside  the  mass,  p = 0,  and  therefore 

X = G, 

or  the  attraction  is  the  same  at  all  distances,  a result  easily 
verified  by  the  direct  methods. 

* If  within  the  mass  the  density  is  constant,  we  have 

X = G'  + iirpx ; 

and  if  the  origin  be  in  the  middle  of  the  lamina,  we  have, 
obviously,  (7'-  0.  Hence  if  t denote  the  thickness,  the  values  of 
X at  the  two  sides  and  in  the  spaces  beyond  are  respectively 
_ 2tt pt  and  + 2t rpt.  The  difference  of  these  is  4t rpt  (§  478). 

g.  Since  in  any  case  ^ is  the  component  of  the  attrac- 
tion in  the  direction  of  the  tangent  to  the  arc  s,  the  attraction 
will  be  perpendicular  to  that  arc  if 

£-0, 

V=C. 
or 

This  is  the  equation  of  an  equipotential  surface. 

If  n be  the  normal  to  such  a surface,  measured  outwards,  the 
whole  force  at  any  point  is  evidently 

dV 
dn ’ 

and  its  direction  is  that  in  which  V increases. 

492  Let  S be  any  closed  surface,  and  let  0 be  a point,  either 
attraction  external  or  internal,  where  a mass,  m,  of  matter  is  eolleote  ^ 
S"  Let  N be  the  component  of  the  attraction  of  mm  the  direction 
of  the  normal  drawn  inwards  from  any  point  P,  of  S.  then 
da  denotes  an  element  of  S,  and  //  integration  over  the  whole 

°f  ‘l’  ffNda  = 47rm,  or  (*). 

according  as  0 is  internal  or  external. 


STATICS. 


39 


492.] 

Case  1,  0 internal.  Let  OP,P„P„...  be  a straight  line  drawn  integral  of 

* “ normal 

in  any  direction  from  0,  cutting  S in  P,  POJ  P„,  etc.,  and  there- attraction 
tore  passing  out  at  Plf  in  at  P2,  out  again  a,t  P3>  in  again  at  P4,  surface, 
and  so  on.  Let  a conical  surface  be  described  by  lines  through  ^Poisson^s 
0,  all  infinitely  near  OPtP2...y  and  let  co  be  its  solid  angle  Laplace’s °f 
• (§  465).  The  portions  of  JjNda  corresponding  to  the  ele- 
ments  cut  from  S by  this  case  will  be  clearly  each  equal  in 
absolute  magnitude  to  com,  but  will  be  alternately  positive  and 
negative.  Hence  as  there  is  an  odd  number  of  them  their 
sum  is  + com.  And  the  sum  of  these,  for  all  solid  angles  round 
0 is  (§  466)  equal  to  4nrm ; that  is  to  say,  jJNda  — rm. 

Case  2,  0 external.  Let  OPtP2P3...  be  a line  drawn  from  0 Equivalent 
passing  across  8,  inwards  at  Px,  outwards  at  P2,  and  SO  011.  equation, 
Drawing,  as  before,  a conical  surface  of  infinitely  small  solid  * U 
angle,  co,  we  have  still  coni  for  the  absolute  value  of  each  of  the 
portions  of  jjNda  corresponding  to  the  elements  which  it  cuts 
from  8 ; but  their  signs  are  alternately  negative  and  positive : 
and  therefore  as  their  number  is  even,  their  sum  is  zero. 

Hence  jjNda  = 0. 

From  these  results  it  follows  immediately  that  if  there  be 
any  distribution  of  matter,  partly  within  and  partly  without  a 
closed  surface  S,  and  N and  da  be  still  used  with  the  same 
signification,  we  have 

J J Nda  = 4>ttM (2) 

if  M denote  the  whole  amount  of  matter  within  8. 

This,  with  M eliminated  from  it  by  Poisson’s  theorem,  § 491  c, 
is  the  particular  case  of  the  analytical  theorem  of  Chap.  i.  App.' 

A (a),  found  by  taking  a=  1,  and  Ur  = 1,  by  which  it  becomes 

0 = // dad  U - ///V2 Udxdydz (3). 

For  let  U be  the  potential  at  (x,  y,  z),  due  to  the  distribution 
of  matter  in  question.  Then,  according  to  the  meaning  of  3, 
we  have  3 U=-  N.  Also,  let  p be  the  density  of  the  matter  at 
(*>  Vi  z)‘  Then  [§  491  (c)]  we  have 

V2  U — — 47t  p. 

Hence  (3)  gives 


f jNda  = 4:ir[J Jpclxdy  dz  = \ttM. 


40 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[493. 


norma?1  °f  493.  It  in  crossing  any  surface  K we  find  an  abrupt  change 

overaclosed  111  ^ie  va^ue  °f  the  component  force  perpendicular  to  K,  it 
surface.  follows  from  (2)  that  there  must  be  a condensation  of  matter 
on  K,  and  that  the  surface-density  of  this  distribution  is  N/4tt, 
if  X be  the  difference  of  the  values  of  the  normal  component  on 
the  two  sides  of  K ; as  we  see  by  taking  for  our  closed  surface 
S an  infinitely  small  rectangular  parallelepiped  with  two  of  its 
faces  parallel  to  K and  on  opposite  sides  of  it.  This  result  was 
found  in  § 478,  in  a thoroughly  synthetical  manner.  The  same 
result  is  found  by  the  proper  analytical  interpretation  of 
Poisson’s  equation 

dX  dY  dZ  . 

dx  dy  dz  ^ 

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  in  travelling  across  K abrupt  change 
in  the  value  of  the  component  force  along  any  line  parallel  to 
K is  forbidden  by  the  Conservation  of  Energy. 


Inverse 

problem. 


494.  The  theorem  of  Laplace  and  Poisson,  § 492,  for  the 
present  application  most  conveniently  taken  (§  491  c)  in  its 
differential  form 


P = 


1 

w 


d2V  d2V  d2V' 

+ T~a  + 


(1), 


, dx1  ' dy 2 ' dz2  J 

is  explicitly  the  solution  of  the  inverse  problem, — given  the 
potential  at  every  point  of  space,  or,  which  is  virtually  the  same, 
given  the  direction  and  magnitude  of  the  resultant  force  at  every 
point  of  space, — it  is  required  to  find  the  distribution  of  matter 
by  which  it  is  produced. 


494  a.  Example.  Let  the  potential  be  given  equal  to  zero 
for  all  space  external  to  a given  closed  surface  S,  and  let 

V=  cf>  (x,  y,  z) (2) 

for  all  space  within  this  surface ; <£  (x,  y,  z)  being  any  arbitrary 
function  subject  to  no  other  condition  than  that  its  value  is 
zero  at  S,  and  that  it  has  no  abrupt  changes  of  value  within  S. 
Abrupt  changes  in  the  values  of  differential  coefficients, 

dcfj  d<j)  dcf> 
dx  ’ dy  ’ dz  ’ 

are  not  excluded,  but  are  subject  to  interpretations,  as  in  § 493, 
if  they  occur. 


404  6.] 


STATICS. 


41 


494  b.  The  required  distribution  of  matter  must  include  a 
surface  distribution  on  S,  because  there  is  abrupt  change  in  the 
value  of  the  normal  component  force  from 


dtf  df\ 
dy 2 + dz 2 ) 


at  the  inside  of  S to  zero  at  the  outside.  Tims,  by  § 493,  and 
by  § 494  (1),  we  have  for  our  complete  solution  (compare  §§  501, 
505,  506,  507  below) 


p = 0,  for  space  external  to  S 

on  S, 


cr  = 


1 (d<{>2  d$ 

1 7*0’"^" 


2 dcjf'v* 


+ 


47 r \ dx2  dy2  dz2 ) 

d2cf>  d3(f> 

^ 47 r V dx 

for  space  enclosed  by  S. 


and 


1 /d2(fi  d2<f>  cl‘4>\ 

+ dy2  + dz2) 


.(2). 


494  c.  From  § 492  (2),  remembering  that  N =■  0 outside  of  S, 
we  infer  that  the  total  mass  on  and  within  S is  zero,  and 
therefore  the  quantity  of  matter  condensed  on  >S  is  equal  and 
of  opposite  sign  to  the  quantity  enclosed  by  it. 


494  d.  Sub-Example.  Let  the  potential  be  given  equal  to 
zero  for  all  space  external  to  the  ellipsoidal  surface 


and  equal  to 


(3), 


for  the  space  enclosed  by  it : in  other  words  let  the  potential  be 
zero  wherever  the  value  of  (3)  is  negative,  and  equal  to  the  value 
of  (3)  wherever  it  is  positive. 


494  e.  The  solution  (2)  becomes 


P=  0, 

1 

47T/>  ’ 


Ou  1 / 

wherever  -5  + 75  + -s  > 1 : 
a2  b2  c2  ’ 


1 


at  the  surface  — 2 + p + -2  = 1 j 


a 


- •••(^) > 


and  p 


1 1\ 
47r  \aa  + b2  + c2) 


wherever  — + + -5  < 1. 

a b2  c 2 


Inverse 

problem. 


Inverse 

problem. 


Attractions 
of  solid 
homogene- 
ous ellip- 
soid and. 
circum- 
scribed 
focaloid  of 
equal  mass 
found 
equal. 

Homoeoids 

and 

Foealoids 

defined. 


42 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [494  6. 


p denoting  the  perpendicular  from  the  centre  to  the  tangent 
plane  of  the  ellipsoidal  surface. 


494  f Let  q be  an  infinitely  small  quantity.  The  equation 


a 

x~ 


y 


b~  -q 


+ 


c-q 


= 1 


(5) 


represents  an  ellipsoidal  surface  confocal  with  the  given  one, 
and  infinitely  near  it.  The  distance  between  the  two  surfaces 
infinitely  near  any  point  ( x , y,  z)  of  either  is  easily  proved  to 
be  equal  to  \ qli).  Calling  this  t,  we  have,  from  (4), 


47r  q 


(6). 


We  conclude  from  (6)  and  (4)  and  the  theorem  (§  494  c)  of 
masses  that 


494  g.  The  attraction  of  a homogeneous  solid  ellipsoid 
is  the  same  through  all  external  space  as  the  attraction  of  a 
homogeneous  focaloid*  of  equal  mass  coinciding  with  its 

surface. 


* To  avoid  complexity  of  diction  we  now  propose  to  introduce  two  new 
words,  “ focaloid”  and  “homoeoid,”  according  to  the  following  definitions 

(1)  A homoeoid  is  an  infinitely  thin  shell  hounded  by  two  similar  surfaces 

similarly  oriented.  ... 

The  one  point  which  is  situated  similarly  relatively  to  the  two  similar 

surfaces  of  a homoeoid  is  called  the  homoeoidal  centre.  Supposing  the  homoeoid 
to  be  a finite  closed  surface,  the  homoeoidal  centre  may  be  any  internal  or 
external  point.  In  the  extreme  case  of  two  equal  surfaces,  the  homoeoidal  centre 
is  at  an  infinite  distance.  The  homoeoid  in  this  extreme  case  (which  is  interest- 
ing as  representing  the  surface-distribution  of  ideal  magnetic  matter  constituting 
the  free  polarity  of  a body  magnetized  uniformly  in  parallel  lines)  may  be  called 
a homoeoidal  couple.  In  every  case  the  thickness  of  the  homoeoid  is  directly 
proportional  to  the  perpendicular  from  the  centre  to  the  tangent  plane  at  any 
point  When  (the  surface  being  still  supposed  to  be  finite  and  closed)  the  centre 
is  external,  the  thickness  is  essentially  negative  in  some  places,  and  positive  in 


Dtliers. 

The  bulk  of  a homoeoid  is  the  excess  of  the  bulk  of  the  part  where  the 
thickness  is  positive  above  that  where  the  thickness  is  negative.  The  bulk  of 
a homoeoidal  couple  is  essentially  zero.  Its  moment  and  its  axis  are  important 
qualities,  obvious  in  their  geometric  definition,  and  useful  in  magnetism  as 


STATICS. 


43 


494  /<.] 


- 494  h.  Take  now  a homogeneous  solid  ellipsoid  and  divide 
it  into  an  infinite  number  of  focaloids,  numbered  1,  2,  3,  ...  Theorem, 
from  the  surface  inwards.  Take  the  mass  of  No.  1 and  dis- 
tribute it  uniformly  through  the  space  enclosed  by  its  inner 
boundary.  This  makes  no  difference  in  the  attraction  through 
space  external  to  the  original  ellipsoid.  Take  the  infinitesimally 
increased  mass  of  No.  2 and  distribute  it  uniformly  through  the 
space  enclosed  by  its  inner  boundary.  And  so  on  with  Nos.  3,  4, 

&c.,  till  instead  of  the  given  homogeneous  ellipsoid  we  have 
another  of  the  same  mass  and  correspondingly  greater  density 
enclosed  by  any  smaller  confocal  ellipsoidal  surface. 


494  i.  We  conclude  that 

Any  two  confocal  homogeneous  solid  ellipsoids  of  equal  Maciaurin’s 
masses  produce  equal  attraction  through  all  space  external  to 
both. 

This  is  Maciaurin’s  splendid  theorem.  It  is  tantamount  to 
the  following,  which  presents  it  in  a form  specially  interesting 
in  some  respects  : 

Any  two  thick  or  thin  confocal  focaloids  of  equal  masses , Equivalent 

each  homogeneous,  produce  equal  attraction  through  all  space  Maciaurin’s 
external  to  both.  Theorem. 


494 j.  Maclaurin  s theorem  reduces  the  problem  of  finding  Digression 
the  attraction  of  an  ellipsoid*  on  any  point  in  external  space,  traction  of 
(which  when  attempted  by  direct  integration  presents  diffi- a,iellips0ld 
culties  not  hitherto  directly  surmounted,)  to  the  problem  of 


representing  the  magnetic  moment  and  the  magnetic  axis  of  a piece  of  matter 
uniformly  magnetized  in  parallel  lines. 

(2)  An  elliptic  hotnoeoid  is  an  infinitely  thin  shell  bounded  by  two  con- 
centric similar  ellipsoidal  surfaces. 


(•->)  A focaloid  is  an  infinitely  thin  shell  bounded  by  two  confocal  ellipsoidal 
surfaces. 

(4)  The  terms  “thick  homoeoid”  and  “thick  focaloid”  may  be  used  in 

the  comparatively  rare  cases  (see  for  example  §§  494 i,  519,  522)  when  forms 

satisfying  the  definitions  (1)  and  (3)  except  that  they  are.  not  infinitely  thin 
are  considered.  J ’ 


To  avoid  circumlocutions  we  call  simply  “an  ellipsoid” 
solid  ellipsoid. 


a homogeneous 


44 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Digression 
on  the  at- 
traction of 
an  ellipsoid. 


To  find  the 
potential  of 
an  ellipsoid 
at  any  inte- 
rior point. 


[494 j. 


finding  the  attraction  of  an  ellipsoid  on  a point  at  its  surface 
which,  as  the  limiting  case  of  the  attraction  of  an  ellipsoid  on 
an  internal  point,  is  easily  solved  by  direct  integration,  thus : 

494  k.  Divide  the  whole  solid  into  pairs  of  vertically  opposite 
infinitesimal  cones  or  pyramids,  having  the  attracted  point  P for 
common  vertex. 

Let  E' PE  be  any  straight  line  through  P,  cut  by  the  surface 
at  E'  and  E,  and  let  da  be  the  solid  angle  of  the  pair  of  cones 
lying  along  it.  The  potentials  at  P of  the  two  are  easily  shown 
to  be  £ PE 2 da  and  | PE'2  da,  and  therefore  the  whole  contribu- 
tion of  potential  at  P by  the  pair  is  ^ (PE2  + PE2)  da. 

Hence,  if  V denote  the  potential  at  P of  the  whole  ellipsoid, 
the  density  being  taken  as  unity,  we  have 

V=jjl(PE2  + PE'2)  da (7), 

where  //  denotes  integration  over  a hemisphere  of  spherical 
surface  of  unit  radius. 


Now  if  x,  y,  z be  the  co-ordinates  of  P relative  to  the 
principal  axes  of  the  ellipsoid  j and  l,  vn,  n the  direction 
cosines  of  PE,  we  have,  by  the  equation  of  the  ellipsoid, 

(x  + IPE)2  (y  + mPE)2  t (z  + mPE)2  _ 1 . 

a* + F c2 

whence 

When  (x,  y,  z)  is  within  the  ellipsoid  this  equation,  viewed  as 
a quadratic  in  PE,  has  its  roots  of  opposite  signs ; the  positive 
one  is  PE,  the  negative  is  - PE'. 

Now  if  rx,  ra  be  the  two  roots  of  gr2  + 2fr-e  = 0,  we  have 
h(r12  + r22)  = (2f2  + ge)/g*. 

Hghcg 


t(PE2  + PE,2)  = 


a 


(l2  m 2 

U2+-f+?) 


where 
and  Q - 4 


a2  t -zl 

C — I 7.2 


a 


(mnyz  t nlzx  lmxy\ 


\b 


2c 2 


2 2 

c a 


a2b 2 ) 


..(8). 


STATICS. 


45 


494  t] 


Now  in  the  / / integration  of  (7),  as  we  see  readily  by  taking 
for  example  one  of  the  hemispheres  into  which  the  whole  sphere 
round  P is  cut  by  the  plane  through  P perpendicular  to  z,  it  is 
clear  that 


(9); 


and  therefore  (7)  and  (8)  give 


(io); 


or 


_ x2  d<P  y2  dQ?  z2  <rZ<3? 

a da  b db  c dc 


(11), 


where 


4> 


-h 


dxr 


m 


— i 1 

2 ^2  ~ „2 


a 


n~ 

7 


(12). 


494  l.  A symmetrical  evaluation  of  4>  not  being  obvious, 
we  may  be  content  to  take 

l = cos  9,  m=  sin  9 cos  cf>,  n = sin  9 sin  c/>, 
and  dcr  — sin  9 d9  d<f>. 

Using  these,  replacing  l,  and  putting 


1 / 1 1 


1 

/I  ^ 

c2 

Vc2  a2) 

we  find  Q-l'dlf2*  dcf) 

Jo  Jo 

r *+  4 r 

Jo  H cos2  <f>+  K sin2  <f>  ]0  H + Kt2  J{HK) 


j o H cos2  </>  + K sin2 

d<f>  t /*°°  dt  2v 


Hence 


= 2t r P 
Jo 


dl 


P -(£-?) [?"(?-?)*■] 


...(13). 


By  (12)  we  know  that  4>  is  a symmetrical  function  of  a,  b , c. 


Digression 
on  the  at- 
traction of 
an  ellipsoid. 


46 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[494  1 


Digression 
on  the  at- 
traction of 
an  ellipsoid. 


To  bring  (12)  to  this  form,  take 


1 = 


a 


which  reduces  (13)  to 
$ = Trabc 


l 


J (a2  + u)“ 
du 


•(14), 


o ( a 2 + vfi  ( b 2 + uf1  (c2  + w)“ 


.(15). 


The  expression  (11)  for  V,  with  (15)  for  <£,  is  worth  preserving 
for  its  own  sake  and  for  some  applications ; but  the  following, 
derived  from  it  by  performing  the  indicated  differentiations,  is 
simpler  and  is  generally  preferable  : 


V=tt  abc 


JTO- 


X 


r 


<r 


du 


+ u b2  + u c2+uJ(a*  + uy2(tf  + uf(c2+u)S 


or,  if  M denote  the  mass  of  the  ellipsoid, 


~*Ef(  1-— y 8 

~~  4 Jo  \ a2+u  b2+u 


z2  \ du 

c~+u)  (a2+u)^(bz+u)^(c2+u)2 


...(17). 


This,  or  (16),  expresses  the  potential  at  any  point  (as,  y,  z) 
within  the  ellipsoid  (a,  b,  c ) or  on  its  surface. 


494  m.  The  potential  at  any  external  point  is  deduced 
from  (17)  through  Maclaurin’s  theorem  [§§  494  i]  simply  by 
substituting  for  a,  b,  c the  semi-axes  of  the  ellipsoid  confocal 
with  (a,  b,  c ),  and  passing  through  x,  y,  z:  these  semi-axes 
are  J(a2  + q),  J(b2  + q),  V(c2  + ?),  where  q denotes  the  positive 

root  of  the  equation 


x 


y‘ 


z2 


ct2  + q b2  + q c2  + q 


= 1 


(18); 


which  is  a cubic  in  q.  Thus,  for  an  external  point,  we  find 


*2  a2  \ 

ciF+q  + u b2  + q+u  c2+q  + uj 


du 

(< a,2+q+u)h(b2+q+u)h(c2+q+u )* ' 

(19); 


which  may  be  written  shorter  as  follows  : 

3 Mr”/,  t. — \ dU  -r ,...(20). 

“4  Jt  \ a2+u  b2+u  c8+w/ (a»+w)i(6B+w)*(c8+w)* 


494  «.] 


STATICS. 


47 


494  n.  These  formulas,  (17)  and  (20),  are,  we  believe,  due  Digression 
to  Lejeune  Dirichlet,  who  proves  them  (Crelle’s  Journal , 1846,  traction  of 
Vol.  xxxii.)  by  showing  that  they  satisfy  the  equation  an  ellipsoid. 


d2V  d2V  d3V 

dx2  + df  + dz2  ‘ 

when 

x2  y2  z2  - 

a2  b2  c2  ’ 

and 

d2V  d2Y  d2V 
dx 2 + dy 2 + dz2  ~ 

when 

x2  y2  z2 

1-  — 4-  — > 1 • 

a2  b2  c2  ’ 

and  that 

dV  dV  dV 
dx  ’ dy  1 dz 

have  equal  values  at  points  infinitely  near  the  surface 

x2  y2  z 2 

+ 7a  + -3=1, 

a b c ’ 


outside  and  inside  it.  His  first  step  towards  this  proof  (the 
completion  of  which  we  leave  as  an  exercise  to  our  readers) 
is  the  evaluation  of  dV/dx,  dV/dy , dV/dz.  In  this  it  is  neces- 
sary to  remark  that,  for  the  external  point,  terms  depending 
on  the  variation  of  q as  it  appears  in  (20)  vanish  because  of 
(18):  and  taking  the  results  which  we  then  get  instantly  by 
plain  differentiation,  and  remembering  that  X = — dV/dx,  &c., 
we  have,  for  the  principal  components  of  the  resultant  force, 


X = 


Y = 


3My 


Z = 


1 

2 l (a1  + u)i(6’  + u),(c,  + ze)i 

f- 

A (a2 


i ( a 2 + u)~  ( b 2 + u)^  (c2  + u)'- 
du 


du 


■ (21), 


2 ’’  («*  + «)*  (6* + m)4  (c!  + sl)8. 

wliere  ? = ° when  (x,  y,  *)  is  internal,  and  q is  the  positive  root 
of  the  cubic  (18),  when  (*,  y,  z)  is  external. 

Using  (21)  in  (20)  and  (17),  we  see  that 

y_  r du 

4 •'*  ~ * {Xx + ry+Zz)-(2n 


48 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[494  o. 


Digression 
on  the  at- 
traction of 
an  ellipsoid 


494  o.  For  the  case  of  an  internal  point  or  a point  on 
the  surface,  by  putting  q = 0,  we  fall  back  on  the  original  ex- 
pressions (16)  for  V,  and  the  proper  differential  coefficients 


of  it  for  X,  Y,  Z. 

These  results  may  be  written  as  follows : 

r=~i%, 


2ir 


V = $ - =£  (&Z2  + W + ©*2) 


'..(23), 


where  <t>,  &,  33,  © are  constants,  of  which  $ is  given  by  (12), 
or  (13),  or  (15),  and  the  others  by  (21)  with  q = 0 j all 
expressed  in  terms  of  elliptic  integrals. 

It  follows  that  the  internal  equipotential  surfaces  are  concen- 
tric similar  ellipsoids  with  axes  proportional  to  ^ ",  33  , © J 


and  that  the  internal  surfaces  of  equal  resultant  force  are  con- 
centric similar  ellipsoids  with  axes  proportional  to  3T\  33  ',  © '. 

The  external  equipotentials  are  transcendental  plinthoids  * of 
an  interesting  character.  So  are  the  equipotentials  partly 
internal  (where  they  are  ellipsoidal)  and  external  (where  they 
are  not  ellipsoidal). 


It  is  interesting,  and  useful  in  helping  to  draw  the  external 
equipotentials,  to  remark  the  following  relations  between  the 
internal  equipotentials,  the  external  equipotentials,  and  the 

surface  of  the  attracting  ellipsoid. 

(1)  The  external  equipotential  V = G is  the  envelope  of 
the  series  of  ellipsoidal  surfaces  obtained  by  giving  an  infinite 
number  of  constant  values  to  q in  the  equation 


1 - 


x 


a?+u 


du 


4G 


(2) 


c2+u)  (a-+  u)  * (b2+u)  * (c2+  «)* 
This  envelope  is  cut  by  the  ellipsoidal  surface 

o 9. 


X 


+ 


y 


+ 


= i 


...(a). 


■09), 


a?  + q ' b'2  + q c + q 

* From  nXtvOoeiSr,,,  brick-like.  Plintboid,  as  we  now  use  the  term,  denotes as 
.ere  a seldom  brick,  any  figure  rrith  three  rectangular  »*»« 
■erywhere  convex,  such  as  an  ellipsoid,  or  a perfectly  symmetrical  ba  e 
,tton  with  slightly  rounded  sides  and  rounded  edges  and  corners.  One  extre 
: plinthoidal  figure  is  a rectangular  parallelepiped ; another 
[eluded  by  our  definition,  is  a figure 

ictangular  pyramids  fixed  together  base  to  base,  that  is  a iegu 


• 494-  0.]  STATICS.  49 

for  any  particular  value  of  q in  the  line  along  which  it  is  Digression 
touched  by  the  particular  one  of  the  series  of  consecutive  traction  of 
ellipsoidal  surfaces  (/3)  corresponding  to  this  value  of  q. 

(3)  If  the  ellipsoidal  surface  (/3)  he  filled  with  homogeneous 
matter,  the  complete  equipotential  for  any  particular  value  of 
C is  composed  of  an  interior  ellipsoidal  surface  passing  tan- 
gentially to  the  external  plinthoidal  (but  not  ellipsoidal)  surface 
across  the  transitional  line  defined  in  (2). 

It  is  easy  to  make  graphic  illustrations  for  the  case  of  ellip- 
soids of  revolution,  by  aid  of  § 527  below. 

494  p.  In  the  case  of  an  elliptic  cylinder,  which  is  im-  Attraction 

portant  in  many  physical  investigations,  replace  M by  iirabc/3,  nite?ylong 
and  put  c = oo  . elliptic 


cylinder. 


X=2ircibx 


Thus  we  find 

^ 4? rcib[J(a2+q)~  J(b2+q)\x 

'»  (a2+uf  (b2  + u)$~  (»2  - b2)  J(a2  + q) 

A-rrabx 


r. 


r=2«%  r 

A (a2+u)-(l 


{a2+uf(b2  + uf 


\/(“2+  ?)  [n/(«2+  q)+ J{b2+  q)] 

= i7rah  U/(«*+  q)~J(b2  + g)]y 
iirciby 


V-(24). 


9)  [n/(«“+?)+V(4!+?)] 


where 


q=0,  when  ^ ^ < 1 ; 

Cl  0 


and  q is  the  positive  root  of  the  quadratic 


x 


y* 


a2  + q b2  + q 


= 1,  when®  +*>1. 


Foi  the  case  of  q — 0,  that  is  to  say,  the  case  of  an  internal 
point,  (24)  becomes 

iircib  x inab  y 

- , and  Y = f f 


X= 


a + b a 


a + b b 


.(25). 


494  q.  For  the  magnitude  of  the  resultant  force  we  deduce  ?ntemai 

isodynamic 

a y / / 2 2v  surfaces  arc 

7?—  II  Y2  _l.  V2\  x , V \ similar  to 

R- V(X  + r ) = ^ / 1 + ■'  ) (26) . ,h.  bo„„d. 


VOL.  II. 


mg  surface. 


Attraction 
of  an  infi- 
nitely long 
elliptic 
cylinder. 


50  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [494  q. 

and  it  is  remarkable  that  this  is  constant  for  all  points  on 

o Q 


the  surface  of  the  elliptic  cylinder  '-2  + and  on  each 

similar  internal  surface,  and  that  its  values  on  different  ones 
of  these  surfaces  are  as  their  linear  magnitudes. 

495  a.  At  any  point  of  zero  force,  the  potential  is  a maximum 
SSK™  or  a minimum,  or  a “minimax."  Now  from  § 492  (2)  it  follows 
orminimum  tliat  the  potential  cannot  be  a maximum  or  a minimum 
at  a point  in  free  space.  For  if  it  were  so.  a closed 
surface  could  be  described  about  the  point,  and  indefinitely 
near  it,  so  that  at  every  point  of  it  the  value  of  the  potentia 
would  be  less  than,  or  greater  than,  that  at  the  point ; so  that 
N would  be  negative  or  positive  all  over  the  surface,  and  there- 
fore JJNdtr  would  be  finite,  which  is  impossible,  as  the  surface 
encloses  none  of  the  attracting  mass. 

495  b Consider,  now,  a point  of  zero  force  in  free  space 
the  potential,  if  it  varies  at  all  in  the  neighbourhood,  must  be 
a minimax  at  the  point,  because,  as  has  just  been  prove  , 1 
cannot  be  a maximum  or  a minimum.  Hence  a material  par  i- 

i i oori  of-  o -noint  of  zero  force  under  the  action  ot  any 
Earnshaw’s  cle  placed  at  a po  1 table 

attracting  bodies,  and  free  from  all  constraint,  is  m unsts 

equilibrium,  a result  due  to  Earnshaw*. 

495  , If  the  potential  be  constant  over  a closed  surface  which 
contains  none  of  the  attracting  mass,  it  has  the  same  constan 
value  throughout  the  interior.  For  if  not,  it  must  have 
maximum  or  a minimum  value  somewhere  within  the  suiface, 

which  (§  495,  a)  is  impossible. 

496  The  mean  potential  over  any  spherical  suiface,  ue  to 

' entirely  without  it  is  equal  to  the  potential  at  its  centre; 

SIT*1  ‘™„®tlv  first  oiven  by  Gauss.  See  also  Cambridge 

equal  to  a theorem  apparently  msr  0 J t.  • one  0f 

that  at  its  . ..  J T^^nl  Feb  1845  (Vol.  IV.  p.  225;.  it  is  one  Ui 

- •<  f rr&rsd 

srp is.- 1.  - .««*■■“•  - *i 

harmonic  expansion. 

* Cambridge  Phil  Trans.,  March,  1839. 


Potential  in 
free  space 


value ; 


is  a mini- 
max  at  a 
point  of 
zero  force 
in  free 
space 


theorem  of 
unstable 
equi- 
librium. 


496.] 


STATICS. 


51 


Let,  in  Chap.  i.  App.  A.  (a),  S be  a spherical  sui’face,  of  Mean  no- 
radius a;  and  let  U be  the  potential  at  (x,  y,  z),  due  to  matter 
altogether  external  to  it  j let  U'  be  the  potential  of  a unit  eJuKo 
of  matter  uniformly  distributed  through  a smaller  concentric  centre! ltS 
spheiical  surface  j so  that,  outside  S and  to  some  distance  within 

it,  U =-  ; and  lastly,  let  a=  1.  The  middle  member  of  App.  A 

(a)  (1)  becomes 

~ //3  Uda  - f ffU'VBUdxdydz, 


which  is  equal  to  zero,  since  V2F=0  for  the  whole  internal 
space,  and  (§  492)  jjdUda. r=0.  Equating  therefore  the  third 
member  to  zero  we  have 

JJda  UdL ' = ffj  W2 U 'dx dy dz. 

Now  at  the  surface,  S,  a£7'  = _-I ; and  for  all  points  external 

to  the  sphere  of  matter  to  which  U'  is  due,  V2U' = 0,  and  for  all 
internal  points  V2 U'  = - iirp',  if  p'  he  the  density  of  the  matter. 
Hence  the  preceding  equation  becomes 

—3  JJUdcr  = 4tt  fffp'Udxdydz. 


Let  now  the  density  P'  increase  without  limit,  and  the  spherical 
space  within  which  the  triple  integral  extends,  therefore  become 
infinitely  small.  If  we  denote  by  U0  the  value  of  U at  its  centre, 
which  is  also  the  centre  of  S,  we  shall  have 

flip  Udxdydz=  U0  j j J p'clxdydz  = U0. 

Hence  the  equation  becomes 


nUd*  rr 

Aira2  °’ 

which  was  to  be  proved. 

. The  following  more  elementary  proof  is  preferable-— 
imagine  any  quantity  of  matter  to  be  uniformly  distributed 
over  the  spherical  surface.  The  mutual  potential  (§  547  below) 
o this  and  the  external  mass  is  the  same  as  if  the  matter  were 
condensed  from  the  spherical  surface  to  its  centre. 

497  If  the  potential  of  any  masses  has  a constant  value,  F,  Thro™  of 
roug  i any  finite  portion,  K,  of  space,  unoccupied  by  matter  Gauss: 
it  is  equal  to  Fthrough  every  part  of  space  which  can  be  reached 


4—2 


52 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Theorem  of 

Gauss, 

proved. 


Green’s 

problem 


[497. 


in  any  way  without  passing  through  any  of  those  masses : a 
very  remarkable  proposition,  due  to  Gauss,  proved  thus : — If 
the  potential  differ  from  V in  space  contiguous  to  K,  we  may, 
from  any  point  G within  K,  as  centre,  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
a place  where  the  potential  differs  from  V,  describe  a spherical 
surface  not  large  enough  to  contain  any  part  of  any  of  the 
attracting  masses,  nor  to  include  any  of  the  space  external 
to  K except  such  as  has  potential  all  greater  than  V,  or  all 
less  than  V.  But  this  is  impossible,  since  we  have  just  seen 
(§  49 G)  that  the  mean  potential  over  the  spherical  surface 
must  be  V.  Hence  the  supposition  that  the  potential  differs 
from  V in  any  place  contiguous  to  K and  not  including  masses, 
is  false. 

498.  Similarly  we  see  that  in  any  case  of  symmetry  round 
an  axis,  if  the  potential  is  constant  through  a certain  finite 
distance,  however  short,  along  the  axis,  it  is  constant  through- 
out the  whole  space  that  can  be  reached  from  this  portion  of 
the  axis,  without  crossing  any  of  the  masses.  (See  § 546,  below.) 

499.  Let  S be  any  finite  portion  of  a surface,  or  a complete 
closed  surface,  or  an  infinite  surface ; and  let  E be  any  point 
on  S.  ( a ) It  is  possible  to  distribute  matter  over  S so  as  to 
produce,  over  the  whole  of  S,  potential  equal  to  F(E),  any 
arbitrary  function  of  the  position  of  E.  ( b ) There  is  only 
one  whole  quantity  of  matter,  and  one  distribution  of  it,  which 
can  do  this. 

In  Chap.  i.  App.  A.  ( b ) (e),  etc.,  let  a = 1.  By  (e)  we  see  that 
there  is  one,  and  that  there  is  only  one,  solution  of  the  equation 

V2Z7=0 

for  all  points  not  belonging  to  S,  subject  to  the  condition  that  U 
shall  have  a value  arbitrarily  given  over  the  whole  of  S.  Con- 
tinuing to  denote  by  U the  solution  of  this  problem,  and  con- 
sidering first  the  case  of  S an  open  shell,  that  is  to  say,  a finite 
portion  of  curved  surface  (including  a plane,  of  course,  as  a par- 
ticular case),  let,  in  Chap.  I.  App.  A.  (a),  L be  the  potential  at 
(x,  y,  z)  due  to  a distribution  of  matter,  having  vr  (Q)  for  density 
at  any  point,  Q.  Let  the  triple  integration  extend  throughoutt 
infinite  space,  exclusive  of  the  infinitely  thin  shell  S.  Although 


499.] 


STATICS. 


53 


in  the  investigation  referred  to  [App.  A.  (a)]  the  triple  integral  Green’s 
extended  only  through  the  finite  space  contained  within  a closed 
surface,  the  same  process  shows  that  we  have  now,  instead  of 
the  second  and  third  members  of  (1)  of  that  investigation,  the 
following  equated  expressions : — 


J j d(T TJ'  {[3Z7]  - (3 £7)}  - /// dxdydz U'VaT7 
= ffdo ■ U { [dU’]  - (dU')}  - fffdx cly dz UV'U' 

where  [9  £7]  denotes  the  rate  of  variation  of  TJ  on  either  side  of 
S,  infinitely  near  E , reckoned  per  unit  of  length  from  S ; and 
(9Z7)  denotes  the  rate  of  variation  of  TJ  infinitely  near  E , on  the 
other  side  of  S,  reckoned  per  unit  of  length  towards  S ; and 
[0^7'],  (dU')  denote  the  same  for  TJ' . Now  we  shall  suppose  the 
matter  of  which  TJ'  is  the  potential  not  to  be  condensed  in  finite 
quantities  on  any  finite  areas  of  S,  which  will  make 


[dU']  = (dU') : 

and  the  conditions  defining  TJ  and  U'  give,  throughout  the  space 
of  the  triple  integral, 


V2£7=  0,  and  V2U'  = - 4ttOT; 

w denoting  the  value  of  vs  iff)  when  Q is  the  point  (x,  y , z). 
Hence  the  preceding  equation  becomes 


ffdaTJ'  {[SZ7]  - (dU)}  - iir  f J jdxdydzvsU (1). 

Let  now  the  matter  of  which  U'  is  the  potential  be  equal  in 
amount  to  unity  and  be  confined  to  an  infinitely  small  space 
round  a point  Q.  We  shall  have 

JJ JdxdydzvsU  = TJ  (Q)  J j fvrdxdydz  = TJ  (Q), 
if  we  denote  the  value  of  TJ  at  ( Q ) by  TJ  ( Q ) : 

1 


also 

Hence  (1)  becomes 


Z7'  = 


EQ' 


//  [a^W—  to = (2). 


EQ 

Hence  a distribution  of  matter  over  S,  having 

(3) 

for  density  at  the  point  E , gives  TJ  as  its  potential  at  ( x , y}  z). 
We  conclude,  therefore,  that  it  is  possible  to  find  one,  but  only 
one,  distribution  of  matter  over  S which  shall  produce  an  arbi- 


reduced  to 
the  proper 
general 
solution  of 
Laplace’s 
equation. 


54 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[499. 


Green’s 
problem ; 


solved  syn- 
thetically in 
terms  of 
particular 
solution  of 
Laplace’s 
equation. 


trarily  given  potential,  F (F),  over  the  whole  of  3 ; and  in  (2) 
we  have  the  solution  of  this  problem,  when  the  problem  of  find- 
ing U to  fulfil  the  conditions  stated  above,  has  been  solved. 

If  S is  any  finite  closed  surface,  any  group  of  surfaces,  open  or 
closed,  or  an  infinite  surface,  the  same  conclusions  clearly  hold. 
The  triple  integration  used  in  the  investigation  must  then  be 
separately  carried  out  through  all  the  portions  of  space  separated 
from  one  another  by  S,  or  by  portions  of  3. 

If  the  solution,  p,  of  the  problem  has  been  obtained  for  the  case 
in  which  the  arbitrary  function  is  the  potential  at  any  point  of  3, 
due  to  a unit  of  matter  at  any  point  P not  belonging  to  3,  that 

is  to  say,  for  the  case  of  F (F)  =^p,  the  solution  of  the  general 

problem  was  shown  by  Green  to  be  deducible  from  it  thus : 

U=  jjpF  (E)  da (4). 


The  proof  is  obvious  : Tor  let,  for  a moment,  p denote  the  super- 
ficial density  required  to  produce  U,  then  ,p'  denoting  the  value 
of  ;p  for  any  other  element,  F',  of  3,  we  have 


Hence  the  preceding  double  integral  becomes 


JJdapJJda'  jffl,  or!. fda'/ffda  ^ . 


But,  by  the  definition  of  p, 

Ud°WF=  FT 

and  therefore 

= («)• 

The  second  member  of  this  is  equal  to  U,  according  to  the 
definition  of  ,p. 

The  expression  (46)  of  App.  B.,  from  which  the  spherical  har- 
monic expansion  of  an  arbitrary  function  was  derived,  is  a case 
of  the  general  result  (4)  now  proved. 

Isolation  Of  500.  It  is  important  to  remark  that,  if  8 consist,  m part,  of 

oto^dpor-  a closed  surface,  Q,  the  determination  of  U within  it  will  e 
surface.  independent  of  those  portions  of  S,  if  any,  which  lie  without 
it;  and,  vice  versa,  the  determination  of  U through  externa 


500.] 


STATICS. 


55 


space  will  be  independent  of  those  portions  of  S,  if  any,  which  isolation  of 
lie  within  Q.  Or  if  S consist,  in  part,  of  a surface  Q,  ex-  cjosedbpor- 
tending  infinitely  in  all  directions,  the  determination  of  U surface, 
through  all  space  on  either  side  of  Q,  is  indejiendent  of  those 
portions  of  S,  if  any,  which  lie  on  the  other  side.  This  follows 
from  the  preceding  investigation,  modified  by  confining  the 
triple  integration  to  one  of  the  two  portions  of  space  separated 
completely  from  one  another  by  Q. 

501.  Another  remark  of  extreme  importance  is  this : — If  Green’s 
F (E)  be  the  potential  at  E of  any  distribution,  M , of  matter,  applied  to  a 
ana  it  o be  such  as  to  separate  perfectly  any  portion  or  portions  t^utionof 
of  space,  II,  from  all  of  this  matter : that  is  to  say,  such  that  M'  inf,uen’c- 
it  is  impossible  to  pass  into  H from  any  part  of  M without  sur' 
crossing  S ; then,  throughout  II,  the  value  of  U will  be  the 
potential  of  M. 

For  if  F denote  this  potential,  we  have,  throughout  II,  V2F=  0; 
and  at  every  point  of  the  boundary  of  II,  V=F(E).  Hence, 
considering  the  theorem  of  Chap.  i.  App.  A.  (c),  for  the  space  II 
alone,  and  its  boundary  alone,  instead  of  S,  we  see  that,  through 
this  space,  V satisfies  the  conditions  prescribed  for  TJ,  and  there- 
fore, through  this  space,  TJ  = V. 

halved  Examples.  (1)  Let  M be  a homogeneous  solid  ellip- 
soid ; and  let  S be  the  bounding  surface,  or  any  of  the  external 
ellipsoidal  sui faces  confocal  with  it.  The  required  surface- 
density  is  proved  in  § 494  g to  be  inversely  proportional  to 
the  perpendicular  from  the  centre  to  the  tangent-plane ; or, 
which  is  the  same,  directly  proportional  to  the  distance  between 
S and  another  confocal  ellipsoid  surface  infinitely  near  it.  In 
other  words,  the  attraction  of  a focaloid  (§  494  g,  foot-note)  of  Virtually 
homogeneous  matter  is,  for  all  points  external  to  it,  the  same  KZT’8 
as  that  of  a homogeneous  solid  of  equal  mass  bounded  by  any  § 494  i/ 
confocal  ellipsoid  interior  to  it. 

(2)  Let  M be  an  elliptic  homoeoid  (§  494  g,  foot-note)  of  Elliptic 

any  external  confocal  an  exampio 
ellipsoidal  surface.  The  required  surface-density  is  proved  thffi£° 
in  § 519  below  to  be  directly  proportional  to  the  perpen-  § som? 
dicular  from  the  centre  to  the  tangent-plane ; and,  which  is  SSSi. 


5G 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[501. 


Green’s  the  same,  directly  proportional  to  the  distance  between  S and 

1 a similar  concentric  ellipsoidal  surface  infinitely  near  it.  In 

other  words,  the  attractions  of  confocal  infinitely  thin  elliptic 
homoeoids  of  homogeneous  matter  are  the  same  for  all  external 
points,  if  their  masses  are  equal. 

Complex  502.  To  illustrate  more  complicated  applications  of  § 501, 
apphcation  ^ ^ consist  0f  three  detached  surfaces,  Sy>  $2,  S3,  as  in  the 

diagram,  of  which  Sv  S2  are  closed,  and  S3  is  an  open  shell,  and  if 
F(E)  be  the  potential  due  to  M,  at  any  point,  E,  of  any  of  these 

portions  of  S;  then  throughout 
Hlf  and  ff2,  the  spaces  within 
8X  and  without  S2,  the  value  of 
TJ  is  simply  the  potential  of  M. 
The  value  of  U through  K,  the 
remainder  of  space,  depends,  of 
course,  on  the  character  of  the 
composite  surface  S,  and  is  a 
case  of  the  general  problem  of  which  the  solution  was  proved 
to  be  possible  and  single  in  Chap.  I.  App.  A. 

General  503.  From  § 500  follows  the  grand  proposition:—^  is 
eSrTc  of  possible  to  find  one,  but  no  other  than  one,  distribution  of  matter 
possible6  over  a surface  S which  shall  produce  over  S,  and  throughout  all 
rnina<te.ter  space  H separated  by  S from  every  part  of  M,  the  same  potential 
as  any  given  mass  M. 

Thus,  in  the  preceding  diagram,  it  is  possible  to  find  one, 
and  but  one,  distribution  of  matter  over  Sv  S2,  S3  which  shall 
produce  over  S3  and  through  H1  and  Id2  the  same  potential 

as  M. 

The  statement  of  this  proposition  most  commonly  made  is : 
It  is  possible  to  distribute  matter  over  any  surface,  S,  completely 
enclosing  a mass  M,  so  as  to  produce  the  same  potential  as  M 
through  all  space  outside  S;  which,  though  seemingly  more 
limited,  is,  when  interpreted  with  proper  mathematical  com- 
prehensiveness, equivalent  to  the  foiegoing. 

Simuitane-  504.  If  S consist  of  several  closed  or  infinite  surfaces,  S, , S,,  S„ 
in“iluttr  respectively  separating  certain  isolated  spaces  If,,  II „ bom 

in  spaces  1 


STATICS. 


57 


504.] 


II,  the  remainder  of  all  space,  and  if  F (E)  be  the  potential 
of  masses  mx,  m2,  ??ia,  lying  in  the  spaces  Hl,  II2,  II a‘,  the  por- 
tions of  U due  to  S1}  S2,  S3,  respectively  will  throughout  II  be 
equal  respectively  to  the  potentials  of  mv  m2,  ma,  separately. 
For  as  we  have  just  seen,  it  is  possible  to  find  one,  but  only 


one,  distribution  of  matter  over  Sx  which  shall  produce  the 
potential  of  mv  throughout  all  the  space  Hx,  H2,  Ha,  etc.,  and 
one,  but  only  one,  distribution 
over  S2  which  shall  produce  the 
potential  of  m2  throughout  H, 

H Ha,  etc. ; and  so  on.  But 
these  distributions  on  S1}  S2, 
etc.,  jointly  constitute  a distri- 
bution producing  the  potential 
F(E)  over  every  part  of  S,  and 
therefore  the  sum  of  the  potentials  due  to  them  all,  at  any 
point,  fulfils  the  conditions  presented  for  U.  This  is  therefore 
(§  50H)  the  solution  of  the  problem. 

505.  Considering  still  the  case  in  which  F (E)  is  prescribed 
to  be  the  potential  of  a given  mass,  M : let  S be  an  equipotential 
surface  enclosing  M,  or  a group  of  isolated  surfaces  enclosing 
all  the  parts  of  and  each  equipotential  for  the  whole  of  M. 
The  potential  due  to  the  supposed  distribution  over  S will  be 
the  same  as  that  of  M,  through  all  external  space,  and  will 
be  constant  (§  497)  through  each  enclosed  portion  of  space.  Its 
resultant  attraction  will  therefore  be  the  same  as  that  of  M on 
all  external  points,  and  zero  on  all  internal  points.  Hence  we 
see  at  once  that  the  density  of  the  matter  distributed  over  it, 


separated 
by  infinitely 
thin  con* 
ducting  sur- 
faces. 


Reducible 
case  of 
Green’s 
problem ; 


58 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[505. 


Reducible 
case  of 
Green’s 
problem ; 


applied  lo 
the  inven- 
tion of 
solved 
problems 
of  electric 
influence. 


Examples. 


to  produce  F (E),  is  equal  to  where  Ii  denotes  the  resultant 
force  of  M,  at  the  point  E. 

We  have  [927]  = — R and  (dU)  = 0.  Using  this  in  § 500  (2), 
we  find  the  preceding  formula  for  the  required  surface-density. 

506.  Considering  still  the  case  of  §§  501,  505,  let  8 be  the 
equipotential  not  of  M alone,  as  in  § 505,  but  of  M and  another 
mass  m completely  separated  by  it  from  M;  so  that  V +v  — G 
at  8,  if  V and  v denote  the  potentials  of  M and  m respectively. 

The  potential  of  the  supposed  distribution  of  matter  on  8, 
which,  (§  501),  is  equal  to  V through  all  space  separated  from  M 
by  8,  is  equal  to  G— v at  8,  and  therefore  equal  to  C—v 
throughout  the  space  separated  from  m by  8. 

Thus,  passing  from  potentials  to  attractions,  we  see  that  the 
resultant  attraction  of  8 alone,  on  all  points  on  one  side  of  it 
is  the  same  as  that  of  M\  and  on  the  other  side  is  equal  and 
opposite  to  that  of  m.  The  most  direct  and  simple  complete 
statement  of  this  result  is  as  follows : — 

If  masses  m,  m,  in  portions  of  space,  H,  H' , completely 
separated  from  one  another  by  one  continuous  surface  8,  whether 
closed  or  infinite,  are  known  to  produce  tangential  forces  equal 
and  in  the  same  direction  at  each  point  of  S,  one  and  the  same 
distribution  of  matter  over  8 will  produce  the  force  of  m 
throughout  H' , and  that  of  m throughout  H.  The  density  of 

R 

this  distribution  is  equal  to  if  R denote  the  resultant  force 

due  to  one  of  the  masses,  and  the  other  with  its  sign  changed. 
And  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  direction  of  this  resultant 
force  is,  at  every  point,  E,  of  8,  perpendicular  to  8,  since  the 
potential  due  to  one  mass,  and  the  other  with  its  sign  changed, 
is  constant  over  the  whole  of  8. 

507.  Green,  in  first  publishing  his  discovery  of  the  result 
stated  in  § 505,  remarked  that  it  shows  a way  to  find  an  in- 
finite variety  of  closed  surfaces  for  any  one  of  which  we  can 
solve  the  problem  of  determining  the  distribution  of  matter 
over  it  which  shall  produce  a given  uniform  potential  at  each 
point  of  its  surface,  and  consequently  the  same  also  throughout 


STATICS. 


50 


507.] 


its  interior.  Thus,  an  example  which  Green  himself  gives,  let 
M be  a uniform  bar  of  matter,  A A'.  The  equipotential  surfaces 
round  it  are,  as  we  have  seen  above  (§  481  c),  prolate  ellipsoids 
of  revolution,  each  having  A and  A'  for  its  foci ; and  the  re- 
sultant force  at  any  point  P was  found  to  be 

VI} o 

l (P  — a*)  * 

the  whole  mass  of  the  bar  being  denoted  by  m,  and  its  length 
by  2a;  A'P+AP  by  21;  and  the  perpendicular  from  the 
centre  to  the  tangent  plane  at  P of  the  ellipsoid,  by  p.  We 
conclude  that  a distribution  of  matter  over  the  surface  of  the 
ellipsoid,  having 

1 mp 
47 r l (l?  — a*) 

for  density  at  P,  produces  on  all  external  space  the  same  re- 
sultant force  as  the  bar,  and  zero  force  or  a constant  potential 
through  the  internal  space.  This  is  a particular  case  of  the 
Example  (2)  § 501  above,  founded  on  the  general  result  regard- 
ing. ellipsoidal  homoeoids  proved  below,  in  §§  519,  520,  521. 

508.  As  a second  example,  let  M consist  of  two  equal  par- 
ticles, at  points  /,  P.  If  we  take  the  mass  of  each  as  unity, 

1 1 

the  potential  at  P is  -jp  4-  pp ) an<4  therefore 

JL  + 1 -0 

IP+ pp~ 

is  the  equation  of  an  equipotential  surface ; it  being  understood 
that  negative  values  of  IP  and  I'P  are  inadmissible,  and  that 
any  constant  value,  from  oo  to  0,  may  be  given  to  C.  The 
curves  in  the  annexed  diagram  have  been  drawn,  from  this 
equation,  for  the  cases  of  G equal  respectively  to  10,  9,  8,  7,  G, 
5,  4-5,  4-3,  4-2,  41,  4,  3 9,  3’8,  37,  3 5,  3,  2 5,  2 ; the  value  of 
IP  being  unity. 

The  corresponding  equipotential  surfaces  are  the  surfaces 
traced  by  these  curves,  if  the  whole  diagram  is  made  to  rotate 
round  IP  as  axis.  Thus  we  see  that  for  any  values  of  G less 
than  4 the  equipotential  surface  is  one  closed  surface.  Choosino- 


Reducible 
case  of 
Green’s 
problem : — 
examples. 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


GO 


[508. 


Reducible 
ease  of 
Green’s  pro- 
blem ex- 
amples. 


any  one  of  these  surfaces,  let  B denote  the  resultant  of  forces 
equal  to  ^ ^ 


IP 2 


and 


FP 2 


in  the  lines  PI  and  PI'.  Then  if 


matter  be  distributed  oyer  this  surface,  with  density  at  P equal 

to  — , its  attraction  on  any  internal  point  will  be  zero ; and  on 
47 r 

any  external  point,  will  be  the  same  as  that  of  I and  I . 

509.  For  each  value  of  C greater  than  4,  the  equipotential 
surface  consists  of  two  detached  ovals  approximating  (the  last 
three  or  four  in  the  diagram,  very  closely)  to  spherical  surfaces, 
with  centres  lying  between  the  points  I and  I , but  appioxi- 
mating  more  and  more  closely  to  these  points,  for  laigei  and 
larger  values  of  G. 

Considering  one  of  these  ovals  alone,  one  of  the  series  en- 
closing I',  for  instance,  and  distributing  matter  over  it  according 

to  the  same  law  of  density,  we  have  a shell  of  matter 

which  exerts  (§  507)  on  external  points  the  same  force  as  I';  and 
on  internal  points  a force  equal  and  opposite  to  that  of  I. 


STATICS. 


61 


510.] 


510.  As  an  example  of  exceedingly  great  importance  in  the 
theory  of  electricity,  let  M consist  of  a positive  mass,  m,  con- 
centrated at  a point  I,  and  a 
negative  mass,  — m , at  and 
let  S be  a spherical  surface 
cutting  II',  and  II'  produced 
in  points  A,  At,  such  that 
I A : AT  : : IAt : I'A/ : : m : m\ 

Then,  by  a well-known  geo- 
metrical proposition,  we  shall  have  IE  : I'E  ::  m 
therefore 

m _ m 

TE~TE' 


m 


and 


Hence,  by  what  we  have  just  seen,  one  and  the  same  distribu- 
tion of  matter  over  S will  produce  the  same  force  as  m!  through 
all  external  space,  and  the  same  as  m through  all  the  space 

• • • *YY\j 

within  S.  And,  finding  the  resultant  of  the  forces  in  EL 

IE 

and  in  I'E  produced,  which,  as  these  forces  are  inversely 

as  IE  to  I E,  is  (§  256)  equal  to 

m jj,  m*II'  1 
IE2.  I'E  ’ 0r  ~HT  IE3’ 

we  conclude  that  the  density  in  the  shell  at  E is 

m2H'  1 
4t nn'  * IE3 ' 

That  the  shell  thus  constituted  does  attract  external  points  as 
if  its  mass  were  collected  at  T,  and  internal  points  as  a certain 
mass  collected  at  I,  was  proved  geometrically  in  § 474  above. 

511.  If  the  spherical  surface  is  given,  and  one  of  the  points, 

I,  I',  for  instance  I,  the  other  is  found  by  taking  Cl'  = -^!  ; 

and  for  the  mass  to  be  placed  at  it  we  have 
, I'A  CA  cr 

Hence  if  we  have  any  number  of  particles  mv  w?2,  etc.,  at  points 


Electric 

images. 


Trans- 
formation 
by  recipro- 
cal radius- 
vectors. 


G2  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [511. 

/2,  etc.,  situated  without  S,  we  may  find  in  the  same  way 
corresponding  internal  points  //,  J2',  etc.,  and  masses  m',  m2, 
etc.;  and,  by  adding  the  expressions  for  the  density  at  E given 
for  each  pair  by  the  preceding  formula,  we  get  a spherical  shell 
of  matter  which  has  the  property  of  acting  on  all  external  space 
with  the  same  force  as  — m/,  — m',  etc.,  and  on  all  internal 
points  with  a force  equal  and  opposite  to  that  of  mv  m2,  etc. 

512.  An  infinite  number  of  such  particles  may  be  given, 
constituting  a continuous  mass  M\  when  of  course  the  corre- 
sponding internal  particles  will  constitute  a continuous  mass, 
— M',  of  the  opposite  kind  of  matter ; and  the  same  conclusion 
will  hold.  If  S is  the  surface  of  a solid  or  hollow  metal  ball 
connected  with  the  earth  by  a fine  wire,  and  M an  external 
influencing  body,  the  shell  of  matter  wTe  have  determined  is 
precisely  the  distribution  of  electricity  on  S called  out  by  the 
influence  of  M : and  the  mass  — M',  determined  as  above,  is 
called  the  Electric  Image  of  M in  the  ball,  since  the  electric 
action  through  the  whole  space  external  to  the  ball  would  be 
unchanged  if  the  ball  were  removed  and  - M'  properly  placed 
in  the  space  left  vacant.  We  intend  to  return  to  this  subject 
under  Electricity. 

513.  Irrespectively  of  the  special  electric  application,  this 
method  of  images  gives  a remarkable  kind  of  transformation 
which  is  often  useful.  It  suggests  for  mere  geometry  what 
has  been  called  the  transformation  by  reciprocal  radius-vectors ; 
that  is  to  say,  the  substitution  for  any  set  of  points,  or  for  any 
diagram  of  lines  or  surfaces,  another  obtained  by  drawing  radii 
to  them  from  a certain  fixed  point  or  origin,  and  measuring  off 
lengths  inversely  proportional  to  these  radii  along  their  direc- 
tions. We  see  in  a moment  by  elementary  geometry  that  any 
line  thus  obtained  cuts  the  radius-vector  through  any  point  of 
it  at  the  same  angle  and  in  the  same  plane  as  the  line  from 
which  it  is  derived.  Hence  any  two  lines  or  surfaces  that  cut 
one  another  give  two  transformed  lines  or  surfaces  cutting  at 
the  same  angle:  and  infinitely  small  lengths,  areas,  and  volumes 
transform  into  others  whose  magnitudes  are  altered  respectively 
in  the  ratios  of  the  first,  second,  and  third  powers  of  the  distances 


513.] 


STATICS. 


G3 


of  the  latter  from  the  origin,  to  the  same  powers  of  the  distances  Trans- 
of  the  former  from  the  same.  Hence  the  lengths,  areas,  and  by  recipro- 
volumes  in  the  transformed  diagram,  corresponding  to  a set  vectors, 
of  given  equal  infinitely  small  lengths,  areas,  and  volumes,  how- 
ever situated,  at  different  distances  from  the  origin,  are  in- 
versely as  the  squares,  the  fourth  powers  and  the  sixth  powers 
of  these  distances.  Further,  it  is  easily  proved  that  a straight 
line  and  a plane  transform  into  a circle  and  a spherical  surface, 
each  passing  through  the  origin  ; and  that,  generally,  circles 
and  spheres  transform  into  circles  and  spheres. 


514.  In  the  theory  of  attraction,  the  transformation  of 
masses,  densities,  and  potentials  has  also  to  be  considered. 

Thus,  according  to  the  foundation  of  the  method  (§  512),  equal 
masses,  of  infinitely  small  dimensions  at  different  distances 
from  the  origin,  transform  into  masses  inversely  as  these  dis- 
tances, or  directly  as  the  transformed  distances  : and,  therefore, 
equal  densities  of  lines,  of  surfaces,  and  of  solids,  given  at  any 
stated  distances  from  the  origin,  transform  into  densities  directly 
as  the  first,  the  third,  and  the  fifth  powers  of  those  distances; 
or  inversely  as  the  same  powers  of  the  distances,  from  the 
origin,  of  the  corresponding  points  in  the  transformed  system. 

515*  The  statements  of  the  last  two  sections,  so  far  as  General 
proportions  alone  are  concerned,  are  most  conveniently  ex-  of  3a 
pressed  thus : — 


Let  P be  any  point  whatever  of  a geometrical  diagram,  or 
of  a distribution  of  matter,  0 one  particular  point  (“  the 
origin  ”),  and  a one  particular  length  (the  radius  of  the  “ reflect- 
ing  sphere  ).  In  OP  take  a point  P',  corresponding  to  P,  and 
for  any  mass  m,  in  any  infinitely  small  part  of  the  given  dis- 
tribution, place  a mass  m! ; fulfilling  the  conditions 


OP'  = 


a 

OP’ 


m 


a 

opm= 


OP' 

a 


m. 


en  if  L,  A,  V , p (Z),  p(A),  p(V)  denote  an  infinitely  small 
length,  area,  volume,  linear-density,  surface-density,  volume- 
density  in  the  given  distribution,  infinitely  near  to  P,  or 
anywhere  at  the  same  distance,  r,  from  0 as  P,  and  if  the 
corresponding  elements  in.  the  transformed  diagram  or  dis- 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


G4  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [515 

General  tribution  be  denoted  in  the  same  way  with  the  addition  of 

summary 

of  ratios,  accents,  we  have 


LlliO,  W ^ In*  » ^ 

T,  d1  T r*  T A'-a*  A-r'X  A-  r=-7  = i7, 
L = ~*L  = aiL’  A ~r4  "V  ’ y r°y  a°  ’ 

p (L)  = ^Jp(L)  (L)  5 P(A)  = FP^  = c?P  ^ ’ 


The  usefulness  of  this  transformation  in  the  theory  of  electricity, 
and  of  attraction  in  general,  depends  entirely  on  the  following 

theorem  : — 

Application  516.  (IWm.)-Let  * denote  the  potential  at  P due  ^ 
££Wl  the  given  distribution,  and  * the  potential  at  P due 
transformed  distribution : then  shall 

v . n . 

$ = -<t>= ?$■ 

T Pt  a mass  m collected  at  / be  any  part  of  the  given  dis- 
Let  a mass  m tribution,  and  let  m at  I' 

be  the  corresponding  part 
in  the  transformed  distri- 
bution. We  have 

o 2 = or . oi = or.  op, 

and  therefore 

OI : OP  ::  OF  : OP) 


IP  : PT 
We  have  besides 

and  therefore 


JOTOP  : JOKOP  ::  OI.OP:a\ 
m : ::  OI  • a> 


Tl  • — , ::  a : OP. 
TP  ' IT 


„ op  Pich  term  of  <#>  bears  to  the  corresponding  term  of  <#»' 

,k.Hr.  »•  r *•  “ *•  “ ‘ 

in  that  ratio,  as  was  to  be  proved. 


STATICS. 


65 


517.  As  an  example,  let  the  given  distribution  be  con-  Any distri- 
fined  to  a spherical  surface,  and  let  0 be  its  centre  and  a its  sj>hericai 
radius.  The  transformed  distribution  is  the  same.  But  the 
space  within  it  becomes  transformed  into  the  space  without 
it.  Hence  if  <£  be  the  potential  due  to  any  spherical  shell  at 
a point  P,  within  it,  the  potential  due  to  the  same  shell  at  the 

point  F in  OP  produced  till  OP'  = ~p,  is  equal  to  ~ <j> 

(which  is  an  elementary  proposition  in  the  spherical  harmonic 
treatment  of  potentials,  as  we  shall  see  presently).  Thus,  for 
instance,  let  the  distribution  be  uniform.  Then,  as  we  know 
there  is  no  force  on  an  interior  point,  <f>  must  be  constant ; and 
therefore  the,  potential  at  P\  any  external  point,  is  inversely 
proportional  to  its  distance  from  the  centre. 


Or  let  the  given  distribution  be  a uniform  shell,  S,  and  let  0 Uni*™ 
be  any  eccentric  or  any  external  point.  The  transformed  dis-  Ki ST 
tnbution  becomes  (§§  513,  514)  a spherical  shell,  S',  with 
density  varying  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  distance  from  0. 

If  O is  within  S,  it  is  also  enclosed  by  S',  and  the  whole  space 
'S  transforms  into  the  whole  space  without  S’.  Hence 
(§  516)  the  potential  of  S'  at  any  point  without  it  is  inversely 
as  the  distance  from  0,  and  is  therefore  that  of  a certain  quan- 
tity of  matter  collected  at  0.  Or  if  0 is  external  to  5 and 
consequently  also  external  to  S',  the  space  within  S transforms 
into  the  space  within  S'.  Hence  the  potential  of  S'  at  »n„ 


bcuJUU  uiagram  is  used. 


VOL.  II. 


5 


66 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[518. 


Uniform  518.  Wc  shall  give  just  one  other  application  of  the  theorem 
eccentn-6re  of  § 516  at  present,  hut  much  use  of  it  will  be  made  later,  in 
fleeted?"  the  theory  of  Electricity. 

Let  the  given  distribution  of  matter  he  a uniform  solid 
sphere,  B,  and  let  0 be  external  to  it.  The  transformed  system 
will  be  a solid  sphere,  B' , with  density  varying  inversely  as 
the  fifth  power  of  the  distance  from  0,  a point  external  to  it. 
The  potential  of  B is  the  same  throughout  external  space  as 
that  due  to  its  mass,  m,  collected  at  its  centre,  C.  Hence  the 
potential  of  B'  through  space  external  to  it  is  the  same  as  that 
of  the  corresponding  quantity  of  matter  collected  at  O',  the 
transformed  position  of  G.  This  quantity  is  of  course  equal 
to  the  mass  of  B'.  And  it  is  easily  proved  that  O'  is  the  posi- 
tion of  the  image  of  0 in  the  spherical  surface  of  B'.  We 
conclude  that  a solid  sphere  with  density  varying  inversely 
as  the  fifth  power  of  the  distance  from  an  external  point,  0, 
attracts  any  external  point  as  if  its  mass  were  condensed  at 
the  image  of  0 in  its  external  surface.  It  is  easy  to  verify 
this  for  points  of  the  axis  by  direct  integration,  and  thence  the 
general  conclusion  follows  according  to  § 490. 


Second  in- 
vestigation 

of  attrac- 
tion of 
ellipsoid. 


Elliptic 
homoeoid 
exerts  zero 
force  on 
internal  * 
point : 


519.  One  other  application  of  Green’s  great  theorem  of 
§ 503,  showing  us  a way  to  find  the  potential  and  the  resultant 
force  at  any  point  within  or  without  an  elliptic  homoeoid,  from 
which  we  are  led  to  a second  very  interesting  solution  of  the 
problem  of  finding  the  attraction  of  an  ellipsoid  differing 
greatly  from  that  of  § 494,  we  shall  now  give. 

An  elliptic  homoeoid  exercises  no  force  on  internal  points. 

To  prove  this,  let  the  infinitely  thin  spherical  shell  of  § 462, 
imagined  as  bounded  by  concentric  spherical  surfaces,  be  dis- 
torted (8S  158,  160)  by  simple  extensions  and  compressions 
in  three ' rectangular  directions,  so  as  to  become  an  elliptic 
homoeoid.  In  this  distorted  form,  the  volumes  of  all  parts  are 
diminished  or  increased  in  the  proportion  of  the  volume , ot  1 
ellipsoid  to  the  volume  of  the  sphere;  and  (§  loS)  “to  of 
the  lines  IIP,  PK  is  unaltered.  Hence  the  elements  I , , 

still  attract  P equally  ; and  therefore,  as  in  § 402,  we  conclude 
that  the  resultant  force  on  an  internal  point  is  zero. 


519.] 


STATICS. 


67 


It  follows  immediately  that  the  attraction  on  any  point  theorem 
in  the  hollow  space  within  a homoeoid  not  infinitely  thin  is  Newton, 
zero.  This  proposition  is  due  originally  to  Newton. 

520.  In  passing  it  may  he  remarked  that  the  distribution  of  oistribu- 
electricity  on  an  ellipsoidal  conductor,  undisturbed  by  electric  electricity 
influence,  is  thus  proved  to  be  in  simple  proportion  to  the  soidai'con- 
thickness  of  a homoeoid  coincident  with  its  surface,  and  there- 
fore (§  494,  foot-note)  directly  proportional  to  the  perpendicular 

from  the  centre  to  the  tangent  plane. 

521.  From  § 519  and  § 478  it  follows  that  the  resultant  Force 
force  on  an  external  point  anywhere  infinitely  near  the  homoeoid  aSjti? 
is  perpendicular  to  the  surface,  and  is  equal  to  47 rt,  if  t denote  founde°  d 
the  thickness  of  the  shell  in  that  neighbourhood  (its  density 

being  taken  as  unity).  It  follows  also  from  § 519  that  the 
potential  is  constant  throughout  the  interior  of  the  homoeoid 
and  over  its  surface.  Hence  the  distance  from  this  surface 
to  another  equipotential  infinitely  near  it  outside  is  inversely 
proportional  to  t ; and  therefore  (§  494)  this  second  surface 
is  ellipsoidal  and  confocal  with  the  first.  By  supposing  the 
proper  distribution  of  matter  (§  505)  placed  on  this  second 
surface  to  produce  over  it,  and  through  its  interior,  its  uniform 
potential,  we  see  in  the  same  way  that  the  third  equipotential 
infinitely  near  it  outside  is  ellipsoidal  and  confocal  with  it; 
and  similarly  again  that  a fourth  equipotential  is  an  ellipsoidal 
surface  confocal  with  the  third,  and  so  on.  Thus  we  conclude 
that  the  equipotentials  external  to  the  original  homoeoid  are 
the  whole  series  of  external  confocal  ellipsoidal  surfaces. 

522.  From  this  theorem  it  follows  immediately  that  any  Digression, 
two  confocal  homoeoids  of  equal  masses  produce  the  same  proof  Sr 
attraction  on  all  points  external  to  both.  And  from  this  (as  toSSt' 
pointed  out  by  Chasles,  Journal  de  VEcole  Poly  technique,  25  th 
Cahier,  Pans,  1837)  follows  immediately  Maclaurin’s  theorem 

us:— Consider  two  thick  homoeoids  having  the  outer  surfaces 
confocal,  and  also  their  inner  surfaces  confocal.  Divide  one 
of  them  into  an  infinite  number  of  similar  homoeoids;  and 
ivide  the  other  in  a corresponding  manner,  so  that  each  of 
i lomoeoidal  parts  shall  be  confocal  with  the  corresponding 

5—2 


68 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[522. 


Digression,  one  of  the  first.  These  two  thick  homoeoids  produce  the  same 
proof'of  force  on  any  point  external  to  both.  Now  let  the  hollow  of 
tbeorem.m  S one  of  them,  and  therefore  also  the  hollow  of  the  other,  become 
infinitely  small ; we  have  two  solid  confocal  ellipsoids,  and  it  is 
proved  that  they  exert  the  same  force  on  all  points  external 


523.  A beautiful  geometric  proof  of  the  theorem  of  § 521 
due  to  Chasles,  is  given  below,  § 532.  The  proof  given  m 
8 521  is  from  Thomson’s  “ Electrostatics  and  Magnetism 
(8  812  reprinted  from  Ccimb.  Math.  Jour.,  Feb.  1842). 
The  theorem  itself  is  due  to  Poisson,  who  proved  (in  the  Con- 
naissance  des  Temps  for  1837,  published  in  1834*)  that  the 
resultant  force  of  a homoeoid  on  an  external  point  is  in  tie 
direction  of  the  interior  axis  of  the  tangential  elliptic  cone 
through  the  attracted  point  circumscribed  about  the  homoeoid ; 
for  it&  is  a known  geometrical  proposition,  easily  proved,  that 
the  three  axes  of  the  tangential  cone  are  normal  to  the  three 
confocal  surfaces,  ellipsoid,  hyperboloid  of  one.  sheet,  and  hyper- 
boloid of  two  sheets,  through  its  vertex. 

524  The  magnitude  of  the  resultant  force  is  equal  to  4ttt, 
where  t denotes  the  thickness  of  the  confocal  homoeoid  equal  m 
bulk  to  the  given  homoeoid. 


to  both. 


Magnitude 
and  direc- 
tion of 
attraction 
of  elliptic 

lioraoeoid 
on  external 
point,  ex- 
pressed 
analytically. 


are  respectively 

4tt abetjp,  and  iirafSyT/'aT  ; 


and  therefore  the  resultant  force  is 


* See  Todliunter’s  History  of  the 


History  of  the  Mathematical  Theories  of  Attraction  ana 


xi.  Articles  1391 — 1415. 


the  Figure  of  the  Earth,  Vol.  n.  Articles  1391 


524.] 


STATICS. 


69 


Supposing  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  attracted  point 
xyz  given ; to  find  a/3y  we  have 

a9  = a9  + A ; (3 3 = b3  + k;  y3  = c3  + A (3), 

where  A is  the  positive  root  of  the  equation 


+ 


V 


a3  + A b2  + A e2  + A 


= 1 


•W, 


Magnitudo 
ana  direc- 
tion of 
attraction 
of  elliptic 
homoeoid 
on  external 
point,  ex- 
pressed 
analytically. 


these  equations  expressing  the  condition  that  the  two  ellipsoidal 
surfaces  are  confocal. 


To  complete  the  analytical  expression  remark  that 


-U7X  'uiy  'uJZ 

’ J3'  y 


(5) 


are  the  direction-cosines  of  the  line  of  the  resultant  force. 


525.  To  find  the  potential  at  any  point  remark  that  the  Potential  of 
difference  of  potentials  at  two  of  the  external  equipotential  sur-  homoeoid0 
faces  infinitely  little  distant  from  one  another  is  (§  486)  equal  to  externai'or* 
the  product  of  the  resultant  force  at  any  point  into  the  distance  found.al 
between  the  two  equipotentials  in  its  neighbourhood.  Hence, 
taking  the  potential  as  zero  at  an  infinite  distance  (§  485),  we 
find  by  summation  (a  single  integration)  the  potential  at  any 
point  external  to  the  given  homoeoid.  Now  let 

x±\dx,  y ± \dy,  z±\dz 

be  the  co-ordinates  of  the  two  points  infinitely  near  one  another, 
on  two  confocal  surfaces.  The  distance  between  the  two  surfaces 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  this  point  is 


TSX 

a2  + A 


dx  + 


my 

FTa 


dy  + 


mZ 


c2  + A 


dz 


(6). 


Let  now  the  squares  of  the  semi-axes  of  these  surfaces  be 


+ A ^cZA  ^ 6" -f  A =*=  j|cZA  j c3+A=t^cZA. 
Now  by  differentiation  of  (4)  we  have 
o ( xdx  ydy  zdz  \ 

V + A b3  + \ c2  + A/ 


{(» 


X 


+ 


?/ 


(a2  + A)2"  (62+  A)2  + (c2+  A) 
dk 


9? 


Hence  (6)  becomes 


) w 


.(7). 


2m 


/ 


Potential  of 
an  elliptic 
liomoeoicl 
at  any  point 
external  or 
internal 
found. 


Synthesis  of 

concentric 

homoeoids. 


70 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Hence,  and  by  § 525  above,  and  by  (2)  of  § 524  we  have 

* = -2  ,^-idX 

apyv 


[525. 


.(8). 


d\ 


•(9), 


Hence,  and  by  (3)  of  § 524, 

„ abet  f 

v = -2tt I 1 1 

V Joo  (a2  + (b2  + Xy  (c2  + A)* * * § 

where  co  denotes  that  the  constant  is  so  assigned  as  to  render 
the  value  of  the  integral  zero  when  A = co  . 


526.  Having  now  found  the  potential  of  an  elliptic  homoeoid, 
and  its  resultant  force  at  any  point  external  or  internal,  we 
can,  by  simple  integration,  find  the  potential  and  the  resultant 
force  of  a homogeneous  ellipsoid,  or  of  a heterogeneous  ellipsoid 
with,  for  its  surfaces  of  equal  density,  similar  concentric  ellip- 
soidal surfaces.  To  do  this  we  have  only  to  divide  the  ellipsoid 
into  elliptic  homoeoids,  and  find  the  potential  of  each  by  (9), 
and  the  potential  of  the  whole  by  summation ; and  again  find 
the  rectangular  components  of  the  force  of  each  by  (2)  and  (5) ; 
and  from  this  by  summation*  the  rectangular  components  of 
the  required  resultant. 


Let  abc  be  the  semi-axes  of  the  whole  ellipsoid.  Let  6a,  6b,  6c, 
be  the  semi-axes  of  the  middle  surface  of  one  of  the  interior 
homoeoids;  and 


(6  ± \d6)  a,  (0±\d6)b,  {6±\d6)c 

those  of  its  outer  and  inner  bounding  surfaces.  From  the 
general  definition  of  a homoeoid,  elliptic  or  not,  it  follows  imme- 
diately that  tip  = d6/6.  Let  now  p,  a given  function  of  6,  be  the 
density  of  the  ellipsoid  in  the  homoeoidal  stratum  corresponding 
to  6.  Hence  by  (9)  remembering  that  the  density  there  was 
taken  as  unity,  and  putting  6a,  6b,  6c  in  place  of  a,  b,  c,  we  find 
for  the  potential  of  the  homoeoid  6 ± \d6  the  following  expres- 
sion, 

dt 


— 2ircibc6 


! Pd6  f 

d a 


(10), 


* Chasles,  “Nouvelle  solution  du  probl&me  de  l’attraction  d’un  ellipsoide 
hdterogeine  sur  un  point  exterieur”  (Lioiwillc’s  Journal,  Dec.  1840).  Also  W. 

Thomson,  “ On  the  Uniform  Motion  of  Heat  in  Solid  Bodies,  and  its  connection 

with  the  Mathematical  Theory  of  Electricity,  Electrostatics  and  Magnetism, 

§ 21—24.  (Reprinted  from  Cambridge  Mathematical  Journal,  Feb.  1842.) 


STATICS. 


71 


526.] 


where  t is  introduced  as  the  variable  of  the  definite  integration,  Synthesis  of 
° # concentric 

because  A is  presently  to  be  made  a function  of  0.  Hence  if  B homoeoids. 
denote  the  potential  of  the  whole  ellipsoid,  we  have 

V=  - 2v abc  f 62pcW  T r — — T t (11), 

j o L (62a?+  ty(d2b*+ cy  (<9v+ tr 

where  A is  a function  of  6 given  by  the  equation 


**  _ , _ y* 

x ' r\ot 


= 1 


.(12). 


e2a2  + A 62b2  + A 62c 2 + A 

The  expression  (11)  is  simplified  by  introducing,  instead  of  9 
or  A,  another  variable  A /62.  Calling  this  u,  so  that 

A =62u  (13), 

we  have  by  (12) 


62  = 


x 


y2  z2 
J + 


a2  + u b2  + u c2  + u 


.(14). 


By  differentiation  of  (12)  we  have 


cl\ 


x 


; + 


y 


+ 


d(62)  l (a2+u)2  (b2+u)2  (c2+u) 


a2x2 

~~  l{cc2+u 


b9f 

, + Tro”  To  + 


cV 


.1 


And  from  (13)  du  = -6a 

9~ 


dX. 


d {9  ) 

Whence,  on  using  (14),  we  find 


+u )2  (i b3+u )2  (c2+u)2  J 
^-u\d  (62). 


Potential 
of  hetero- 
geneous 
ellipsoid 


— 26 dd  = 


X2 


+ 


y 


^2  n 


au. 


_(a2  + u)2  (b2  + u)2  ( c2  + uy_ 

Then  changing  the  valuable  of  integration  in  the  function  under 
the  second  integral  sign  in  (11)  from  £ to  £/02,  and  writing  u for 
£/02,  we  find  by  means  of  these  transformations, 


V = 7 rabc 


S}duk‘ 


X 


> + • 


V 


( (*’  + “)’ ' (c‘  + unL(a‘+u)i(i‘+u)i(<?+uf 

- (15). 

where  q is  the  positive  root  of  the  equation 


du 


x 


z 


= 1 


.(16). 


ar  +q  b2  + q c2  + q 

For  the  case  of  uniform  density  in  which  we  may  put  p=  1, 
this  becomes  simplified  by  integration  by  parts,  thus  : 

iju  (c+uy  // W du  — crrq  j'f  W du + '(«) 

=crrql/(u)du-icT-/(u)- 


I 


72 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [526. 


Potential 
of  homo- 
geneous 
ellipsoid. 


Attraction 
of  hetero- 
geneous 
ellipsoid. 


Putting  for  C successively  a3,  b2,  c2,  using  the  result  properly  in 
(15),  and  talcing  account  of  (16),  and  putting 

£tt abc  = M (17), 

we  find 


3 M r / _ a;2  _ y2  _ z2  \ du 

~Tl\  a2  + u b2  + u c2  + u)  (a2  + w)i(&a+w)i(cs  + w)* 

(18), 

which  agrees  with  § 494  above. 

Just  as  we  have  found  (15),  we  find  from  (2),  (5),  (13), ‘and  (14), 
the  following  expression  for  the  ce-components  of  the  resultant 
force  and  the  symmetricals  for  the  y-  and  z-components : 


3Mx  f”  pdu 

2 Jq  ( a 2 + u)~  ( b 2 + u)^  (c2  + w)3 


(19), 


where  p,  a function  of  6 , is  reduced  to  a function  of  u by  (14). 

For  the  case  of  a homogeneous  ellipsoid  (/>=  1),  these  results 
become  (20)  and  (21)  of  § 494.  As  there  they  were  for  external 
points  deduced  by  aid  of  Maclaurin’s  theorem  from  the  attraction 
of  an  ellipsoid  on  a point  at  its  surface,  so  now  when  proved  other- 
wise they  contain  a proof  of  Maclaurin’s  theorem.  This  we  see 
in  a moment  by  putting  u = w + q in  the  integrals,  w hich  makes 
the  limits  w — 0 and  w = go  . 

527.  In  the  case  of  a homogeneous  ellipsoid  of  revolution 
the  integrals  expressing  the  potential  and  the  force-components 
(which  for  a homogeneous  ellipsoid,  in  general,  are  elliptic  inte- 
grals) are  reduced  to  algebraic  and  trigonometrical  forms,  thus  : 
let  b — c and  z = 0. 

We  have 


t-HXx+Yy). 


•(20), 


(21)- 


(b2  +u)2  (a2  +uf  _ 


To  reduce  these  put 


b2  + u = 


b2  - a2 


.(22): 


527.] 


STATICS. 


73 


which  reduces  the  three  integrals  to  2/(b2  — a2)^.  Jd£/ (1  £ )”> 

2/  ( b 2 - a2)1 . j^/(l  - f )f,  and  2/  (52  - a2)" . J?d&  (1  -£2)'  1 and 

makes  the  limits  in  each  of  them 

. > /62-a2 

%-otot-^y  ba+^. 


We  thus  find 

3 d/ 


r t tan'1  /£-?-  - 1 (Xx  + Ty) 

2 (b’-arf  V cs+q 

{ /^-tan-1  /^i 
«'+3  V « +?J 


•(23), 


Y= 


(b2-ay 

3My 


2 (62-a2)f^tan  V a*  + q b2  + q 


-I  !K~  - ft2  _ (&2-«g)2(^2  + /)- 


!} 


•(24), 


where,  for  any  external  point,  q is  the  positive  root  of  the 
equation 


x"  if 

+ t^—  = 1 


a2  + q b2  + q 


•(25), 


as  and  y denoting  the  co-ordinates  of  the  attracted  point  respec- 
tively along  and  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  revolution,  and 
for  any  internal  point  or  for  points  on  the  surface  q = 0. 


V= 
X = 


Formulas  (23)  and  (24)  realized  for  the  case  of  a > b become 
3 M , J(a2-b2)  + J(a2  + q) 

J(p*  + q) 

J(a,*  - b2)  + J(a2  + <?) 

V(62  + ?) 


I log 

9 /n*-h*\* 


{a2  ~b2f 
3Mx 


4(**+ry) (26), 


(a2  - b2)1 

r SMV  (K-PlV+g)*  7K-J!)  +*/(«■+?) 
2(a2-62)fl  62+<? 


{l°g 


- /— [ 
\/  a2  + q) 


log 


J(b*  + q) 


> 


(27). 


The  structure  of  these  expressions  (23),  (24),  (26),  (27),  is 
elucidated,  and  calculation  of  results  from  them  is  facilitated 
by  taking 

/=  “<V(4* -«•)  = !• (28), 

and  again  e=  , and  J(a‘  - b‘)  = s (29); 


Potential 
and  attrac- 
tion of 
homo- 
geneous 
ellipsoid  of 
revolution : 


oblate: 


prolate. 


/ 


prolate. 


Third  in- 
vestigation 
of  the 
attraction 
of  an 
ellipsoid. 


Correspond 
ing  points 
on  confocal 
ellipsoids 
defined. 

Digression ; 
orthogonal 
trajectory 
of  confocal 


74  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 

"which  reduces  them  to  the  following  alternative  forms : — 


[527. 


F = |“  ton-/-  J(X*+  Yy)^\oSAJl±±-\(Xx+Ty)...(3% 


3Mx 

^=-3- (/-tan  '/) 


3 Mx 


3 My  / . j r f \ ?>My  ( e /l+e\ 

F-lpr(ton  = 


(31). 


Then,  for  determining  / or  e,  in  the  case  of  an  external  point, 
(25)  becomes 

f (x2 + Y+f*) = r*’ an(i  &2  (x2  + r^e"2) = fi2 (32)* 

In  the  case  of  an  internal  point  we  have 


(33). 


528.  The  investigation  of  the  attraction  of  an  ellipsoid 
which  was  most  popular  in  England  40  to  50  years  ago  re- 
sembled that  of  § 494  above,  in  finding  the  attraction  of  an 
internal  point  by  direct  integration,  substantially  the  same  as 
that  of  § 494,  and  deducing  from  the  result  the  attraction  of 
an  external  point  by  a special  theorem. 


But  the  theorem  then  popularly  used  for  the  purpose  was 
not  Maclaurin’s  theorem,  which  was  little  known,  strange 
to  say,  in  England  at  that  time ; it  was  Ivory’s  theorem,  much 
less  beautiful  and  simple  and  directly  suitable  for  the  purpose 
than  Maclaurin’s,  but  still  a very  remarkable  theorem,  curiously 
different  from  Maclaurin’s,  and  in  one  respect  more  important 
and  comprehensive,  because,  as  was  shown  by  Poisson,  it  is 
not  confined  to  the  Newtonian  Law  of  Attraction,  but  holds 
for  force  varying  as  any  function  of  the  distance.  Before  enun- 
ciating Ivory’s  theorem,  take  his  following  definition  : — 

529.  Corresponding  points  on  two  confocal  ellipsoids  are 
any  two  points  which  coincide  when  either  ellipsoid  is  deformed 
by  a pure  strain  so  as  to  coincide  with  the  other. 

In  connection  with  this  definition,  it  is  interesting  to  remark 
that  each  point  on  the  surface  of  the  changing  ellipsoid  de- 


STATICS. 


75 


529.] 


scribes  an  orthogonal  trajectory  of  the  intermediate  series  of  ellipsoids  is 
confocal  ellipsoids  if  the  distortion  specified  in  the  definition  any  point  of 

A _ lie  a confocally 

is  produced  continuously  in  such  a manner  that  the  surface  dhtorted, 
of  the  ellipsoid  is  always  confocal  with  its  original  figure.  soid: 

To  prove  this  proposition,  which  however  is  not  necessary  for  proof, 
our  present  purpose,  let  abc  be  the  semi-axes  of  the  ellipsoid  in 
one  configuration,  and  J(a2  + h),  J(b2  + h),  J(c2  + h)  in  another. 

If  xyz  be  the  co-ordinates  of  any  point  P on  the  surface  in  the 
first  configuration,  its  co-ordinates  in  the  second  configuration 
will  be 

J(c 9 4-  h) 


J(a2+h)  J(b2+h) 

x > y j. 


a 


.(32). 


When  h is  infinitely  small  the  differences  of  the  co-ordinates  of 
these  points  are 


x 


ih=»  1*3- 


a 


Hence  the  direction-cosines  of  the  line  joining  them  are  propor- 
tional to  x/a2,  y/b2,  z/c2,  and  therefore  it  coincides  with  the 
normal  to  the  two  infinitely  nearly  coincident  surfaces. 

530.  The  property  of  corresponding  points  (essential  for  ivory’s 

Ivory’s  theorem,  and  for  Cliasles’,  § 532  below)  is  this  : — ^“pend- 

ing points. 

If  P,P'  be  any  two  points  on  one  ellipsoid,  and  Q,  Q'  the 
corresponding  points  on  any  confocal  ellipsoid,  PQ'  is  equal 
to  P'Q. 

To  prove  this,  let  xyz  be  the  co-ordinates  of  P,  and  x y'  z' 
those  of  P . Taking  (32)  as  the  co-ordinates  of  Q,  we  find 

-(*'-*  J + (y-  y J + (*'  - . 

r =*'*  - +*•  (i + £.) + *<=• 

Now  because  (x,  y,  z ) is  on  the  ellipsoidal  surface  (a,  b,  c),  we 
have 

x2  y2  ~2 


— V - — i — = 1 

a2  b3  c* 


Hence  the  preceding  becomes 


PY)2  o ( ’ /(Pbli  / b~+h  fc 

PQ-x  +*  -2{xxJ 


9+/l\  , 

cr)  t -x2+y2+z2+h. 


I 


Ivory’s 

theorem, 


proved. 


76  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [530. 

This  is  symmetrical  in  respect  to  xyz  and  x'y'z and  so  the 
proposition  is  proved. 

531.  The  following  is  Ivory’s  Theorem  : — Let  F and  P be 
corresponding  points  on  the  surfaces  of  two  homogeneous  con- 
focal  ellipsoids  (a,  b,  c)  ( a ',  b' , c) ; the  ^-component  of  the 
attraction  of  the  ellipsoid  abc  on  the  point  P is  to  the  #-com- 
ponent  of  the  attraction  of  the  ellipsoid  ab'c  on  the  point  F as 
be  is  to  b'c. 

Let  x,  y,  z be  the  co-ordinates  of  P,  the  attracted  point ; 

„ £,  7],  £ „ co-ordinates  of  any  point  of  the  mass  ; 

})  D . „ distance  between  the  two  points ; 

„ F (D)  d£dr\d£  be  the  attraction  of  the  elemental  mass 
d£dr)dt  at  (£,  7],  £),  on  (*,  y,  z ); 

Let  X be  the  .^-component  of  the  attraction  of  the  whole  ellip- 
soid (a,  b,  c)  on  (x,  y,  z). 

We  have 

x=jjfdidv%F(nf-=d  = jjfd&vdtFp)  x (-  ~) 


Now  F (D)  being  any  function  of  D , let 

Jf(£>)  dD  = -\j/  (D) ; 

and  let  F,  G be  the  positive  and  negative  ends  of  the  bar  dydt, 
of  the  ellipsoid,  that  is  to  say,  the  points  on  the  positive  and 
negative  sides  of  the  plane  yoz  in  which  the  surface  of  the 
ellipsoid  is  cut  by  the  line  parallel  to  ox,  having  for  its  other 
co-ordinates.  The  proper  limits  being  assigned  to  the  ^-integra- 
tion in  the  formula  for  X above  being  assigned,  we  find 

x-j[dnn{^(EF)-<neP) }. 

Now  let  E'G'  be  points  on  a confocal  ellipsoidal  surface 
(a,  b' , c)  through  P,  corresponding  to  E and  G on  the  surface  of 
the  given  ellipsoid  (a,  b,  c );  and  let  P be  the  point  on  the  lust 
ellipsoidal  surface  corresponding  to  P on  the  second.  The  y-  z- 
co-ordinates  common  to  E'G ' are  respectively  b'/b  . tj  and  c'/c.£; 


STATICS. 


77 


531.] 


and  by  lemma  EP  = E'F  and  GP  = G'P'.  Hence  if  we  change 
from  as  variables  for  the  double  integration  in  the  preceding 
formula  for  X,  to  rj'C,  we  find 

x~mlfa,dC  {f  {EP)  ~ * {eF)]’ 

which  is  Ivory’s  theorem. 

532.  Two  confocal  homoeoids  of  equal  masses  being  given,  Cha^^ 
the  potential  of  the  first  at  any  point,  P,  of  the  surface  of  the  Jgween^ 
second,  is  equal  to  that  of  the  second  at  the  corresponding  j^f0c»iw0 
point,  P',  on  the  surface  of  the  first..  , homoeoids. 

Let  E be  any  element  of  the  first  and  E'  the  corresponding 
element  of  the  second.  The  mass  of  each  element  bears  to  the 
mass  of  the  whole  homoeoid  the  same  ratio  as  the  mass  of  the 
corresponding  element  of  a uniform  spherical  shell,  from  which 
either  homoeoid  may  be  derived,  bears  to  the  whole  mass  of 
the  spherical  shell.  Hence  the  mass  of  E is  equal  to  the  mass 
of  E' ; and  by  Ivory’s  lemma  (§  530)  PE  = P'E.  Hence  the 
proposition  is  true  for  the  parts  of  the  potential  due  to  the 
corresponding  elements,  and  therefore  it  is  due  for  the  entire 
shells. 

t 

This  beautiful  proposition  is  due  to  Chasles.  It  holds,  what-  Proof  of 
ever  be  the  law  of  force.  From  it,  for  the  case  of  the  inverse  theorem 
square  of  the  distance,  and  from  Newton’s  Theorem  for  this  attraction 
case  that  the  force  is  zero  within  an  elliptic  homoeoid,  or,  which  homoeoid. 
is  the  same,  that  the  potential  is  constant  through  the  interior, 
it  follows  that  the  external  equipotential  surfaces  of  an  elliptic 
homoeoid  are  confocal  ellipsoids,  and  therefore  that  the  attrac- 
tion on  an  external  point  is  normal  to  a confocal  ellipsoid 
passing  through  the  point;  which  is  the  same  conclusion  as  that 
of  § 521  above. 


533.  An  ingenious  application  of  Ivory’s  theorem,  by  Law  of  at- 
Duhamel,  must  not  be  omitted  here.  Concentric  spheres  are  SS°auni- 
a particular  case  of  confocal  ellipsoids,  and  therefore  the  at-  caiTheii10”* 
traction  of  any  sphere  on  a point  on  the  surface  of  an  internal  action  on  an 
concentric  sphere,  is  to  that  of  the  latter  upon  a point  in  the  pohit.ml 
surface  of  the  former  as  the  squares  of  the  radii  of  the  spheres. 

Now  if  the  laiv  of  attraction  be  such  that  a homogeneous  spherical 


Law  of  at- 
traction 
when  a uni- 
form spheri- 
cal shell 
exerts  no 
action  on  an 
internal 
point. 


Cavendish’s 

theorem. 


Centre  of 
gravity. 


Centrobaric 

bodies, 

proved 

Sossible 
y Green. 


Properties 
of  centro- 
baric 
bodies. 


i 


78  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [533. 

shell  of  uniform  thickness  exerts  no  attraction  on  an  internal  point, 
tlie  action  of  the  larger  sphere  on  the  internal  point  is  reduced 
to  that  of  the  smaller.  Hence  the  smaller  sphere  attracts 
points  on  its  surface  and  points  external  to  it,  with  forces 
inversely  as  the  squares  of  their  distances  from  its  centre. 
Hence  the  law  of  force  is  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance,  as  is 
easily  seen  by  making  the  smaller  sphere  less  and  less  till  it 
becomes  a mere  particle.  This  theorem  is  due  originally  to 
Cavendish. 

4 

534.  ( Definition .)  If  the  action  of  terrestrial  or  other  gravity 
on  a rigid  body  is  reducible  to  a single  force  in  a line  passing 
always  through  one  point  fixed  relatively  to  the  body,  whatever 
be  its  position  relatively  to  the  earth  or  other  attracting  mass, 
that  point  is  called  its  centre  of  gravity,  and  the  body  is  called 
a centrobaric  body. 

One  of  the  most  startling  results  of  Green’s  wonderful 
theory  of  the  potential  is  its  establishment  of  the  existence  of 
centrobaric  bodies  ; and  the  discovery  of  their  properties  is 
not  the  least  curious  and  interesting  among  its  very  various 
applications. 

534  a.  If  a body  (. B ) is  centrobaric  relatively  to  any  one 
attracting  mass  (A),  it  is  centrobaric  relatively  to  every  other : 
and  it  attracts  all  matter  external  to  itself  as  if  its  own  mass 
were  collected  in  its  centre  of  gravity  *. 

Let  0 be  any  point  so  distant  from  B that  a spherical  surface 
described  from  it  as  centre,  and  not  containing  any  part  of  B, 
is  large  enough  entirely  to  contain  A.  Let  A be  placed  within 
any  such  spherical  surface  and  made  to  rotate  about  any  axis, 
OK,  through  0.  It  will  always  attract  B in  a line  through  G, 
the  centre  of  gravity  of  B.  Hence  if  every  particle  of  its  mass 
be  uniformly  distributed  over  the  circumference  of  the  circle 
that  it  describes  in  this  rotation,  the  mass,  thus  obtained,  will 
also  attract  B in  a line  through  G.  And  this  will  be  the  case 
however  this  mass  is  rotated  round  0 ; since  before  obtaining 
it  we  might  have  rotated  A and  OK  in  any  way  round  0,  hold- 

* Thomson,  Froc.  R.  S.  E .,  Feb.  1SG4. 


STATICS. 


79 


534  a.] 


ing  them  fixed  relatively  to  one  another.  We  have  therefore 
found  a body,  A',  symmetrical  about  an  axis,  OK,  relatively 
to  which  B is  necessarily  centrobaric.  Now,  0 being  kept 
fixed,  let  OK,  carrying  A'  with  it,  be  put  successively  into  an 
infinite  number,  n,  of  positions  uniformly  distributed  round  0 ; 
that  is  to  say,  so  that  there  are  equal  numbers  of  positions  of 

OK  in  all  equal  solid  angles  round  0 : and  let  - part  of  the 

r\\ 

mass  of  A'  be  left  in  each  of  the  positions  into  which  it 
was  thus  necessarily  carried.  B will  experience  from  all  this 
distribution  of  matter,  still  a resultant  force  through  G.  But 
this  distribution,  being  symmetrical  all  round  0,  consists  of 
uniform  concentric  shells,  and  (§  471)  the  mass  of  each  of  these 
shells  might  be  collected  at  0 without  changing  its  attraction 
on  any  particle  of  B , and  therefore  without  changing  its  re- 
sultant attraction  on  B.  Hence  B is  centrobaric  relatively  to 
a mass  collected  at  0 ; this  being  any  point  whatever  not 
nearer  than  within  a certain  limiting  distance  from  B (accord- 
ing to  the  condition  stated  above).  That  is  to  say,  any  point 
placed  beyond  this  distance  is  attracted  by  B in  a line  through 
G ; and  hence,  beyond  this  distance,  the  equipotential  surfaces 
of  B are  spherical  with  G for  common  centre.  B therefore 
attracts  points  beyond  this  distance  as  if  its  mass  were  collected 
at  G : and  it  follows  (§  497)  that  it  does  so  also  through  the 
whole  space  external  to  itself.  Hence  it  attracts  any  group 
of  points,  or  any  mass  whatever,  external  to  it,  as  if  its  own 
mass  were  collected  at  G. 


534  b.  Hence  §§  497,  492  show  that — 

(1)  The  centre  of  gravity  of  a centrobaric  body  necessarily  lies 
in  its  interior;  or  in  other  words,  can  only  be  reached  from 
external  space  by  a path  cutting  through  some  of  its  mass.  And 

(2)  No  centrobaric  body  can  consist  of  parts  isolated  from  one 
another,  each  in  space  external  to  all:  in  other  words,  the  outer 
boundary  of  every  centrobaric  body  is  a single  closed  surface. 

Thus  we  see,  by  (a),  that  no  symmetrical  ring,  or  hollow 
cylinder  with  open  ends,  can  have  a centre  of  gravity  ; for  its 


Properties 
of  centro- 
baric 
bodies. 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


80 


[534  b. 


Froportios  centre  of  gravity,  if  it  had  one,  would  be  in  its  axis,  and  there- 
of centro-  o ’ 

biiric  fore  external  to  its  mass. 

bodies. 

534  c.  If  any  mass  whatever,  M,  and  any  single  surface,  S, 
completely  enclosing  it  be  given,  a distribution  of  any  given 
amount,  M ’,  of  matter  on  this  surface  may  be  found  which  shall 
make  the  whole  centrobaric  with  its  centre  of  gravity  in  any 
given  position  ( G)  within  that  surface. 

The  condition  here  to  be  fulfilled  is  to  distribute  M'  over  8, 
so  as  by  it  to  produce  the  potential 

M+M' 

EG 

any  point,  E,  of  8;  V denoting  the  potential  of  M at  this 
point.  The  possibility  and  singleness  of  the  solution  of  this 
problem  were  proved  above  (§  499).  It  is  to  be  remarked, 
however,  that  if  M’  be  not  given  in  sufficient  amount,  an  extra 
quantity  must  be  taken,  but  neutralized  by  an  equal  quantity 
of  negative  matter,  to  constitute  the  required  distribution  on  S. 

The  case  in  which  there  is  no  given  body  M to  begin  with 
is  important ; and  yields  the  following  : — 


Centrobaric  534  d.  A given  quantity  of  matter  may  be  distributed  in  one 
way , but  in  only  one  way,  over  any  given  closed  surface,  so  as  to 
constitute  a centrobaric  body  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  any 
given  point  within  it. 

Thus  we  have  already  seen  that  the  condition  is  fulfilled  by 
making  the  density  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  distance  from 
the  given  point,  if  the  surface  be  spherical.  From  what  was 
proved  in  §§  501,  506  above,  it  appears  also  that  a centrobanc 
shell  may  be  made  of  either  half  of  the  lemniscate  in  the 
diagram  of  § 508,  or  of  any  of  the  ovals  within  it,  by  distributing 
matter  with  density  proportional  to  the  resultant  force  of  m at  I 
and  m at  and  that  the  one  of  these  points  which  is  within 
it  is  its  centre  of  gravity.  And  generally,  by  drawing  the 
equipotential  surfaces  relatively  to  a mass  m collected  at  a 
point  I,  and  any  other  distribution  of  matter  whatever  not 
surrounding  this  point ; and  by  taking  one  of  these  surfaces 
which  encloses  I but  no  other  part  of  the  mass,  we  learn,  by 


STATICS. 


81 


534  d.] 


Green’s  general  theorem,  and  the  special  proposition  of  § 50G,  Cenjrobaric 
how  to  distribute  matter  over  it  so  as  to  make  it  a centrobaric 
shell  with  I for  centre  of  gravity. 


534  e.  Under  hydrokinetics  the  same  problem  will  be  solved 
for  a cube,  or  a rectangular  parallelepiped  in  general,  in  terms 
of  converging  series ; and  under  electricity  (in  a subsequent 
volume)  it  will  be  solved  in  finite  algebraic  terms  for  the 
surface  of  a lens  bounded  by  two  spherical  surfaces  cutting 
one  another  at  any  sub-multiple  of  two  right  angles,  and  for 
either  part  obtained  by  dividing  this  surface  in  two  by  a third 
spherical  surface  cutting  each  of  its  sides  at  right  angles. 


534/  Matter  may  be  distributed  in  an  infinite  number  of  centrobaric 
ways  throughout  a given  closed  space , to  constitute  a centrobaric 
body  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  any  given  point  within  it. 

For  by  an  infinite  number  of  surfaces,  each  enclosing  the 
given  point,  the  whole  space  between  this  point  and  the  given 
closed  surface  may  be  divided  into  infinitely  thin  shells ; and 
matter  may  be  distributed  on  each  of  these  so  as  to  make  it 
centrobaric  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  the  given  point.  Both 
the  forms  of  these  shells  and  the  quantities  of  matter  distributed 
on  them,  may  be  arbitrarily  varied  in  an  infinite  variety  of 
ways. 

Thus,  for  example,  if  the  given  closed  surface  be  the  pointed  Properties 
oval  constituted  by  either  half  of  the  lemniscate  of  the  diagram  baric 
of  § 508,  and  if  the  given  point  be  the  point  I within  it,  a 
centrobaric  solid  may  be  built  up  of  the  interior  ovals  with 
matter  distributed  over  them  to  make  them  centrobaric  shells 
as  above  (§  531).  From  what  was  proved  in  § 518,  we  see 
tbat  a solid  sphere,  with  its  density  varying  inversely  as  the 
fifth  power  of  the  distance  from  an  external  point,  is  centro- 
baric, and  that  its  centre  of  gravity  is  the  image  (§  512)  of 
this  point  relatively  to  its  surface. 


534  g.  The  centre  of  gravity  of  a centrobaric  body  composed  The  centre 
of  true  gravitating  matter  is  its  centre  of  inertia.  For  a centro-  $f  lterftt) 
baric  body,  if  attracted  only  by  another  infinitely  distant  body,  onner«a.tre 
or  by  matter  so  distributed  round  itself  as  to  produce  (§  499) 

VOL.  II.  (3  . 


82 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[584-  g. 


The  centre  uniform  force  in  parallel  lines  throughout  the  space  occupied 
OfaTxS)  by  it,  experiences  {§  528)  a resultant  force  always  through  its  j 
ofiitrtta.  centre  of  gravity.  But  in  this  case  this  force  is  the  resultant  j 
of  parallel  forces  on  all  the  particles  of  the  body,  which  (see 
Properties  of  Matter,  below)  are  rigorously  proportional  to  j 
their  masses : and  in  § 561  it  is  proved  that  the  resultant  of 
such  a system  of  parallel  forces  passes  through  the  point  defined 
in  § 230,  as  the  centre  of  inertia. 

a centre-  535.  The  moments  of  inertia  of  a centrobaric  body  are  1 
kine°ti(»iiy“  eqUal  round  all  axes  through  its  centre  of  inertia.  In  other 
words  (§  285),  all  these  axes  are  principal  axes,  and  the  body 
gravity.  is  kinetically  symmetrical  round  its  centie  of  ineitia. 

Let  it  be  placed  with  its  centre  of  inertia  at  a point  0 (origin 
of  co-ordinates),  within  a closed  surface  having  matter  so  dis- 
tributed over  it  (§  499)  as  to  have  xyz  [which  satisfies  v*  (**/*) =°]  I 
for  potential  at  any  point  (x,  y,  z)  within  it.  The  resultant  action 
on  the  body  is  (§  528)  the  same  as  if  it  were  collected  at  0;  that 
is  to  say,  zero  : or,  in  other  words,  the  forces  on  its  different  parts 
must  balance.  Hence  (§  551, 1.,  below)  if  p be  the  density  of  the 

body  at  ( x , y,  z) 

jljyzpdxdydz=0,  jjjzxPdxdydz  = 0,  jjjxypdxdydz= 0. 

Hence  OX,  OY,  OZ  are  principal  axes;  and  this,  however  the 
body  is  turned,  only  provided  its  centre  of  gravity  is  kept  at  0. 

To  prove  this  otherwise,  let  V denote  the  potential  of  the' 
given  body  at  (x,  y,z)’,u  any  function  of  y,  z;  and  tv  the 

triple  integral 

[[[(*!  d l + f dJ-  + ^ P)  dxdydz, 

JJJ  \dx  dx  dy  dy  dz  dz  J 

extended  through  the  interior  of  a spherical  surface,  S,  enclosing* 
all  of  the  given  body,  and  having  for  centre  its  centre  of  graMty. 
Then,  as  in  Chap.  I.  App.  A,  we  have 

= j jdu  Vda  - JJj  Vv  hulxdydz  j 

= f[d  Vuda  - [[ [uYa  V dxdydz. 


5*35.] 


STATICS. 


83 


But  if  m be  the  whole  mass  of  the  given  body,  and  a the  radius  Properties 

of  S,  we  have,  over  the  whole  surface  of  S,  barfcntT° 

bodies. 


V=~,  and  dV=~  — 
a a 


Also  [§  491c]  V2F=-4tt p, 

vanishing  of  course  for  all  points  not  belonging  to  the  mass  of 
the  given  body.  Hence  from  the  preceding  we  have 

lir  jjjupdsedydz  = JJ(adu  + u)  da  - j jJWudxdydz . 

Let  now  u be  any  function  fulfilling  V2u  = 0 through  the  whole 
space  within  S ; so  that,  by  § 492,  we  have  Jjduda  = 0,  and  by 


496,  ljuder  = 47ra2M0 , if  u0  denote  the  value  of  u at  the  centre 


of  S.  Hence 


j updxdydz  = muQ . 

Let,  for  instance,  u = yz.  We  have  u0  = 0,  and  therefore 

yzpdxdydz  = 0, 


//> 


as  we  found  above.  Or  let  u = (x2  + y 2)  - (x2  + z2),  which  gives 
u0  = 0 j and  consequently  proves  that 


fJJ(x2  + z2)  pdxdydz  = Jjj(x2  + if)  pdxdydz, 


or  the  moment  of  inertia  round  OY  is  equal  to  that  round  OX, 
verifying  the  conclusion  inferred  from  the  other  result. 


536.  The  spherical  harmonic  analysis,  which  forms  the  sub-  Origin  of 
ject  of  an  Appendix  to  Chapter  I.,  had  its  origin  in  the  theory 
of  attraction,  treated  with  a view  especially  to  the  figure  of  the  LeS're°f 
earth;  having  been  first  invented  by  Legendre  and  Laplace  for  piaceLa' 
the  sake  of  expressing  in  converging  series  the  attraction  of 
a body  of  nearly  spherical  figure.  It  is  also  perfectly  appropriate 
or  expiessing  the  potential,  or  the  attraction,  of  an  infinitely 
thin  spherical  shell,  with  matter  distributed  over  it  according  to 

any  arbitrary  law.  This  we  shall  take  first,  being  the  simpler 
application.  1 


C— 2 


84- 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Origin  of 
spherical 
harmonic 
analysis  of 
Legendre 
ana  La- 
place. 


[536. 

Let  x,  y,  z be  the  co-ordinates  of  P , the  point  in  question, 
reckoned  from  0 the  centre,  as  origin  of  co-ordinates : p and  p 
the  values  of  the  density  of  the  spherical  surface  at  points  E and 
E',  of  which  the  former  is  the  point  in  which  it  is  cut  by  OP,  or 
this  line  produced  : cla  an  element  of  the  surface  at  E',  a its 
radius.  Then,  V being  the  potential  at  P , we  have 


r _ f fp'da' 

~JJET 


.(1). 


But,  by  B (48) 


M1  + f0,  Q]  when  p is  intemal> 


and 


„ external, 


•(2) 


where  Q{  is  the  biaxal  surface  harmonic  of  (E,  E').  Hence,  if 


p'  =S0  + S1  + S3  + &c. 


.(3) 


be  the  harmonic  expansion  for  p,  we  have,  according  to  B (52), 


S. 

F = 4tt  a2 


and 


L 9 . , . 

(o  4"  1 \Ct/, 


when  P is  internal, 


47ra2  C«  S.  /«V  | 


r 


f 2i  + 1 \r, 


„ external, 


.(4). 


If,  for  instance,  p = St,  we  have 

47T?’*  S{ 


and 


V = r ^ ‘ ; inside, 

a'~l2i+l 


TT  47r«i+2  S,  ... 

V=— j+y-  — ; outside. 

r 2i  + 1 


Application 
of  spherical 
harmonic 
analysis. 


Thus  we  conclude  that 

537.  A spherical  harmonic  distribution  of  density  on  a 
spherical  surface  produces  a similar  and  similarly  placed 
spherical  harmonic  distribution  of  potential  over  every  con- 
centric spherical  surface  through  space,  external  and  internal; 
and  so  also  consequently  of  radial  component  force.  But  the 
amount  of  the  latter  differs,  of  course  (§  478),  by  4?rp,  for  points 
infinitely  near  one  another  outside  and  inside  the  surface,  if  p 


537.] 


STATICS. 


85 


denote  the  density  of  the  distribution  on  the  surface  between 
them. 


Application 
of  spherical 
harmonic 
analysis. 


If  R denote  the  radial  component  of  the  force,  we  have 


7?  = -— =-47rr<"1 


iS( 


clr 


and 


al~l  2i+  1 


inside, 


4‘7ral+a  (i+l)St 

r4+a  2 i + 1 

% 

Hence,  if  r — a,  we  have 


outside, 


(5). 


ft  (outside)  - R (inside)  = 4 icSi  = 4irp. 


538.  The  potential  is  of  course  a solid  harmonic  through 
space,  both  internal  and  external ; and  is  of  positive  degree  in 
the  internal,  and  of  negative  in  the  external  space.  The  ex- 
pression for  the  radial  component  of  the  force,  in  each  division 
of  space,  is  reduced  to  the  same  form  by  multiplying  it  by  the 
distance  from  the  centre. 


539.  The  harmonic  development  gives  an  expression  in 
converging  series,  for  the  potential  of  any  distribution  of  matter 
through  space,  which  is  useful  in  some  applications. 


Let  x,  y,  z be  the  co-ordinates  of  F,  the  attracted  point,  and 
x > y\  ^ those  of  P'  any  point  of  the  given  mass.  Then,  if  p 
be  the  density  of  the  matter  at  F,  and  V the  potential  at  F,  we 
have 


.(6). 


v = fff p'dxdy'dz' 

i(x-xy+(y-yy+(z-zyf 

The  most  convenient  view  we  can  take  as  to  the  space  through 
which  the  integration  is  to  be  extended  is  to  regard  it  as  infinite 
in  all  directions,  and  to  suppose  p to  be  a discontinuous  function 
of  x>  y > z i vanishing  through  all  space  unoccupied  by  matter. 

Now  by  App.  B.  ( u ) we  have 


1 ( oo  / ?• 

7^14  = / [ 1 v?. 


when  r'  > r 


[(x-  - x)2  + (y-  yj  + (^_  gfyj 

and  =I{l+!ftC0;  ” 


■■■<?)■ 


86 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[530. 


Application 
01  spherical 
harmonic 
analysis. 


Substituting  this  in  (6)  we  have 

V=  (///)  + [ Lf/Jl  pdx'dy’M 


+ 2 {/(///)( J. 


pdx'dy'dz 


r 


.'•+i 


+ r<+~‘ 


Potential  of 
a distant 
body. 


where  (J  ff)  denotes  integration  through  all  the  space  external  to 
the  spherical  surface  of  radius  r,  and  [J f /]  integration  through 
the  interior  space. 

This  formula  is  useful  for  expressing  the  attraction  of  a mass 
of  any  figure  on  a distant  point  in  a single  converging  series. 
Thus  when  OP  is  greater  than  the  greatest  distance  of  any  part 
of  the  body  from  0,  the  first  series  disappears,  and  the  expression 

becomes  a single  converging  series,  in  ascending  powers  of  - : — 

V = - {fffp'dx'dy'dz  + 2 . * J// Q/ydx'dy'dz'} (9). 

If  we  use  the  notation  of  B.  (u)  (53),  this  becomes 
V = i jj/ ' / pdx'dy'dz'  + %r~2if J Jpllt[(x,  y,  z),  (x,  y',  z)\dx’dy'dz^ ..(10), 
and  we  have,  by  App.  B.  (vr)  and  (w), 

cosV-^)cos«»4^poos^-etc.]rV.,l 
xx  + yy'  + zz' 

where  cos  6 = • 

rr 

From  this  we  find 

H^=xx'+yy'  + zz)  Hi=^\fxx'+yy'+zz')2-^{x2A-y1+z2){x2-iry  +z  )], 

and  so  on. 

Let  now  M denote  the  mass  of  the  body ; and  let  0 be  taken 
at  its  centre  of  gravity.  We  shall  have 

J f f p'dx'dy'dz  — M ; and  f ff p II Xdx  dy  dz  =0. 

Further,  let  OX , OY,  OZ  be  taken  as  principal  axes  (§§  281,  282), 
so  that  /// p'y'z'dx'dy.  dz  = 0,  etc., 

and  let  A,  B,  C be  the  moments  of  inertia  round  these  axes. 
This  will  give 

fffUrfdx'di/dz'  = i{(3*2- r1)  fffp'  Pdx'dy'dz'  + etc. } =£{  (3x2  - r2)  [i  (A  + B + C)  - A ] + etc. } 
- i ; A (f  - 3x2)  + B f-  3 y*)C  + (r2  -3 z>)\  = \{{B  + C - 2,1)  x2  + [C+  A - 2 B)  tf-  + (A  + B -2 Q*\ 


539.] 


STATICS). 


87 


V = 


Hence  neglecting  terms  of  the  third  and  higher  orders  of  small  Potential  of 
00  0 H distant 

(7*  \ body, 

powers  of  -) , we  have  the  following  approximate 

expression  for  the  potential : — 

j + ^ {{B + C - 2 A ) a9  + (C+  A - 2B)  if  + (A  + B - 2 C)z*\  ...(12). 


As  one  example  of  the  usefulness  of  this  result,  we  may  mention 
the  investigation  of  the  disturbance  in  the  moon’s  motion  pro- 
duced by  the  non-sphericity  of  the  earth,  and  of  the  reaction  of 
the  same  disturbing  force  on  the  earth,  causing  lunar  nutation 
and  precession , which  will  be  explained  later. 

Differentiating,  and  retaining  only  terms  of  the  first  and  second 
degrees  of  approximation,  we  have  for  the  components  of  the 
mutual  force  between  the  body  and  a unit  particle  at  ( x , y}  z), 


v Mx  (B  + C — 2A)x  5 x 

Z=73 ^5 —+2  -7[(B  + C-2A)x*+(C  + A-2B)i/  + (A+£-2C)z*] 


(13); 


r=etc.„  Z=e  tc. 


whence 


Zy- Yz  = 3 Xz-Z^AA-^,  Yx-Xy=  3 .(U). 


Comparing  these  with  Chaj).  ix.  below,  we  conclude  that 

540.  The  attraction  of  a distant  particle,  P,  on  a rigid  body  Attraction 
I if  transferred  (according  to  Poinsot’s  method  explained  below,  on  a distant 
F § 555)  to  the  centre  of  inertia,  I,  of  the  latter,  gives  a couple 
j approximately  equal  and  opposite  to  that  which  constitutes  the 
E resultant  effect  of  centrifugal  force,  if  the  body  rotates  with  a 
F certain  angular  velocity  about  IP.  The  square  of  this  angular 
I velocity  is  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  distance  of  P,  irre- 
j spectively  of  its  direction ; being  numerically  equal  to  three 
times  the  reciprocal  of  the  cube  of  this  distance,  if  the  unit 
of  mass  is  such  as  to  exercise  the  proper  kinetic  unit  (§  225) 
force  on  another  equal  mass  at  unit  distance.  The  general 
tendency  of  the  gravitation  couple  is  to  bring  the  principal  axis 
of  least  moment  of  inertia  into  line  with  the  attracting  point. 

The  expressions  for  its  components  round  the  principal  axes 
"will  be  used  in  Chap.  ix.  (§  825)  for  the  investigation  of  the 
phenomena  of  precession  and  nutation  produced,  in  virtue  of 


88 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[540 


Attraction  the  earth’s  11011-sphericity,  by  the  attractions  of  the  sun  and 
on  a distant  rtioon.  They  are  available  to  estimate  the  retaidation  produced 
b°dy'  by  tidal  friction  against  the  earth’s  rotation,  according  to  the 
principle  explained  above  (§  276). 


Principle  of 
the  ap- 
proxima- 
tion used  in 
the  com- 
mon theory 
of  the 
centre 
of  gravity. 


541.  It  appears  from  what  we  have  seen  that  the  amount 
of  the  gravitation  couple  is  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  distance 
between  the  centre  of  inertia  and  the  external  attracting  point : 
and  therefore  that  the  shortest  distance  of  the  line  of  the  re- 
sultant force  from  the  centre  of  inertia  varies  inversely  as  the 
distance  of  the  attracting  point.  We  thus  see  how  to  a first 
approximation  every  rigid  body  is  centrobaric  relatively  to  a 
distant  attracting  point. 

542.  The  real  meaning  and  value  of  the  spherical  harmonic 
method  for  a solid  mass  will  be  best  understood  by  consideiing 
the  following  application  : — 


Let 


P = F (r)  S{ 


(15) 


where  F (r)  denotes  any  function  of  r,  and  St  a surface  spherical 
harmonic  function  of  order  i,  with  coefficients  independent  of  r. 
Substituting  accordingly  for  p in  (8),  and  attending  to  B.  (o2) 
and  (16),  we  find 

y-  F{r')dr'  + r~'-'\l  ri*‘F(r)dr^  ...(16). 


Potential  of  543.  As  an  example,  let  it  be  required  to  find  the  potent^ 
with  har-re  of  a solid  sphere  of  radius  a,  having  matter  distributed  through 
Sfbutionii  it  according  to  solid  harmonic  function  K. 

density. 

That  is  to  say,  let 

p=V  = rlS , when  r < a, 


and 


r > a. 


Hence  in  the  preceding  formula  F (r)  = r1  from  r-0  to  r <*, 
and  F (f)  — 0,  when  r > and  it  becomes 


V = 4-rr  V{ 


- i - 

‘ (2(27 


+ 1)  2(27  + 3)J 


when  P is  internal, 


(17). 


, 4tt  aSi+3Vj  external. 

and  =(2i+l)(2iT3)  r“« 

This  result  may  also  be  obtained  by  the  aid  of  the  algebraical 


STATICS. 


89 


543.] 


formula  B.  (12)  thus,  on  the  same  principle  as  the  potential  of  a PotentW^of 

with  har- 
monic dis- 
tribution of 
density. 


uniform  spherical  shell  was  found  in  § 491  (d). 

We  have  by  § 491  (c) 

V9  V = - 47t  Ft,  when  ?•<»,) 
and  =0  „ t > a.  ) 

But  by  taking  m = 2 in  B.  (12)  we  have 

V2(r*Fi)  = 2(2t+3)F<, 

and  therefore  the  solution  of  the  equation 

V*F=-4t rFt 

reV, 


.(18). 


is 


F — — 4?r  ; 


+ U. 


2(2i+  3) 

where  U is  any  function  whatever  satisfying  the  equation 

v*cr=o 

through  the  whole  interior  of  the  sphere.  By  choosing  U and  the 
external  values  of  F so  as  to  make  the  values  of  F equal  to  one 
another  for  points  infinitely  near  one  another  outside  and  inside 

dV 

the  bounding  surface,  to  fulfil  the  same  condition  for  -=- , and 
° dr 


to  make  F vanish  when  r = oo , and  when  r—  0,  we  find 


U=  47tF4 


a 


2(21+1)’ 

and  obtain  the  expression  of  (17)  for  F external.  For  in  the 

V 

first  place,  F external  and  U must  clearly  be  A , and  B F{, 

where  A and  B are  constants : and  the  two  conditions  give  the 

equations  to  determine  them. 

544.  From  App.  B.  (52)  it  follows  immediately  that  any  potential  of 
function  of  x,  y,  z whatever  may  be  expressed,  through  the  harmonfcm 
whole  of  space,  in  a series  of  surface  harmonic  functions,  each 
having  its  coefficients  functions  of  the  distance  (r)  from  the 
origin.  Hence  (16),  with  placed  under  the  sign  of  integra- 
tion for  r,  gives  the  harmonic  development  of  the  potential 
' of  any  mass  whatever ; being  the  result  of  the  triple  integra- 
tions indicated  in  (8)  of  § 539,  when  the  mass  is  specified  by 
means  of  a harmonic  series  expressing  the  density. 


senes. 


90 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Application 
to  figure  of 
the  earth. 


Case  of  the 
potential 
symmetri- 
cal about 
an  axis. 


\ 


[545. 


545.  The  most  important  application  of  the  harmonic  de- 
velopment for  solid  spheres  hitherto  made  is  for  investigating, 
in  the  Theory  of  the  Figure  of  the  Earth,  the  attraction  of  a 
finite  mass  consisting  of  approximately  spherical  layers  of 
matter  equally  dense  through  each,  hut  varying  in  density 
from  layer  to  layer.  The  result  of  the  general  analytical 
method  explained  above,  when  worked  out  in  detail  for  this 
case,  is  to  exhibit  the  potential  as  the  sum  of  two  parts,  of 
which  the  first  and  chief  is  the  potential  due  to  a solid  sphere, 
A,  and  the  second  to  a spherical  shell,  B.  The  sphere,  A,  is 
obtained  by  reducing  the  given  spheroid  to  a spherical  figure 
by  cutting  away  all  the  matter  lying  outside  the  proper  mean 
spherical  surface,  and  filling  the  space  vacant  inside  it  where 
the  original  spheroid  lies  within  it,  without  altering  the  density 
anywhere.  The  shell,  B,  is  a spherical  surface  loaded  with 
equal  quantities  of  positive  and  negative  matter,  so  as  to  com- 
pensate for  the  transference  of  matter  by  which  the  given 
spheroid  was  changed  into  A.  The  analytical  expression  of 
all  this  may  be  written  down  immediately  from  the  preceding 
formulae  (§§  536,  537);  but  we  reserve  it  until,  under  hydro- 
statics and  hydrokinetics,  we  shall  be  occupied  with  the  theory 
of  the  Figure  of  the  Earth,  and  of  the  vibrations  of  liquid 
globes. 

546.  The  analytical  method  of  spherical  harmonics  is  very 
valuable  for  several  practical  problems  of  electricity,  magnetism, 
and  electro-magnetism,  in  which  distributions  of  force  sym- 
metrical round  an  axis  occur  : especially  in  this ; that  if  the 
force  (or  potential)  at  every  point  through  some  finite  length 
along  the  axes  be  given,  it  enables  us  immediately  to  deduce 
converging  series  for  calculating  the  force  for  points  through 
some  finite  space  not  in  the  axes.  (See  § 498.) 

0 being  any  conveniently  chosen  point  of  reference,  in  the 
axis  of  symmetry,  let  us  have,  in  series  converging  for  a portion 
AB  of  the  axis, 

U=  an  + - + a.r  + \ + a ar*  + -f  + etc (a), 

where  U is  the  potential  at  a point,  Q,  in  the  axis,  specified  by 


STATICS. 


91 


540.] 


OQ  z=  r.  Then  if  V be  the  potential  at  any  point  P,  specified  by  of  the 
OP  = r and  QOP  = Q,  and,  as  in  App.  B.  (47),  Ql%  denote  symmetri- 

the  axial  surface  harmonics  of  6,  of  the  successive  integral  orders,  an  axis, 
we  must  have,  for  all  values  of  r for  which  the  series  converges, 

V = ao + 7 + + p)  Qx  + (<v8  + p)  Q*  + etc (J)> 

provided  P can  be  reached  from  Q and  all  points  of  AB  within 
some  finite  distance  from  it  however  small,  without  passing 
through  any  of  the  matter  to  which  the  force  in  question  is  due, 
or  any  space  for  which  the  series  does  not  converge.  For 
throughout  this  space  (§  498)  V — V must  vanish,  if  V'  be  the 
value  of  the  sum  of  the  series ; since  V — V is  [App.  B.  (</)] 
a potential  function,  and  it  vanishes  for  a finite  portion  of  the 
axis  containing  Q. 

The  series  (b)  is  of  course  convergent  for  all  values  of  r which 
make  (a)  convergent,  since  the  ultimate  ratio  Qi+1-i-Q{  for  in- 
finitely great  values  of  i,  is  unity,  as  we  see  from  any  of  the 
expressions  for  these  functions  in  App.  B. 

In  general,  that  is  to  say  unless  0 be  a singular  point,  the 
series  for  U consists,  according  to  Maclaurin’s  theorem,  of  ascend- 
ing integral  powers  of  r only,  provided  r does  not  exceed  a certain 
limit.  In  certain  classes  of  cases  there  are  singular  points,  such 
that  if  0 be  taken  at  one  of  them,  U will  be  expressed  in  a series 
of  powers  of  r with  fractional  indices,  convergent  and  real  for 
all  finite  positive  values  of  r not  exceeding  a certain  limit.  The 
expression  for  the  potential  in  the  neighbourhood  of  0 in  any 
such  case,  in  terms  of  solid  spherical  harmonics  relatively  to  0 
as  centre,  will  contain  harmonics  [App.  B.  (a)]  of  fractional 
degrees. 

Examples — (I.)  The  potential  of  a circular  ring  of  radius  a,  Examples, 
and  linear  density  p,  at  a point  in  the  axis,  distant  by  r from  the  tL'u  ofcireu- 


centre 

jj  2 trap 

m 

lar  ring ; 

(a2+r*)h 

Hence 

U = 2 irp  ^ 

r 9 1.3  r4 

* a9  + 2.4  a4 

etc.^ 

when  r < a . . 

••(2), 

and 

jj  27 rap 

r 

A .a9  1.3  a* 

\ V + 2.4r( 

- etc. 

'j  when  r>  a 

-(3), 

Potential 
symmetri- 
cal about 
an  axis. 

92 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[540. 


Potential 
symmetri- 
cal about 
an  axis. 


from  which  we  have 

2ttP  ^1  - & ^-aQa  + ^ Qt  - etc.)  when  r < a.  .(4), 

and  V = 2t rp  (?  -$±Qa  + b2±QA-.  etc.)  when  r > a . . (5). 


(II.)  of  cir- 
cular disc. 


(II.)  Multiplying  (1)  by  da,  and  integrating  with  reference 
to  a from  a = 0 as  lower  limit,  and  now  calling  U the  potential 
of  a circular  disc  of  uniform  surface  density  p,  and  radius  a,  at 
a point  in  its  axis,  we  find 

U = 27rp  {(a8  + r2)*  — r}, 

r being  positive. 

Hence,  expanding  first  in  ascending,  and  secondly  in  descend- 
ing powers  of  r,  for  the  cases  of  r < a and  r > a,  we  find 


r=2*P{-rQl+a  + l?Q,- 


and 


Tr  f,  a2  1.1  a*  1.1.3a'  , ) , 

y=  U - - o-7 ^ Q*+2jTG?Qi~e  ' when  r>a- 


( 2 r 2.4? 


7 


It  must  be  remarked  that  the  first  of  these  expressions  is  only 
continuous  from  0 = 0 to  0 = ^7r;  and  that  from  6 — to  0 = ir 
the  first  term  of  it  must  be  made 


+ 2irprQ1 , instead  of  - 2irprQi . 


Potential  in 
the  neigh- 
bourhood of 
a circular 
galvano- 
meter coil. 


(III.)  Again,  taking  — of  the  expression  for  U in  (II.),  and 
now  calling  U the  potential  of  a disc  of  infinitely  small  thickness 
c with  positive  and  negative  matter  of  surface  density  ^ on  its 
two  sides,  we  have 


\ (a? + r2f) 

[obtainable  also  from  § 477  ( e ),  by  integrating  with  reference  to 
x,  putting  r for  x,  and  p for  pc].  Hence  for  this  case 


1 3 * 

r=  2*p  (l -r-  Q,  + 15  Q.  - 2^4  ? + etc-)  'vhe11  ’■  •=  °> 

and  V = 2*p  (jp  <2,  - Q‘ + et0')  'Vh“  r>a" 

The  first  of  these  expressions  also  is  discontinuous ; and  when  6 


STATICS. 


93 


546.] 


is  > ^7r  anti  < 7 r,  its  first  terra  must  be  taken  as  - 2-rrp  instead 
of  2-rrp. 

547.  If  two  systems,  or  distributions  of  matter,  M and  M' , Exhaustion 
given  in  spaces  each  finite,  but  infinitely  far  asunder,  be  allowed  energy, 
to  approach  one  another,  a certain  amount  of  work  is  obtained 
\ by  mutual  gravitation : and  their  mutual  potential  energy 
loses,  or  as  we  may  say  suffers  exhaustion,  to  this  amount : 
which  amount  will  (§  486)  be  the  same  by  whatever  paths  the 
changes  of  position  are  effected,  provided  the  relative  initial 
positions  and  the  relative  final  positions  of  all  the  particles  are 

given.  Hence  if  ml,  be  particles  of  M\  m\,  7?i'2 , 

particles  of  M' ; v\,  the  potentials  due  to  M’  at  the 

points  occupied  by  m1,  vl}  those  due  to  M at 

the  points  occupied  by  m\,  m'2,...;  and  E the  exhaustion  of 
mutual  potential  energy  between  the  two  systems  in  any  actual 
configurations ; we  have 

E — %mv'  = Sto'v. 

This  may  be  otherwise  written,  if  p denote  a discontinuous 
function,  expressing  the  density  at  any  point,  (x,  y,  z)  of  the 
mass  M,  and  vanishing  at  all  points  not  occupied  by  matter  of 
this  distribution,  and  if  p be  taken  to  specify  similarly  the  other 
mass  M’.  Thus  we  have 

E = Jfj  pvclxdydz  — fff  p'vdxdydz, 


the  integrals  being  extended  through  all  space.  The  equality  of 
the  second  and  third  members  here  is  verified  by  remarking  that 


if  D denote  the  distance  between  (x,  y,  z)  and  (x,  y,  z),  the 
latter  being  any  point  of  space,  and  p the  value  of  p at  it.  A 
corresponding  expression  of  course  gives  v:  and  thus  we  find  one 
sextuple  integral  to  express  identically  the  second  and  third 
members,  or  the  value  of  E,  as  follows: — 


E = 


\ppdxdydzdx  dy  dz 


548.  It  is  remarkable  that  it  was  on  the  consideration  ofareon’s 
an  analytical  formula  which,  when  properly  interpreted  with  mcth°a- 
reference  to  two  masses,  has  precisely  the  same  signification  as 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


94 


[548. 


method  the  preceding  expressions  for  E,  that  Green  founded  his  whole 
structure  of  general  theorems  regarding  attraction. 

In  App.  A.  (a)  let  a be  constant,  and  let  U,  U'  be  the 
potentials  at  (x,  y,  z)  of  two  finite  masses,  M,  M\  finitely  distant 
from  one  another  : so  that  if  p and  p denote  the  densities  of  M 
and  M'  respectively  at  the  point  (x,  y,  z),  we  have  [§  491  (c)] 

V2£/  = -47rp,  V2CT'  = -47rp'- 

It  must  be  remembered  that  p vanishes  at  every  point  not  form- 
ing part  of  the  mass  M : and  so  for  p and  M' . In  the  present 
merely  abstract  investigation  the  two  masses  may,  in  part  or  in 
whole,  jointly  occupy  the  same  space:  or  they  may  be  merely 
imagined  subdivisions  of  the  density  of  one  real  mass.  Then, 
supposing  S to  be  infinitely  distant  in  all  directions,  and  observ- 
ing that  UdU'  and  TJ'dU  are  small  quantities  of  the  order  of  the 
inverse  cube  of  the  distance  of  any  point  of  S from  M and  M , 
whereas  the  whole  area  of  S over  which  the  surface  integrals  of 
App.  A.  (a)  (1)  are  taken  as  infinitely  great,  only  of  the  order  of 
the  square  of  the  same  distance,  we  have 

J JdSU'dU  = 0,  and  jjdSUdU'  = 0. 


Hence  (a)  (1)  becomes 


dU  dTT  dU  dlT 
dx  dx  dy  dy 


— ^ dxdydz  = i-rr/ff p U'dxdydz  — inf// p Udxdydz  ; 

dz  dz  J 


showing  that  the  first  member  divided  by  4tt  is  equal  to  the 
exhaustion  of  potential  energy  accompanying  the  approach  of 
the  two  masses  from  an  infinite  mutual  distance  to  the  relative 
position  which  they  actually  occupy. 


Without  supposing  S infinite,  we  see  that  the  second  membei 
of  (a)  (1),  divided  by  h r,  is  the  direct  expression  for  the  ex- 
haustion of  mutual  energy  between  M'  and  a distribution  con- 
sisting of  the  part  of  M within  S and  a distribution  over  S,  of 

density  J-SJT;  and  the  third  member  the  corresponding  ex- 
pression for  M and  derivations  from  M . 


Exhaustion 
•of  potential 
•energy, 
in  allowing 


549. 

tides, 


If,  instead  of  two  distributions,  M and  M',  two  par- 
m m„  alone  be  given;  the  exhaustion  of  mutual 


540.] 


STATICS. 


05 


potential  energy  in  allowing  them  to  come  together  from  in-  condema- 
finity,  to  any  distance  D (1,  2)  asunder,  is  diffused 

ui  litter* 


mxm 

D(l,  2) ' 


It  now  a third  particle  m3  he  allowed  to  come  into  their  neigh- 
bourhood, there  is  a further  exhaustion  of  potential  energy 
amounting  to 

i)(l,  zy  D (2,  3)* 


By  considering  any  number  of  particles  coming  thus  necessarily 
into  position  in  a group,  we  find  for  the  whole  exhaustion  of 
potential  energy 

77X7)1/ 

where  in,  vi  denote  the  masses  of  any  two  of  the  particles,  D Exhaustion 
the  distance  between  them,  and  —<2  the  sum  of  the  expressions  energy, 
for  all  the  pairs,  each  pair  taken  only  once.  If  v denote  the 
potential  at  the  point  occupied  by  m,  of  all  the  other  masses, 
the  expiession  becomes  a simple  sum,  with  as  many  terms  as 
there  are  masses,  which  we  may  write  thus — 


E=  \ ; 

the  factor  £ being  necessary,  because  2wv  takes  each  such  term 

7)1/  7)1/  n 

aS  D (1  2)  ^w*ce  over-  If  the  particles  form  an  ultimately  con- 
tinuous mass,  with  density  p at  any  point  (a?,  y,  z ),  we  have  only 
to  write  the  sum  as  an  integral ; and  thus  we  have 

E=  iff/  pvdxdydz 

as  the  exhaustion  of  potential  energy  of  gravitation  accompany- 
ing the  condensation  of  a quantity  of  matter  from  a state  of 
infinite  diffusion  (that  is  to  say,  a state  in  which  the  density 
is  everywhere  infinitely  small)  to  its  actual  condition  in  any 
finite  body. 


An  important  analytical  transformation  of  this  expression  is 
suggested  by  the  preceding  interpretation  of  App.  A.  (a);  by 


Exhaustion 
or  potential 
energy. 


90 


which  wc  find* 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[549. 


Gauss’s 

method. 


Sir 


(W  dv*  dv'\  , 7 

S?^+W)dxdvdz' 


or  E = A;  jjjli’dxdydz, 

if  it  denote  the  resultant  force  at  (x,  y,  z),  the  integration  being 
extended  through  all  space. 

Detailed  interpretations  in  connexion  with  the  theory  of  energy, 
of  the  remainder  of  App.  A.,  with  a constant,  and  of  its  more 
general  propositions  and  formulae  not  involving  this  restriction, 
especially  of  the  minimum  problems  with  which  it  deals,  are  of 
importance  with  reference  to  the  dynamics  of  incompressible 
fluids,  and  to  the  physical  theory  of  the  propagation  of  electric 
and  magnetic  force  through  space  occupied  by  homogeneous  or 
heterogeneous  matter;  and  we  intend  to  return  to  it  when  we 
shall  be  specially  occupied  with  these  subjects. 


550.  The  beautiful  and  instructive  manner  in  which  Gauss 
independently  proved  Green’s  theorems  is  more  immediately 
and  easily  interpretable  in  terms  of  energy,  according  to  the 
commonly-accepted  idea  of  forces  acting  simply  between  par- 
ticles at  a distance  without  any  assistance  or  influence  of  inter- 
posed matter.  Thus,  to  prove  that  a given  quantity,  Q,  of 
matter  is  distributable  in  one  and  only  one  way  over  a given 
single  finite  surface  S (whether  a closed  or  an  open  shell),  so  as 
to  produce  equal  potential  over  the  whole  of  this  surface,  he 
shows  (1)  that  the  integral 


pp dcr  da' 

~~pF 


has  a minimum  value,  subject  to  the  condition 

JJpda  = Q, 

where  p is  a function  of  the  position  of  a point,  P,  on  S,  p its 
value  at  P',  and  da  and  da  elements  of  8 at  these  points  and 
(2)  that  this  minimum  is  produced  by  only  one  determinate 
distribution  of  values  of  p.  By  what  we  have  just  seen  (§  549) 
the  first  of  these  integrals  is  double  the  potential  energy  of  a 

* Niohol’s  Encyclopedia,  2d  Ed,  I860.  Magnetism,  Dynamical  Relations  of. 


550.] 


STATICS. 


.97 


distribution  over  S of  an  infiuite  number  of  infinitely  small  Gauss’s 
mutually  repelling  particles  : and  hence  this  minimum  problem 
is  (§  292)  merely  an  analytical  statement  of  the  problem  to 
find  how  these  particles  must  be  distributed  to  be  in  stable 
equilibrium. 


Similarly,  Gauss’s  second  minimum  problem,  of  which  the  Equiii- 
preceding  is  a particular  case,  and  which  is,  to  find  p SO  as  to  repelling 
make  ffiSS 

■jig  v- to)  pda-  ir.oX1 

a minimum,  subject  to  surface. 

Jf  pda  = Q, 


where  f!  is  any  given  arbitrary  function  of  the  position  of  P 
and 


is  merely  an  analytical  statement  of  the  question  : — how  must 
a given  quantity  of  repelling  particles  confined  to  a surface  S 
be  distiibuted  so  as  to  make  the  whole  potential  energy  due  to 
their  mutual  forces,  and  to  the  forces  exerted  on  them  by  a 
given  fixed  attracting  or  repelling  body  (of  which  G is  the 
potential  at  P),  be  a minimum  ? In  other  words  (§  292),  to  find 
how  the  movable  particles  will  place  themselves,  under  the 
influence  of  the  acting  forces. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


Rigid  body. 


Equili- 
brium of 
free  rigid 
body. 


STATICS  OF  SOLIDS  AND  FLUIDS. 


551.  We  commence  with  the  case  of  a rigid  body  or  system, 
that  is,  an  ideal  substance  continuously  occupying  a given  solid 
figure,  admitting  no  change  of  shape,  but  free  to  move  transla- 
tionally  and  rotationally.  It  is  sometimes  convenient  to  regard 
a rigid  body  as  a group  of  material  particles  maintained  by 
mutual  forces  in  definite  positions  relatively  to  each  other,  hut 
free  to  move  relatively  to  other  bodies.  The  condition  of  perfect 
rigidity  is  approximately  fulfilled  in  natural  solid  bodies,  so  long: 
as  the  applied  forces  are  not  sufficiently  powerful  to  break  therm 
or  to  distort  them,  or  to  condense  or  rarefy  them  to  a sensible 
extent.  To  find  the  conditions  of  equilibrium  of  a rigid  body,  I 
under  the  influence  of  any  number  of  forces,  we  follow  the 
example  of  Lagrange  in  using  the  principle  of  work  (§  289) 
and.  take  advantage  of  our  kinematic  preliminary  (§  197). 

552.  First  supposing  the  body  to  be  perfectly  free  to  taka 
any  motion  possible  to  a rigid  body: — Give  it  an  infinitesimal  | 
translation  in  any  direction,  and  an  infinitesimal  rotation  round  j 

any  line. 

I in  respect  to  the  translational  displacement,  the  work 
done  by  the  applied  forces  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the 
amount  of  the  displacement  (being  the  same  for  all  the  points 
of  application)  into  the  algebraic  sum  of  the.  components  o 
the  forces  in  its  direction.  Hence  for  equilibrium  (§  289)  th 
sum  of  these  components  must  be  zero. 


552.] 


STATICS. 


99 


II.  In  respect  to  rotational  displacement  the  work  done  Equiii- 
by  the  forces  is  (§  240)  equal  to  the  product  of  the  infinitesimal  free  rigid 
angle  of  rotation  into  the  sum  of  the  moments  (§  231)  of  the  b°dy' 
foices  round  the  axis  of  rotation.  Hence  for  equilibrium  (§  289) 
the  sum  of  these  moments  must  be  zero. 

Since  (§  19/)  every  possible  motion  of  a rigid  body  may  bo 
compounded  of  infinitesimal  translations  in  any  directions,  and 
rotations  lound  any  lines,  it  follows  that  the  conditions  necessary 
and  sufficient  for  equilibrium  are  that  the  sum  of  the  com- 
ponents of  the  forces  in  any  direction  whatever  must  be  zero, 
and  the  sum  of  the  moments  of  the  forces  round  any  axis 
whatever  must  be  zero. 

Let  Xi>  z,  be  the  components  of  one  of  the  forces,  and 
®i»  *,  the  co-ordinates  of  its  point  of  application  relatively 

to  three  rectangular  axes.  Taking  successively  these  axes  for 
directions  of  the  infinitesimal  translations,  and  axes  of  the 
infinitesimal  rotations,  we  find,  as  necessary  for  equilibrium,  the 
following  equations  : — 

5(X1)  = 0,  2(T;)  = 0,  S(^,)  = 0 (1); 

S(Xizl-Zlx1)  = 0,  ^(YlXl-Xiyi)  = 0...(2).’ 

Of  the  latter  three  equations  the  first  members  are  respectively 
the  sums  of  the  moments  round  the  three  axes  of  co-ordinates  of 
the  given  forces  or  of  the  components  Ylf  Zlt  &c.,  which  we 
take  tor  them. 


553.  It  is  interesting  and  important  to  remark  that  the  Important 
evanescence  of  the  sum  of  components  in  any  direction  what-  proposition’ 
ever  is  secured  if  it  is  ascertained  that  the  sums  of  the  com- 
ponents m the  directions  of  any  three  lines  not  in  one  plane 
are  each  ml ; and  that  the  evanescence  of  the  sum  of  moments 
round  any  axis  whatever  is  secured  if  it  is  ascertained  that  the 
sums  of  the  moments  round  any  three  axes  not  in  one  plane  are 


of  thref’,m’  K)’  f-  ^ (r>  ^ be  the  <“n  cosines  provcd 

of  three  lines  not  in  one  plane,  a condition  equivalent  to  non- 

evanescence  of  the  determinant  l mf  n"-&c.  Let  F,  F'  F"  be 

t ie  sums  of  components  of  forces  along  these  lines.  We  have 

F =l  2(jr,)+m  2(r,)+w  %{zly 

F'  = v + xirj  + n'XW  /3\ 

F"  = r 3 (X, ) + m" 2(7,)  +n"%(Zl)  \ 


7—2 


100 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[553. 


Equili- 
brium of 
free  rigid 
body. 


Equili- 
brium of 
constrained 
rigid  body. 


If  each  of  these  is  zero,  each  of  the  components  2A,  27,  %Z 
must  he  zero,  as  the  determinant  is  not  zero.  The  correspond- 
ing proposition  is  similarly  proved  for  the  moments,  because 
(§  233)  moments  of  forces  round  different  axes  follow  the  same 
laws  of  composition  and  resolution  as  forces  in  different  direc- 
tions. 

554  For  equilibrium  when  the  body  is  subjected  to  one, 
two,  three,  four,  or  five  degrees  of  constraint,  equations  to  be 
fulfilled  by  the  applied  forces,  to  ensure  equilibrium,  correspon  - 
inoly  reduced  in  number  to  five,  four,  three,  two  or  one,  are 
found  with  the  greatest  ease  by  giving  direct  analytical  expres- 
sion to  (§  289),  the  principle  of  work  m equilibrium. 

Let  *,  2/,  *,  P,  erbe  components  of  the  translational  velocity 
of  a point  0 of  the  body,  and  of  the  angular  velocity  of  the  . 

body;  and  (§  201)  let 

Ax+By  + Cz  + Gro+Hp  + I(r^O\ 

A'x  + B'y  + G'z  + G'tb  + H'p  + I'cr  = 0 l (4), 

&c.,  &c.,  ) 

be  one,  two,  three,  four,  or  five  equations,  representing  the  con- 
straints. The  work  done  by  the  applied  forces  per  runt  of  tune  is 

iS(X,)+j/S (F,)  + SS(^)  ? u SIT.-I.]"® 

+ ^2  (Zxyx  - Yxzx)  + pS  {Xxzx  - Zxxx)  + cr2  ( Yxxx  2 xyx)) 

or  Xx  + Yy  + Zz  + Lm  + Mp  + No- (5'), 

t ar.0  T V Z L M X denote  the  sums  that  appear  m (5), 
That  ist  S sums  of  the  components  of  the  given  forces 
parallel  to  the  axes  of  co-ordinates,  and  the  sum  of  then  mo- 

ments  round  these  lines.  , nf 

This  amount  of  work,  (5),  must  be  aero  for  all  values  of 

£ U w,  p,  0-  which  satisfy  equation  or  equations  (4).  Hence, 

by  Lagrange’s  method  of  indeterminate  multipliers,  we  find 


2(X,)  + Ad  + A'd'  + ... 

2(7,)  + XB  + XB'  + ... 

2(X,)  + \G  + A '.C  + ... 

2 (Zxyx  - Yxzx)  + XG  + XG'  + . 
2(X,z,  - Zxxx)  + XE+  XW  + 
2(71a’1-Ar1y1)  + A/+  A'/'  + - = ° 


= 0 
= 0 
= 0 
= 0 
. = 0 


■ (G); 


554.] 


STATICS. 


101 


and  the  elimination  of  X,  X',...  from  these  six  equations  gives  Equili-  ^ 
the  correspondingly  reduced  number  of  equations  of  equilibrium  constrained 
among  the  applied  forces.  n8ld  b°dy‘ 


To  illustrate  the  use  of  these  equations  suppose,  for  example,  Example, 
the  number  of  constraints  to  be  two,  and  all  except  four  of  straints;— 
ii  the  applied  forces  be  given  : the  six  equations  (5)  determine  equations  of 
these  four  forces,  and  allow  us  if  we  desire  it  to  calculate  the  foundbrmm 
two  indeterminate  multipliers  X,,  X.  The  use  of  finding  the 
values  of  these  multipliers  is  that 


XA,  XB,  XC,  XG,  XII,  \I 


are  the  components  and  the  moments  of  the  reactions 
first  constraining  body  or  system  on  the  given  body,  and 

X'A',  XB',  XC',  X G',  XII',  XI' 

are  those  of  the  second. 


of  the  and  the  two 
factors  de- 
termining 
the  amounts 
of  the  con- 
straining 
forces  cal  led 
into  action. 


555.  When  it  is  desired  only  to  find  the  equations  of  equili-  Equations 
1 brium,  not  the  constraining  reactions,  the  easiest  and  most  direct  Ubmm 
way  to  the  object  is,  to  first  express  any  possible  motion  of  the  SSon 
body  in  terms  of  the  five,  four,  three,  two  or  one  freedoms  straining 
(§§  197,  200)  left  to  it  by  the  one,  two,  three,  four  or  five  con- 
straints to  which  it  is  subjected.  The  description  in  § 102  of 
the  most  general  motion  of  a rigid  body  shows  that  the  most 
general  result  of  five  constraints,  or  the  most  general  way  of 
allowing  just  one  freedom,  to  a rigid  body,  is  to  give  it  guidance 
equivalent  to  that  of  a nut  on  a fixed  screw  shaft.  If  we  unfix 
this  shaft  and  give  it  similar  guidance  to  allow  it  one  freedom, 
the  primary  rigid  body  has  two  freedoms  of  the  most  general 
kind.  Its  double  freedom  may  be  resolved  in  an  infinite 
number  of  ways  (besides  the  one  way  in  which  it  is  thus  com- 
pounded) into  two  single  freedoms.  Triple,  quadruple,  and 
: quintuple  freedom  may  be  similarly  arranged  mechanically. 

556.  The  conditions  of  equilibrium  of  a rigid  body  with 
i single,  double,  triple,  quadruple  or  quintuple  freedom,  when 
) each  ot  the  constituent  freedoms  is  given  in  the  manner  speci- 
| fied  in  § 555,  are  found  by  writing  down  the  equation  or  equa- 
’ tions  expressing  that  the  applied  forces  do  no  work  when  the 


102 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[55G. 


body  moves  simply  according  to  any  one  alone  of  the  given 
freedoms.  We  shall  take  first  the  case  of  a single  freedom  of 
the  most  general  kind. 

Equiii-  Let  s*  be  the  axial  motion  per  radian  of  rotation;  so  that 

forces  ap-  q — sco  expresses  the  relation  between  axial  translational  velo- 

plied  to  a 1 1 ....  ...  . T tttt- 

nut  on  !i  citv.  and  angular  velocity  in  the  possible  motion.  Let  UK  be 

frictionless  J 3 . ••  t nr 

lixed screw,  the  axis  of  the  screw,  and  N1  the  nearest  point  to  it  in  Ll  Mx, 
the  line  of  Px , a first  of  the  applied  forces.  Let  i1  be  the  incli- 
nation of  Lx  Mx  to  HK,  and  ax  the  distance  of  Nx  from  HK. 
At  any  point  in  LtMx,  most  conveniently  at  the  point  Nv 
resolve  P into  two  components,  Px  cos  ix , parallel  to  the  axis  of 
freedom,  and  Px  sin  ix  perpendicular  to  it.  The  former  compo- 
nent does  work  only  on  the  axial  component  of  the  motion,  the 
latter  on  the  rotational;  and  the  rate  of  work  done  by  the 
two  together  is 

O 

Work  done  SCO  Pi  C0S  \ + aw  Fi  sin  V 

iforceSonKae  Hence,  if  2 denotes  summation  for  all  the  given  forces,  the 

nut, turning  . _ . . . 

on  a fixed  equation  of  equilibrium  to  prevent  them  from  taking  advantage 

screw  • -*• 

of  the  first  freedom  is 


Equation  of 
equili- 
brium of 
forces  ap- 
plied to  a 
nut  on  a 
frictionless 
screw. 


sSPt  cos  \ + Za1P1  sin  q = 0 (7) ; 

or,  in  words,  the  step  of  the  screw  multiplied  into  the  sum  of  the 
axial  components  must  he  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  moments  of 
the  force  round  the  axis  of  the  screw. 

The  direction  taken  as  positive  for  the  moments  in  the 
preceding  statement  is  the  direction  opposite  to  the  rotation 
which  the  nut  would  have  if  it  had  axial  motion  in  the  direc- 
tion taken  as  positive  for  those  axial  components. 


557.  The  equations  of  equilibrium  when  there  are  two  or  more 
freedoms,  are  merely  (7)  repeated  with  accents  to  denote  the 
elements  corresponding  to  the  several  guide-screws  othei  than 
the  first.  Thus  if  s,  s',  s',  &c.,  denote  the  screw-steps ; av  af 
af,  &c.,  the  shortest  distances  between  the  axes  of  the  screws 
and  the  line  of  Pp  ix,  if  if,  &c.,  the  inclinations  of  this  line  to 
the  axes ; and  a2,  a',  &c.,  and  if  &c.,  corresponding  elements 

* The  quantity  s thus  defined  we  shall,  for  brevity,  henceforth  call  the 
screw-step. 


STATICS. 


103 


557.] 


for  the  line  of  the  second  force,  and  so  on ; we  have,  for  the 
equations  of  equilibrium, 


sSPj  cos  +'£a1P [ sin  i1  — 0 ' 

s,'£P1  cos  i'  + Sa/Pj  sin  i'  — 0 
s'XP,  cos  i"  + 2 al"P1  sin  i"  = 0 ” 
&c.,  &c., 


(8). 


The  equations  of  constraint  being,  as  in  § 553,  (4), 


Ax  + Pi)  + Cz  -j-  Gts  + Hp  + la  = 0 | 

A'x  + By  + C'z  + G,*r  + H,p  + I'a=o\ (9), 


The  same 
analytically 
and  in 
terms  of 
rectangular 
co-ordi- 
nates. 


suppose,  for  example,  these  equations  to  be  four  in  number. 
Take  two  more  equations 


ax  + by  +cz  + grz  + hp  + ia  = co 
ax  + b'i)  + cz  + g'-ur  + h'p  + i' a = co' 


(io), 


where  a,  b, ...  and  a',  &',...  are  any  arbitrarily  assumed  quanti- 
ties: and  from  the  six  equations  (9)  and  (10)  deduce  the  fol- 
lowing : 


fl&  = &o>+&V,  y=  33w  + 33V,  z=@  <o  + @V,l 

‘uT  = (Sw  4 Ctx'io ',  p = %l)(o  + a — + lE'u)',  / 7 

where  SI,  33, . . . and  SI',  33', . . . are  known,  being  the  determi-  Two  gene- 
nantal  ratios  found  in  solving  (9)  and  (10).  Thus  the  six  rect-  ponentC°m" 
angular  component  velocities  are  expressed  in  terms  of  two  correspond- 
generalized  component  velocities  co,  co',  which,  in  virtue  of  the  freedoms.0 
four  equations  of  constraint  (9),  suffice  for  the  complete  specifi- 
cation of  whatever  motion  the  constraints  leave  permissible. 

In  terms  of  this  notation  we  have,  for  the  rate  of  working  of 
the  applied  forces, 


Ax  + Y y 4 Zz  4 Xur  + J\Ip  4 Per  ) 

= (&X+3 $Y+@Z+<&L  + 1i}M+JkJY)<o  l . (12). 

4 (%,'X  4 33' T 4 WZ+  <&'L  4 WM+  3E'iV)<o'J 

This  must  be  nil  for  every  permitted  motion  in  order  that  the 
forces  may  balance.  Hence  the  equations  of  equilibrium  are 

4 33  Y 4 <&Z  4 <&L  4 ?i?J/  4 IN  = 0 ) 
and  (&!X+WY+<il,Z+<&,L  + 'WM+rN=0  j (13)‘ 


104- 


abstract  DYNAMICS. 


Two  gene- 
ralized com- 
ponent 
velocities 
correspond- 
ing to  two 
freedoms. 


Equilibrant 
and  result- 
ant. 


Couples. 


[5o7. 

Similarly  with  one,  or  two,  or  three,  or  five  (instead  of  our  ex- 
ample of  four)  constraining  equations  (9),  we  find  five,  or  four, 
or  three,  or  one  equation  of  equilibrium  (13).  These  equations 
express  obviously  the  same  conditions  as  those  expressed  by  (8); 
the  first  of  (13)  is  identical  with  the  first  of  (8),  the  second  of 
(13)  with  the  second  of  (8),  and  so  on,  provided  w,  a/,...  cor- 
respond to  the  same  components  of  freedom  as  the  several  screws 
of  (8)  respectively.  The  equations  though  identical  in  substance 
are  very  different  in  form.  The  purely  analytical  transformation 
from  either  form  to  the  other  is  a simple  enough  piece  of  ana- 
lytical geometry  which  may  be  worked  as  an  exercise  by  the 
student,  to  be  done  separately  for  the  first  of  (8)  and  the  first 
of  (13),  just  as  if  there  were  but  one  freedom. 

558.  Any  system  of  forces  which  if  applied  to  a rigid  body 
would  balance  a given  system  of  forces  acting  on  it,  is  called  an 
equilibrant  of  the  given  system.  The  system  of  forces  equal 
and  opposite  to  the  equilibrant  may  be  called  a resultant  of  the 
given  system.  It  is  only,  however,  when  the  resultant  system 
is  less  numerous,  or  in  some  respect  simpler,  than  the  given 
sj^stem  that  the  term  resultant  is  convenient  or  suitable.  It  is 
used  with  great  advantage  with  respect  to  the  resultant  force 
and  couple  (§  559  g,  below)  to  which  Poinsot’s  method  leads,  or 
to  the  two  resultant  forces  which  mathematicians  before  Poinsot 
had  shown  to  be  the  simplest  system  to  which  any  system  of 
forces  acting  on  a rigid  body  can  in  general  be  reduced.  It  is 
only  when  the  system  is  reducible  to  a single  force  that  the 
term  “ resultant  ” pure  and  simple  is  usually  applied. 

559.  As  a most  useful  commentary  on  and  illustration  of 
the  general  theory  of  the  equilibrium  of  a rigid  body,  which  we 
have"  completed  in  §§  552—557,  and  particularly  for  the  pur- 
pose of  finding  practically  convenient  resultants  in  a . very 
simple  and  clear  manner,  we  may  now  with  advantage  intro- 
duce the  beautiful  method  of  Couples,  invented  by  Poinsot. 

In  § 234-  we  have  already  defined  a couple,  and  shown  that 
the  sum  of  the  moments  of  its  forces  is  the  same  about  all 
axes  perpendicular  to  its  plane.  It  may  therefore  be  shifted  to 
any  new  position  in  its  own  plane,  or  in  any  parallel  plane, 


559.] 


STATICS. 


105 


without  alteration  of  its  effect  on  the  rigid  body  to  which  Couples, 
it  is  applied.  Its  arm  may  be  turned  through  any  angle 
in  the  plane  of  the  forces,  and  the  length  of  the  arm  and  the 
magnitudes  of  the  forces  may  be  altered  at  pleasure,  without 
changing  its  effect — provided  the  moment  remain  unchanged. 

Hence  a couple  is  conveniently  specified  by  the  line  defined  as 
its  “axis”  in  § 234.  According  to  the  convention  of  § 234  the 
axis  of  a couple  which  tends  to  produce  rotation  in  the  direc- 
tion contrary  to  the  motion  of  the  hands  of  a watch, 
must  be  drawn  through  the  front  of  the  watch  and 
vice  versa.  This  may  easily  be  remembered  by  the 
help  of  a simple  diagram  such  as  we  give,  in  which 
the  arrow-heads  indicate  the  directions  of  rotation, 
and  of  the  axis,  respectively. 

559  b.  It  follows  from  §§  233,  234,  that  couples  are  to  be  Composi- 
compounded  or  resolved  by  treating  their  axes  by  the  law  of  coupiL 
the  parallelogram,  in  a manner  identical  with  that  which  we 
have  seen  must  be  employed  for  linear  and  angular  velocities, 
and  forces. 

Hence  a couple  G,  the  direction  cosines  of  whose  axis  are 
X,  /x,  v,  is  equivalent  to  the  three  couples  GX,  G/x,  Gv  about  the 
axes  of  x , y , z respectively. 

559  c.  If  a force,  F,  act  at  any  point,  A,  of  a body,  it  may  Force  re- 
be  transferred  to  any  other  point,  B.  Thus:  by  the  principle  of  wind0 
superposition  of  forces,  introduce  at  B,  in  the  line  through  it  couple' 
parallel  to  the  given  force  F , a pair  of  equal  and  opposite  forces 
A and  — F.  Then  F at  A,  and  — F at  B,  form  a couple,  and 
there  remains  F at  B. 

From  this  we  have,  at  once,  the  conditions  of  equilibrium  Application 
of  a rigid  body  already  investigated  in  § 552.  For,  each  force 
may  be  transferred  to  any  assumed  point  as  origin,  if  we  intro-  rigid  body' 
duce  the  corresponding  couple.  And  the  forces,  which  now  act 
at  one  point,  must  equilibrate  according  to  the  principles  of 
Chap.  VI.;  while  the  resultant  couple,  and  therefore  its  com- 
ponents about  any  three  lines  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  must 
vanish. 


Forces  re- 
presented 
by  the  sides 
of  a polygon. 


Forces  pro- 
portional 
and  perpen- 
dicular to 
the  sides  of 
a triangle. 


Composi- 
tion of 
force  and 
couple. 


10G  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [559  d. 

559  d.  Hence  forces  represented,  not  merely  in  magnitude 
and  direction,  but  in  lines  of  action,  by  the  sides  of  any  closed 
polygon  whether  plane  or  not  plane,  are  equivalent  to  a single 
couple.  For  when  transferred  to  any  origin,  they  equilibrate,  ; 
by  the  Polygon  of  Forces  (§§  27,  256).  When  the  polygon  is 
plane,  twice  its  area  is  the  moment  of  the  couple  ; when  not 
plane,  the  component  of  the  couple  about  any  axis  is  twice  the 
area  of  the  projection  on  a plane  perpendicular  to  that  axis.  The 
resultant  couple  has  its  axis  perpendicular  to  the  plane  (§  236) 
on  which  the  projected  area  is  a maximum. 

559  e.  Lines,  perpendicular  to  the  sides  of  a triangle,  and 
passing  through  their  middle  points,  meet ; and  their  mutual 
inclinations  are  equal  to  the  changes  of  direction  at  the  corners, 
in  travelling  round  the  triangle.  Hence,  if  at  the  middle  points 
of  the  sides  of  a triangle,  and  in  its  plane,  forces  be  applied  all 
inwards  or  all  outwards;  and  if  their  magnitudes  be  proportional 
to  the  sides  of  the  triangle,  they  are  in  equilibrium.  The  same 
is  true  of  any  plane  polygon,  as  we  readily  see  by  dividing  it 
into  triangles.  And  if  forces  equal  to  the  areas  of  the  faces  be 
applied  perpendicularly  to  the  faces  of  any  closed  polyhedron,  at 
tlieir  centres  of  inertia,  all  inwards  or  all  outwards,  these  also 
will  form  an  equilibrating  system ; as  we  see  by  considering  the' 
evanescence  of  (i)  the  algebraic  sum  of  the  projections  of  the 
areas  of  the  faces  on  any  plane,  and  of  (ii)  the  algebraic  sum  of 
the  volumes  of  the  rings  described  by  the  faces  when  the  solid 
figure  is  made  to  rotate  round  any  axis,  these  volumes  being 
reckoned  by  aid  of  Pappus’  theorem  (§  569,  below). 

559  f A couple  and  a force  in  a given  line  inclined  to  its 
plane  may  be  reduced  to  a smaller  couple  in  a plane  perpen- 
dicular to  the  force,  and  a force  equal  and  parallel  to  the  given 
force.  For  the  couple  may  be  resolved  into  two,  one  in  a plane 
containing  the  direction  of  the  force,  and  the  other  in  a plane 
perpendicular  to  the  force.  The  force  and  the  component 
couple  in  the  same  plane  with  it  are  equivalent  to  an  equal 
force  acting  in  a parallel  line,  according  to  the  converse  of  | 

§ 559  c. 


559  g.] 


STATICS. 


107 


559  a.  We  have  seen  that  any  set  of  forces  acting  on  Composi- 

. . J J . 1 tion  of 

a rigid  body  may  be  reduced  to  a force  at  any  point  and  a any^set  of 
couple.  Now  (§  559 /)  these  may  be  reduced  to  an  equal  force  ing.ona^ 
acting  in  a definite  line  in  the  body,  and  a couple  whose  plane  is 
perpendicular  to  the  force,  and  which  is  the  least  couple  which, 
with  a single  force,  can  constitute  a resultant  of  the  given  set  of 
forces.  The  definite  line  thus  found  for  the  force  is  called  the 
Central  Axis.  It  is  the  line  about  which  the  sum  of  the  moments  Central 
of  the  given  forces  is  least. 

With  the  notation  of  §§  552,  553,  let  us  suppose  the  origin  to 
be  changed  to  any  point  x',  y',  s'.  The  resultant  force  has  still 
the  components  X (X),  2 ( T ),  X (X),  or  XI,  Em,  En,  parallel  to 
the  axes.  But  the  couples  now  are 

S[^(y-y;-r(W)],  Z[X(z-z')-Z(x-x')\  2 
or 

GX  - E (ny'  — mz ),  Gy.  — E (lzr  — nx),  Gv  — E (mxr  — ly'). 

The  conditions  that  the  resultant  force  shall  be  perpendicular  to 
the  plane  of  the  resultant  couple  are 

GX  - E ( ny'  - mz')  _Gy.-E  ( Iz  — nx)  Gv  — E (nix'  - ly') 
l m n 

These  two  equations  among  x',  y,  z'  are  the  equations  of  the 
central  axis. 

e find  the  same  two  equations  by  investigating  the  con- 
ditions that  the  resultant  couple 

J\GX—E(ny  —mz )]"+  [G/x—E {lz  — rnx')Y+  [Gv  —E(mx  — ly')Y 
may  be  a minimum  subject  to  independent  variations  of  x', 

y\  «'• 

560.  By  combining  the  resultant  force  with  one  of  the  Reduction 
forces  of  the  resultant  couple,  we  have  obviously  an  infinite  forces0, 
number  ot  ways  of  reducing  any  set  of  forces  acting  on  a rigid 
body  to  two  forces  whose  directions  do  not  meet.  But  there  is 
one  case  in  which  the  result  is  symmetrical,  and  which  is  there- 
fore worthy  of  special  notice. 

Supposing  the  central  axis  of  the  system  has  been  found,  Symmctri- 
draw  a line,  A A',  at  right  angles  to  it  through  any  point  C of  ^ CU8°‘ 


108 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[5G0. 


Symmetri- 
cal case. 


Composi- 
tion of 
parallel 
forces. 


it,  and  make  CA  equal  to  GA'.  For  R,  acting  along  the  central 

axis,  substitute  (by  § 5G1)  at  each  end  of  AA'.  Then, 

choosing  this  line  A A'  as  the  arm  of  the  couple,  and  calling  it 

n 

a , we  have  at  one  extremity  of  it,  two  forces,  — perpendicular 

CL 

to  the  central  axis,  and  \R  parallel  to  the  central  axis.  Com- 


pounding these  we  get  two  forces,  each  equal  to  + 


CP 


through  A and  A'  respectively,  perpendicular  to  AA',  and  ! 
inclined  to  the  plane  through  AA'  and  the  central  axis,  at 

2 Gr 

angles  on  the  two  sides  of  it  each  equal  to  tan  1 . 


561.  A very  simple,  but  important,  case,  is  that  of  any  • 
number  of  'parallel  forces  acting  at  different  points  of  a rigid 
body. 

Here,  for  equilibrium,  obviously  it  is  necessary  and  sufficient 
that  the  algebraic  sum  of  the  forces  be  nil ; and  that  the  sum  of  | 
their  moments  about  any  two  axes  perpendicular  to  the  com- 
mon direction  of  the  forces  be  also  nil. 

This  clearly  implies  (§  553)  that  the  sum  ot  their  moments 
about  any  axis  whatever  is  nil. 

To  express  the  condition  in  rectangular  coordinates,  let 
P2,  <kc.  be  the  forces;  (a?,,  y x,  2,),  ( x2 , y2,  z2),  &c.  points  in 
their  "lines  of  action ; and  l,  m,  n the  direction  cosines  of  a 
line  parallel  to  them  all.  The  general  equations  [§  552  (1),  (2)]  - 
of  equilibrium  of  a rigid  body  become  in  this  case, 


ZXP=  0,  m%P=  0,  n$P  = 0; 

rL%Py  — m%Pz  = 0,  V%Pz  — ri%Px  — 0,  ri%Px  — l%Py  — 0. 

These  equations  are  equivalent  to  but  three  independent  equa- 
tions, which  may  be  written  as  follows  : 


$P  = 0, 


%Px 


%Py 

m 


(!)• 


If  the  given  forces  are  not  in  equilibrium  a single  force  may 
be  found  which  shall  be  their  resultant.  To  prove  this  let, 
if  possible,  a force  -11,  in  the  direction  (l,  m,  n ),  at  a point 


561.] 


STATICS. 


109 


(x,  y,  z)  equilibrate  the  given  farces.  By  (1)  we  have,  for  Composi 
the  conditions  of  equilibrium  of  - R,  I\ , P2,  &c.,  forces*51 

R = 2P (2), 

and 

5 Px  - Ex  __  Py  — Ry  _ ^Pz-  Rz  ^ 

l m n 

Equation  (2)  determines  R,  and  equations  (3)  are  the  equa- 
tions of  a straight  line  at  any  point  of  which  a force  equal  to 
— R,  applied  in  the  direction  (l,  m,  n),  will  balance  the  given 
system. 

Suppose  now  the  direction  (l,  m,  n)  of  the  given  forces  to  be 
varied  while  the  magnitude  P},  and  one  point  (&,,  y,,  z})  in  the 
line  of  application,  of  each  force  is  kept  unchanged.  We  see  by 
(3)  that  one  point  ( x , y,  z)  given  by  the  equations 


_ %Px  _ 2Py  _ %Pz 
X~~R~’  y~~R~  ’ R 


(4), 


is  common  to  the  lines  of  the  resultants. 

The  point  (%,  y,  z)  given  by  equations  (4)  is  what  is  called 
the  centre  of  the  system  of  parallel  forces  Px  at  (%v  yv  zt),  P2 
at  (ocv  yv  z2),  &c. : and  we  have  the  proposition  that  a force  in 
the  line  through  this  point  parallel  to  the  lines  of  the  given 
forces,  equal  to  their  sum,  is  their  resultant.  This  proposition 
is  easily  proved  synthetically  by  taking  the  forces  in  any  order 
and  finding  the  resultant  of  the  first  two,  then  the  resultant  of 
this  and  the  third,  then  of  this  second  force,  and  so  on.  The  line 
of  the  first  subsidiary  resultant,  for  all  varied  directions  of  the 
given  forces,  passes  through  one  and  the  same  point  (that  is  the 
point  dividing  the  line  joining  the  points  of  application  of  the 
first  two  forces,  into  parts  inversely  as  their  magnitudes). 
Similarly  we  see  that  the  second  subsidiary  resultant  passes 
always  through  one  determinate  point : and  so  for  the  third, 
and  so  on  for  any  number  of  forces. 

562.  It  is  obvious,  from  the  formulas  of  § 230,  that  if  masses  Centre  of 
proportional  to  the  forces  be  placed  at  the  several  points  of  gravlty‘ 
application  of  these  forces,  the  centre  of  inertia  of  these  masses 
will  be  the  same  point  in  the  body  as  the  centre  of  parallel 


Contro  of 
gravity. 


Parallel 
forces 
whose 
algebraic 
sum  is  zero. 


Conditions 
of  equili- 
brium of 
three 
forces. 


Physical 

axiom. 


110  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [5G2. 

forces.  Hence  the  reactions  of  the  different  parts  of  a rigid 
body  against  acceleration  in  parallel  lines  are  rigorously  re- 
ducible to  one  force,  acting  at  the  centre  of  inertia.  The  same 
is  true  approximately  of  the  action  of  gravity  on  a rigid  body 
of  small  dimensions  relatively  to  the  earth,  and  hence  the 
centre  of  inertia  is  sometimes  (§  230)  called  the  Centre  of 
Gravity.  But,  except  on  a centrobaric  body  (§  534),  gravity  is 
in  general  reducible  not  to  a single  force  but  to  a force  and 
couple  (§  559  g)\  and  the  force  does  not  pass  through  a point 
fixed  relatively  to  the  body  in  all  the  positions  for  which  the 
couple  vanishes. 

563.  In  one  case  the  proposition  of  § 561,  that  the  system 
has  a single  resultant  force,  must  be  modified : that  is  the  case 
in  which  the  algebraic  sum  of  the  given  forces  vanishes.  In 
this  case  the  resultant  is  a couple  whose  plane  is  parallel  to  the 
common  direction  of  the  forces.  A good  example  of  this  case 
is  furnished  by  a magnetized  mass  of  steel,  of  moderate  dimen- 
sions, subject  to  the  influence  of  the  earth’s  magnetism.  The 
amounts  of  the  so-called  north  and  south  magnetisms  in  each 
element  of  the  mass  are  equal,  and  are  therefore  subject  to  equal 
and  opposite  forces,  parallel  in  a rigorously  uniform  field  of 
force.  Thus  a compass-needle  experiences  from  the  earth’s 
magnetism  sensibly  a couple  (or  directive  action),  and  is  not 
sensibly  attracted  or  repelled  as  a whole. 

564.  If  three  forces,  acting  on  a rigid  body,  produce  equili- 
brium, their  directions  must  lie  in  one  plane;  and  must  all  meet 
in  one  point,  or  be  parallel.  For  the  proof  we  may  introduce 
a consideration  which  will  be  very  useful  to  us  in  investigations 
connected  with  the  statics  of  flexible  bodies  and  fluids. 

If  any  forces,  acting  on  a solid,  or  fluid  body,  produce 
equilibrium,  we  may  suppose  any  portions  of  the  body  to  become 
fixed,  or  rigid,  or  rigid  and  fixed,  without  destroying  the  equi- 
librium. 

Applying  this  principle  to  the  case  above,  suppose  any  two 
points  of  the  body,  respectively  in  the  lines  of  action  of  two  of 
the  forces,  to  be  fixed.  The  third  force  must  have  no  moment 


STATICS. 


Ill 


564.] 

about  the  line  joining  these  points  ; in  other  words,  its  direction  Physical 

J ° . 1 ••it  axiom. 

must  pass  through  that  line.  As  any  two  points  m the  lines  of 
action  may  he  taken,  it  follows  that  the  three  forces  are  coplanar. 

And  three  forces,  in  one  plane,  cannot  equilibrate  unless  their 
directions  are  parallel,  or  pass  through  a point. 

565.  It  is  easy,  and  useful,  to  consider  various  cases  of  Equiiibri- 
equilibrium  when  no  forces  act  on  a rigid  body  but  gravity  the  action 

. ° . of  gravity. 

and  the  pressures,  normal  or  tangential,  between  it  and  fixed 
supports.  Thus  if  one  given  point  only  of  the  body  be  fixed,  it 
is  evident  that  the  centre  of  inertia  must  be  in  the  vertical  line 
through  this  point.  For  stable  equilibrium  the  centre  of  inertia 
need  not  be  below  the  point  of  support  (§  566). 

566.  An  interesting  case  of  equilibrium  is  suggested  by  Rocking 
what  are  called  Rocking  Stones,  where,  whether  by  natural  or  sl0ULb‘ 
by  artificial  processes,  the  lower  surface  of  a loose  mass  of  rock 

is  worn  into  a convex  or  concave,  or  anticlastic  form,  while  the 
bed  of  rock  on  which  it  rests  in  equilibrium  may  be  convex 
or  concave,  or  of  an  anticlastic  form.  A loaded  sphere  resting 
on  a spherical  surface  is  a particular  case. 

Let  0,  0'  be  the  centres  of  curvature  of  the  fixed,  and  rock- 
ing, bodies  respectively,  when  in  the  position  of 
equilibrium.  Take  any  two  infinitely  small, 
equal  arcs  PQ,  Pp;  and  at  Q make  the  angle 
O'QR  equal  to  POp.  When,  by  displacement,  Q 
and  p become  the  points  in  contact,  QR  will 
evidently  be  vertical;  and,  if  the  centre  of  inertia 
G,  which  must  be  in  0P0'  when  the  movable 
body  is  in  its  position  of  equilibrium,  be  to  the 
left  of  QR,  the  equilibrium  will  obviously  be 
stable.  Hence,  if  it  be  below  R,  the  equilibrium 
is  stable,  and  not  unless. 

Now  if  p and  a be  the  radii  of  curvature  OP, 

OP  of  the  two  surfaces,  and  6 the  angle  POp,  the  angle  QO'R 

will  be  equal  to  — ; and  we  have  in  the  triangle  QO'R  (§  112) 

RO'  : a ::  sin  6 : sin  (o  + 

::  cr  : a + p (approximately). 


Rooking 

stones. 


Equilibri- 
um, about 
an  axis, 


on  a fixed 
surface. 


112  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [5GG. 

Hence  PR  = a = ; 

a + p p + c r 

and  therefore,  for  stable  equilibrium, 

PG< 

p + <r 

If  the  lower  surface  be  plane,  p is  infinite,  and  the  condition 
becomes  (as  in  § 291) 

PG<*. 

If  the  lower  surface  be  concave  the  sign  of  p must  be  changed, 
and  the  condition  becomes 

PG  , 

p-cr 

which  cannot  be  negative,  since  p must  be  numerically  greater 
than  cr  in  this  case. 

567.  If  two  points  be  fixed,  the  only  motion  of  which  the 
system  is  capable  is  one  of  rotation  about  a fixed  axis,  dhe 
centre  of  inertia  must  then  be  in  the  vertical  plane  passing 
through  those  points.  For  stability  it  is  necessary  (§  566)  that 
the  centre  of  inertia  be  below  the  line  joining  them. 

568.  If  a rigid  body  rest  on  a frictional  fixed  surface  there 
will  in  general  be  only  three  points  of  contact ; and  the 
body  will  be  in  stable  equilibrium  if  the  vertical  line  drawn 
from  its  centre  of  inertia  cuts  the  plane  of  these  three  points 
within  the  triangle  of  which  they  form  the  corners.  For  if  one 
of  these  supports  be  removed,  the  body  will  obviously  tend  to 
fall  towards  that  support.  Hence  each  of  the  three  prevents 
the  body  from  rotating  about  the  line  joining  the  other  two. 
Thus,  for  instance,  a body  stands  stably  on  an  inclined  plane  (if 
the  friction  be  sufficient  to  prevent  it  from  sliding  down)  when 
the  vertical  line  drawn  through  its  centre  of  inertia  falls  within 
the  base,  or  area  bounded  by  the  shortest  line  which  can  be 
drawn  round  the  portion  in  contact  with  the  plane.  Hence  a 
body,  which  cannot  stand  on  a horizontal  plane,  may  stand  on 

an  inclined  plane. 


STATICS. 


113 


I 560.] 

569.  A curious  theorem,  duo  to  Pappus,  but  commonly  Pappus’ 
attributed  to  Guldinus,  may  be  mentioned  hero,  as  it  is  em-  theorem' 
| ployed  with  advantage  in  some  cases  in  finding  the  centre  of 
gravity  (or  centre  of  inertia)  of  a body.  It  is  obvious  from 
§ 230.  If  a plane  closed  curve  revolve  through  any  angle  about 
an  axis  in  its  plane,  the  solid  content  of  the  surface  generated  is 
equal  to  the  product  of  the  area  of  the  curve  into  the  length  of  the 
I path  described  by  the  centre  of  inertia  of  the  area  of  the  curve  ; 
and  the  area  of  the  curved  surface  is  equal  to  the  product 
of  the  length  of  the  curve  into  the  length  of  the  path  described 
I by  the  centre  of  inertia  of  the  curve. 


570.  The  general  principles  upon  which  forces  of  constraint 
I and  friction  are  to  be  treated  have  been  stated  above  (§§  293, 
I 329,  452).  We  add  here  a few  examples  for  the  sake  of  illus- 
trating the  application  of  these  principles  to  the  equilibrium 

I of  a rigid  body  in  some  of  the  more  important  practical  cases 
I of  constraint. 


571.  The  application  of  statical  principles  to  the  Me-  Mechanical 
chanical  Powers,  or  elementary  machines,  and  to  their  combi-  powers' 
nations,  however  complex,  requires  merely  a statement  of  their 
kinematical  relations  (as  in  §§  79,  85, 102,  &c.)  and  an  immediate 
I translation  into  Dynamics  by  Newton’s  principle  (§  269) ; or  by 
Lagrange’s  Virtual  Velocities  (§§  289,  290),  with  special  atten- 
I tion  to  the  introduction  of  forces  of  friction  as  in  § 452.  In  no 
I case  can  this  process  involve  further  difficulties  than  are  implied 
I in  seeking  the  geometrical  circumstances  of  any  infinitely  small 
I disturbance,  and  in  the  subsequent  solution  of  the  equations 
I to  which  the  translation  into  dynamics  leads  us.  We  will  not, 

I therefore,  stop  to  discuss  any  of  these  questions  ; but  will  take 
| a few  examples  of  no  very  great  difficulty,  before  quitting  for 
a time  this- part  of  the  subject.  The  principles  already"  de- 
I veloped  will  be  of  constant  use  to  us  in  the  remainder  of  the 
I work,  which  will  furnish  us  with  ever-recurring  opportunities 
I ot  exemphfymg  their  use  and  mode  of  application. 


Let  us  begin  with  the  case  of  the  Balance,  of  which 
promised  (§  431)  to  give  an  investigation. 

VOL.  II. 


we 


8 


114 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[572. 


Examples. 

Balance. 


572,  Ex.  I.  The  centre  of  gravity  of  the  beam  must  not 
coincide  with  the  knife-edge,  or  else  the  beam  would  rest  in- 
differently in  any  position.  We  shall  suppose,  in  the  first  place, 
that  the  arms  are  not  of  equal  length. 

Let  0 be  the  fulcrum,  G 
the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
beam,  M its  mass ; and  sup- 
pose that  with  loads  P and  Q 
in  the  pans  the  beam  rests 
(as  drawn)  in  a position 
making  an  angle  6 with  the 

horizontal  line. 


Sensibility.  Taking  moments  about  0,  and,  for  convenience  (see  § 220), 
using  gravitation  measurement  of  the  forces,  we  have 

Q (. AB cos  0 + OA  sin  0)  + M.  OG sin  6 = P (A C cos  6-0 A sin  6). 


From  this  we  find 

tan  6 = 


P.AG-Q.AB 

(pV^oaVmto  g ■ 


If  the  arms  be  equal  we  have 


tan  6 = 


(P-Q)AB 
(Pq  Q)  OA  + M.OG ’ 


Hence  the  Sensibility  (§  431)  is  greater,  (1)  as  the  arms  are 
longer,  (2)  as  the  mass  of  the  beam  is  less,  (3)  as  the  fulcrum 
is  nearer  to  the  line  joining  the  points  of  attachment  of  the 
nans  (4)  as  the  fulcrum  is  nearer  to  the  centre  of  gravity  o 
the  beam.  If  the  fulcrum  be  in  the  line  joining  the  points  o 
attachment  of  the  pans,  the  sensibility  is  the  same  for  the  same 

difference  of  loads  in  the  pans. 

EWe.  Ex  II.  Find  the  position  of  equilibrium  of  a rod  AB 
SSiSto.  resting  on  a frictionless  horizontal  rail  D,  its  lower  end  pressing 
constraint.  & frictioniess  vertical  wall  AG  parallel  to  the  ran. 

The  figure  represents  a vertical  section  through  the  i > 
which  must  evidently  be  in  a plane  perpendicular  to  the  wal 
and  rail.  The  equilibrium  is  obviously  unstable. 


572.] 


STATICS. 


115 


The  only  forces  acting  are  three,  R the  pressure  of  the  wall  Examples, 
on  the  rod,  horizontal ; S that  of  the  rail  on  the  rod,  perpcndi-  frictionless 
cular  to  the  rod ; TV  the  weight  constraint- 

of  the  rod,  acting  vertically 
downwards  at  its  centre  of 
gravity.  If  the  half-length  of 
the  rod  be  a,  and  the  distance 
of  the  rail  from  the  wall  b, 
these  are  given — and  all  that 
is  wanted  to  fix  the  position  of 

equilibrium  is  the  angle,  CAB,  which  the  rod  makes  with  the 

b 


wall.  If  we  call  it  0 we  have  AD  = 


sin  0 


Resolving  horizontally,  R - S cos  0 = 0 
vertically,  F - 8 sin  0 = 0 . 

Taking  moments  about  A 

8 • AD  — W . a sin  0 — 0, 
S .b—  TV.  a sin2#  = 0 . 


•(1), 

.(2). 


or 


.(3). 


As  there  are  only  three  unknown  quantities  R,  S,  and  0,  these 

three  equations  contain  the  complete  solution  of  the  problem 
By  (2)  and  (3)  1 


sin3  0 = - , which  gives  0. 
ct 


And  by  (2) 
and  by  (1) 


S = 


W 


sin  0 ’ 

R = S cos  0 = TV  cot  0. 


Lr,  ' , ' As  an  additional  example,  suppose  the  wall  and  Rod  con- 

friction  ?o°  , Tn  ^ a,nd  let  M be  the  “efficient  of  statical 

I friction  f0r  both.  If  the  rod  be  placed  in  the  position  of  equi-  Sur'“m 

hbnum  just  investigated  for  the  case  of  no  friction,  none  will 

e called  into  play,  for  there  will  be  no  tendency  to  motion  to 

P °VerC°me-  If  the  “d  ^ be  brought  lower  and  lower  mo^ 

8—2 


11G 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[572. 


Examples,  and  more  friction  will  be  called  into  play  to  overcome  the  tend- 
strainedby  ency  of  tlic  rod  to  fall  between  the  wall  and  the  rail,  until  v>c 
surfaces.  come  to  a limiting  position  in  which  motion  is  about  to  com- 
mence. In  that  position  the  friction  at  A is  /i  times  the  pres- 
sure on  the  wall,  and  acts  upwards.  That  at  D is  /z  times  the 
pressure  on  the  rod,  and  acts  in  the  direction  DR.  Putting 
GAD  = 0t  in  this  case,  our  three  equations  become 


Rl  + fiSl  sin  6X  — Sx  cos  0l  = 0 (1,), 

W — pR1  — sin  =0 (2t), 

SJ)  - Wa  sin 2 =0 (3J. 


The  directions  of  both  the  friction-forces  passing  through  A, 
neither  appears  in  (3,).  This  is  why  A is  preferable  to  any 
other  point  about  which  to  take  moments. 

By  eliminating  R1  and  Sx  from  these  equations  we  get 


1 — ^ sin3  sin2  0 x (cos  0,  - fi  sin  0X) (4,), 

b o 

from  which  9,  is  to  he  found.  Then  8,  is  known  from  (3,), 
and  R,  from  either  of  the  others. 

If  the  end  A be  raised  above  the  position  of  equilibrium 
without  friction,  the  tendency  is  for  the  rod  to  fall  outside  the 
rail ; more  and  more  friction  will  be  called  into  play,  till  the 
position  of  the  rod  (02)  is  such  that  the  friction  reaches  its 
greatest  value,  /*  times  the  pressure.  We  may  thus  fin 
another  toMng  position  for  stability;  and  m any  position 
between  these  the  rod  is  in  equilibrium. 

It  is  useful  to  observe  that  in  this  second  case  the  direction 
of  each  friction  is  the  opposite  to  that  in  the  former.  Hence 
equations  of  the  first  case,  with  the  sign  of  p changed,  serve 
for  the  second  case.  Thus  for  S,,  hy  (4,), 


1 - 2 sin3  9,  = - p J sin5  9,  (cos  9,  + P sin  9,). 


572.] 


STATICS. 


117 


Ex.  IV.  A rectangular  block  lies  on  a frictional  horizontal  Examples. 


plane,  and  is  acted  on  by  a hori- 
zontal force  whose  line  of  action 
is  midway  between  two  of  the 
vertical  sides.  Find  the  mag- 
nitude of  the  force  when  just 
sufficient  to  produce  motion, 
and  whether  the  motion  will 
be  of  the  nature  of  sliding  or 
overturning. 


Block  on 
frictional 
plane. 


If  the  force  P is  on  the  point  of  overturning  the  body,  it  is 
evident  that  it  will  turn  about  the  edge  A,  and  therefore  the 
piessuie,  P,  of  the  plane  and  the  friction,  S,  act  at  that  edge. 
Our  statical  conditions  are,  of  course, 

P = IF, 

S = P, 

Wb  = Pa, 

where  b is  half  the  length  of  the  solid,  and  a the  distance  of  P 

from  the  plane.  From  these  we  have  S = - W. 

a 

ISow  S cannot  exceed  git,  whence  wre  must  not  have  - 

a 

greater  than  g,  if  it  is  to  be  possible  to  upset  the  body  by  a 
horizontal  force  in  the  line  given  for  P. 

A simple  geometrical  construction  enables  us  to  solve  this 
and  similar  problems,  and  will  be  seen  at  once  to  be  merely  a 
I graphic  representation  of  the  above  process.  Thus  if  we  pro- 
duce the  directions  of  the  applied  force,  and  of  the  weight,  to 
meet  in  II,  and  make  at  A the  angle  BAR  whose  co-tangent 
is  the  coefficient  of  friction:  there  will  be  a tendency  to  upset, 
or  not,  according  as  II  is  above,  or  below,  A II. 


Ex.Y.  A mass,  such  as  a gate,  is  supported  by  two  rings,  Masssup- 
A and  B,  which  pass  loosely  round  a vertical  post.  In  equi-  Kw 
libnum,  it  is  obvious  that  at  A the  part  of  the  ring  nearest  the  KSt’ 


118 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[572.' 


Examples, 
Mass  sup- 
ported by 
rings  pass- 
ing round  n 
rough  post. 


Equilibrium 
of  a flexible 
andinexten- 
sible  cord. 


Catenary. 


mass,  and  at  B the  part  farthest  from  it,  will  be  in  contact  with 

the  post.  The  pressures  exerted 
on  the  rings,  R and  S , will  evi- 
dently be  in  the  directions  AC, 
CB,  indicated  in  the  diagram, 
which,  if  no  other  force  besides 
gravity  act  on  the  mass,  must 
meet  in  the  vertical  through  its 
centre  of  inertia.  And  it  is  obvious  that,  however  small  be  the 
coefficient  of  friction,  provided  there  be  any  force  of  friction  at 
all,  equilibrium  is  always  possible  if  the  distance  of  the  centre 
of  inertia  from  the  post  be  great  enough  compared  with  the 
distance  between  the  rings. 

When  the  mass  is  just  about  to  slide  down,  the  full  amount 
of  friction  is  called  into  play,  and  the  angles  which  R and  8 
make  with  the  horizon  are  each  equal  to  the  sliding  angle.  If 
the  centre  of  inertia  of  the  gate  be  farther  from  the  post  than 
the  intersection  of  two  lines  drawn  from  A,  B,  at  the  sliding 
angles,  it  will  hang  stably  held  up  by  friction ; not  unless.  A 
force  pushing  upwards  at  Qv  or  downwards  at  Qv  will  remove 
the  tendency  to  fall ; but  a force  upwards  at  Q3,  or  downwards 
at  will  produce  sliding. 

A similar  investigation  is  easily  applied  to  the  jamming  of  a 
sliding  piece  or  drawer,  and  to  the  determination  of  the  propel 
point  of  application  of  a force  to  move  it. 

573.  Having  thus  briefly  considered  the  equilibrium  of  a 
riffid  body,  we  propose,  before  entering  upon  the  subject  of  the 
deformation  of  elastic  solids,  to  consider  certain  intermediate 
cases,  in  each  of  which  we  make  a particular  assumption  the 
basis  of  the  investigation,  and  thereby  avoid  a very  considerable 
amount  of  analytical  difficulty. 

574  Very  excellent  examples  of  this  kind  are  furnished  by 
the  statics  of  a flexible  and  inextensible  cord  or  chain,  fixed 
at  both  ends,  and  subject  to  the  action  of  any  forces.  The 
curve  in  which  the  chain  hangs  in  any  case  may  be  called  a 
Catenary,  although  the  term  is  usually  restricted  to  the  case  of 
a uniform  chain  acted  on  by  giavity  <>nh. 


STATICS. 


119 


575.] 


575.  We  may  consider  separately  the  conditions  of  equi-  Three 

...  /.it  ± i ji  i i . . methods  c 

librium  of  each  element;  or  we  may  apply  the  general  condition  investiga- 

(§  292)  that  the  whole  potential  energy  is  a minimum,  in  the 
case  of  any  conservative  system  of  forces ; or,  especially  when 
gravity  is  the  only  external  force,  we  may  consider  the  equi- 
librium of  a finite  portion  of  the  chain  treated  for  the  time  as 
a rigid  body  (§  564). 


576.  The  first  of  these  methods  gives  immediately  the  Equationsof 

° ^ equilibrium 

three  following  equations  of  equilibrium,  for  the  catenary  in  with  refer- 

general: — tangent  and 

° osculating 

plane. 

(1)  The  rate  of  variation  of  the  tension  per  unit  of  length 
along  the  cord  is  equal  to  the  tangential  component  of  the 
applied  force,  per  unit  of  length. 

(2)  The  plane  of  curvature  of  the  cord  contains  the  normal 
component  of  the  applied  force,  and  the  centre  of  curvature  is 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  arc  from  that  towards  which  this 

: force  acts. 

(3)  The  amount  of  the  curvature  is  equal  to  the  normal 
component  of  the  applied  force  per  unit  of  length  at  any  point 
divided  by  the  tension  of  the  cord  at  the  same  point. 

The  first  of  these  is  simply  the  equation  of  equilibrium  of 
an  infinitely  small  element  of  the  cord  relatively  to  tangential 
motion.  The  second  and  third  express  that  the  component  of 
the  lesultant  of  the  tensions  at  the  two  ends  of  an  infinitely 
small  arc,  along  the  normal  through  its  middle  point,  is  directly 
opposed  and  is  equal  to  the  normal  applied  force,  and  is  equal 
to  the  whole  amount  of  it  on  the  arc.  For  the  plane  of  the 
tangent  lines  in  which  those  tensions  act  is  (§  8)  the  plane 
of  curvature.  And  if  6 be  the  angle  between  them  (or  the  in- 
finitely small  angle  by  which  the  angle  between  their  positive 
directions  falls  short  of  7 r),  and  T the  arithmetical  mean  of 
their  magnitudes,  the  component  of  their  resultant  along  the 
line  bisecting  the  angle  between  their  positive  directions  is 
21  sin  \B,  rigorously  : or  TO,  since  0 is  infinitely  small.  Hence 
TO  = Ms,  if  8s  be  the  length  of  the  arc,  and  Ms  the  whole 


120 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[576. 


Equations  of 
equilibrium 
with  refer- 
ence to 
tangent  and 
osculating 
plane. 


Integral  for 
tension. 


Cartesian 
equations  ol 
equilibrium. 


£>.9 

amount  of  normal  force  applied  to  it.  But  (§  9)  6 = — if  p 
be  the  radius  of  curvature;  and  therefore 


1 N 


which  is  the  equation  stated  in  words  (3)  above. 

577.  From  (1)  of  § 576,  we  see  that  if  the  applied  forces 
on  each  particle  of  the  cord  constitute  a conservative  system, 
and  if  the  cord  be  homogeneous,  the  difference  of  the  tensions 
of  the  cord  at  any  two  points  of  it  when  hanging  in  -equi- 
librium, is  equal  to  the  difference  of  the  potential  (§  485)  of  the 
forces  between  the  positions  occupied  by  these  points.  Hence, 
whatever  be  the  position  where  the  potential  is  reckoned  zero, 
the  tension  of  the  string  at  any  point  is  equal  to  the  potential 
at  the  position  occupied  by  it,  with  a constant  added. 


578.  Instead  of  considering  forces  along  and  perpendicular 
to  the  tangent,  we  may  resolve  all  parallel  to  any  fixed  direc- 
tion: and  we  thus  see  that  the  component  of  applied  force  per 
unit  of  length  of  the  chain  at  any  point  of  it,  must  be  equal  to 
the  rate  of  diminution  per  unit  of  length  of  the  cord,  of  the 
component  of  its  tension  parallel  to  the  fixed  line  of  this  com- 
ponent. By  choosing  any  three  fixed  rectangular  directions  we 
thus  have  the  three  differential  equations  convenient  for  the 
analytical  treatment  of  catenaries  by  the  method  of  rectangular 
co-ordinates. 


These  equations  are 
d 
ds 
d 
ds  \ 
d 
ds  V 


(Td-f 

ds 

, dz\ 


= -o-7 


i(T^)  = -aZ 


■(1). 


if  s denote  the  length  of  the  cord  from  any  point  oiit,  to  a point 
p • y } % the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  P‘,  A,  1,  Z the  com- 

ponents’of  the  applied  forces  at  P,  per  unit  mass  of  the  cord;  cr 
the  mass  of  the  cord  per  unit  length  at  P ; and  T its  tension  at 

this  point. 


578.] 


STATICS. 


121 


These  equations  afford  analytical  proofs  of  § 576,  (1),  (2),  and  Cartesian 
(3)  thus : — Multiplying  the  first  by  dx , the  second  by  dy,  and  equilibrium, 
the  third  by  dz,  adding  and  observing  that 

, dx2  + dy 2 4-  dz 


dx  .dx  dy  dy  dz  .dz 
ds  ( ds  + ds  ( ds  + ds ( ds 


d~  + ~ d±  + x d ' ~~  = °» 


we  have 

dT  = — a (Xdx  + Ydy  + Zdz)  = -a(x~  + Y(-^  + Zj)  ds... (2), 

which  is  (1)  of  § 576.  Again,  eliminating  dT  and  T,  we  have 
vf  dy.dz  dz  dy\  f dz  dx  dx  dz\  ( dx  ,dy  dy  ,dx\  _ ... 

- a^aj +*(W -sf4*;-0 (8)- 

which  (§§  9,  26)  shows  that  the  resultant  of  X,  Y,  Z is  in  the 
osculating  plane,  and  therefore  is  the  analytical  expression  of 

§ 576  (2).  Lastly,  multiplying  the  first  by  d~ , the  second  by 

CCS 

d~,  and  the  third  by  d , and  adding,  we  find 


which  is  the  analytical  expression  of  § 576  (3). 

579.  The  same  equations  of  equilibrium  may  be  derived  Method  of 
from  the  energy  condition  of  equilibrium;  analytically  with  “""w- 
ease  by  the  methods  of  the  calculus  of  variations. 


Let  J be  the  potential  at  (x,  y,  z)  of  the  applied  forces  per  Catenary, 
unit  mass  of  the  cord.  The  potential  energy  of  any  given  length 
of  the  cord,  in  any  actual  position  between  two  given  fixed  points 
willbe  fVads. 

This  integral,  extended  through  the  given  length  of  the  cord 
between  the  given  points,  must  be  a minimum  • while  the  in- 
definite integral,  s,  from  one  end  up  to  the  point  (x,  y,  z)  remains 
unchanged  by  the  variations  in  the  positions  of  this  point. 

Hence,  by  the  calculus  of  variations, 

8 J Vads  f JX8ds  = 0, 

where  X is  a function  of  a-,  y,  z to  be  eliminated. 


122 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[579. 


Catenary. 


Now  a is  a function  of  s,  and  therefore  as  s does  not  vary 
when  x,y,z  are  changed  into  x + Zx,  y+Zy,  z+Zz,  the  co-ordinates 
of  the  same  particle  of  the  chain  in  another  position,  we  have 

Z (cr  V)  = orS  V = — cr  (A  Zx  + YZy  + ZZz). 

Using  this,  and 

dxclZx  + dydZy  + dzdZz 
ods  — ' y 

as 

in  the  variational  equation  ; and  integrating  the  last  term  by 
parts  according  to  the  usual  rule ; we  have 


M[ >4( 


as 


Energy 
equation  of 
equilibrium. 


;)  ]to+hF+I(  Vr + *§ )]»»  + 

whence  finally 


Vff  + x 


-dz 

ds 


)],;r0: 


|{(r<r  + x)|}+r.  = °, 
|{(F.  + x>|}+^  = °, 


Common 

catenary. 


which,  if  T be  put  for  Va  + A,  are  the  same  as  the  equations  (1) 
of  § 578. 

580.  The  form  of  the  common  catenary  (§  574)  may^be  of 
course  investigated  from  the  differential  equations  (§  o78)  of 
the  catenary  in  general.  It  is  convenient  and  instiuctive, 
however,  to  work  it  out  ab  initio  as  an  illustration  of  the  third 
method  explained  in  § 575. 

Third  method.—  The  chain  being  in  equilibrium,  any  arc  of  it 
may  be  supposed  to  become  rigid  without  disturbing  the  equi- 
librium. The  only  forces  acting  on  this  rigid  body  are  the 
tensions  at  its  ends,  and  its  weight.  These  forces  being  three 
in  number,  must  be  in  one  plane  (§  564),  and  hence,  since  one 
of  them  is  vertical,  the  whole  curve  lies  in  a vertical  plane,  la 

this  plane  let  tw0  ends  »!, 

are  which  is  supposed  rigid,  and  7'i(,  A.  tbe  tensions  a 1 

points.  Resolving  horizontally  we  have 


580.] 


STATICS. 


123 


doc 

Hence  T --  is  constant  throughout  the  curve.  Resolving  verti- 
ds  ° ° 

cally  we  have 


the  weight  of  unit  of  mass  being  now  taken  as  the  unit  of  force. 

dz 

Hence  if  T0  be  the  tension  at  the  lowest  point,  where  — = 0, 

ds 

s = 0,  and  T the  tension  at  any  point  (x,  z)  of  the  curve,  we  have 


Hence 


rp  rp  ds  ds 


rn  d / dz\  

odsKdx)”*’ 


.(1). 


or 


rn  d*z  ds  / fdz\ 8 

r'(/.c‘“‘r,/J:='or  V 1 ‘ \,uj (2)- 


Integrating  we  have 


and  the  constant  is  zero  if  we  take  the  origin  so  that  x = 0 when 

dz  * 

- 0,  i.e.,  where  the  chain  is  horizontal. 


dx 


Hence 


dz  / fdz\ 2 

dx  V + \dx)  ~ 6 


whence 


dz 


V <T 

■ X X 


£ " -eA); 

and  by  integrating  again 


+ c"=^*+;ix). 


This  may  be  written 


z = \ct  ( ea  + 6 “) 


(4), 


the  ordinary  equation  of  the  catenary,  the  axis  of  x being  taken 


T. 


at  a distance  a or  —2  below  the  horizontal  element  of  the  chain. 


Catenary ; 
common. 


124 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[580. 


Catenary : 
common. 


or  the  tension  oh  the  lowest  point  of  the  chain  (and  therefore 
also  the  horizontal  component  of  the  tension  throughout)  is  the 
weight  of  a length  a of  the  chain. 

Now,  by  (1),  T = T0^-<rz,  by  (4),  and  therefore 

the  tension  at  any  point  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  a portion  of 
the  chain  equal  to  the  vertical  ordinate  at  that  point. 


The  co-ordinates  of  that  element  are  therefore  x = 0, 
T 

z = —±  = ci.  The  latter  shows  that 

(T 


Relative 

kinetic 

problem. 


Kinetic 
Question 
relative  to 
catenary. 


581.  From  § 57 6 it  follows  immediately  that  if  a material 
particle  of  unit  mass  be  carried  along  any  catenary  with  a velo- 
city, s,  equal  to  T,  the  numerical  measure  of  the  tension  at  any 
point,  the  force  upon  it  by  which  this  is  done  is  in  the  same 
direction  as  the  resultant  of  the  applied  force  on  the  catenary  at 
this  point,  and  is  equal  to  the  amount  of  this  force  per  unit  of 
length,  multiplied  by  T.  For,  denoting  by  S the  tangential 
and  (as  before)  by  N the  normal  component  of  the  applied 
force  per  unit  of  length  at  any  point  P of  the  catenary,  we 
have,  by  § 576  (1),  S for  the  rate  of  variation  of  s per  unit 
length,  and  therefore  Ss  for  its  variation  per  unit  of  time.  That 
is  to  say, 

s=  Ss  =ST, 


or  (§  259)  the  tangential  component  force  on  the  moving 
particle  is  equal  to  ST.  Again,  by  § 576  (3), 


or  the  centrifugal  force  of  the  moving  particle  in  the  circle  of 
curvature  of  its  path,  that  is  to  say,  the  normal  component  of 
the  force  on  it,  is  equal  to  NT.  And  lastly,  by  (2)  this  foicc 
is  in  the  same  direction  as  N.  We  see  therefoie  that  the 
direction  of  the  whole  force  on  the  moving  particle  is  the 
same  as  that  of  the  resultant  of  S and  A;  and  its  magnitude 
is  T times  the  magnitude  of  this  resultant. 


581.] 


STATICS. 


125 


Or,  by  taking 


ds  , 
Y=dt’ 


Kinetic 
question 
relative  to 
catenary. 


in  the  differential  equation  of  § 578,  we  have 


d2x 

IF 


= - T<tX, 


d2z 

dtf 


- TvZ, 


which  proves  the  same  conclusion. 

When  cr  is  constant,  and  the  forces  belong  to  a conservative 
system,  if  V be  the  potential  at  any  point  of  the  cord,  we  have, 
by  § 578  (2),  T = aV  + C. 

Hence,  if  U=  \(vV  + G)2,  these  equations  become 

cGx__dU  cVy  __dU  d2z  _ _dU 
dt 2 dx  ’ dt 2 dy  ’ dt2  dz 

The  integrals  of  these  equations  which  agree  with  the  catenary, 
are  those  only  for  which  the  energy  constant  is  such  that  s2=2U. 

582.  Thus  we  see  how,  from  the  more  familiar  problems  Examples, 
of  the  kinetics  of  a particle,  we  may  immediately  derive  curious 
cases  of  catenaries.  For  instance:  a particle  under  the  in- 
fluence of  a constant  force  in  parallel  lines  moves  (Chap.  VIII.) 
in  a parabola  with  its  axis  vertical,  with  velocity  at  each  point 
equal  to  that  generated  by  the  force  acting  through  a space 
equal  to  its  distance  from  the  directrix.  Hence,  if  2 denote 
this  distance,  and  /the  constant  force, 

T=j2fz 

in  the  allied  parabolic  catenary ; and  the  force  on  the  catenary 
is  parallel  to  the  axis,  and  is  equal  in  amount  per  unit  of 
length,  to 

*or4- 

Hence  if  the  force  on  the  catenary  be  that  of  gravity,  it  must 
have  its  axis  vertical  (its  vertex  downwards  of  course  for  stable 
equilibrium)  and  its  mass  per  unit  length  at  any  point  must  be 
inversely  as  the  square  root  of  the  distance  of  this  point  above 
the  directrix.  From  this  it  follows  that  the  whole  weight  of 
any  arc  of  it  is  proportional  to  its  horizontal  projection.  Or, 


Examples. 


Catenary. 

Inverse 

problem. 


Catenary 

uniform 

strength. 


12G 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[582. 


again,  as  will  be  proved  later  with  reference  to  the  motions  of 
comets,  a particle  moves  in  a parabola  under  the  influence  of  a 
force  towards  a fixed  point  varying  inversely  as  the  square'  of 
the  distance  from  this  point,  if  its  velocity  be  that  due  to  falling 


from  rest  at  an  infinite  distance.  This  velocity  being  > at 

distance  r,  it  follows,  according  to  § 581,  that  a cord  will  hang 
in  the  same  parabola,  under  the  influence  of  a force  towards 
the  same  centre,  and  equal  to 


or 


If,  however,  the  length  of  the  cord  be  varied  between  two 
fixed  points,  the  central  force  still  following  the  same  law,  the 
altered  catenary  will  no  longer  be  parabolic:  but  it  will  be 
the  path  of  a particle  under  the  influence  of  a central  force 
equal  to 


since  (§  581)  we  should  have, 

T=  aV+C  = -af^/£sdr  + C=  a + 0, 

instead  of 

583.  Or  if  the  question  be,  to  find  what  force  towards  a 
given  fixed  point,  will  cause  a cord  to  hang  in  any  given  plane 
curve  with  this  point  in  its  plane ; it  may  be  answered  im- 
mediately from  the  solution  of  the  corresponding  problem  in 
“ central  forces.” 


But  the  general  equations,  § 578,  are  always  easily  ap- 
plicable; as,  for  instance,  to  the  following  curious  and  interest- 
ing, but  not  practically  useful,  inverse  case  of  the  gravitation 
catenary  : — 

Find  the  section,  at  each  ‘point , of  a chain  of  uniform 
material,  so  that  when  its  ends  are  fixed  the  tension  at  each  point 
may  be  proportional  to  its  section  at  that  point.  Find  also  the 
form  of  the  Curve,  called  the  Catenary  of  Uniform  Strength,  in 
which  it  will  hang. 


583.] 


STATICS. 


127 


Here,  as  tiro  only  external  force  is  gravity,  the  chain  is  in  a 
vertical  plane — in  which  we  may  assume  the  horizontal  axis  of  x 
to  lie.  If  fx  be  the  weight  of  the  chain  at  the  point  (x,  z) 
reckoned  per  unit  of  length  ; our  equations  [§  578  (1)]  become 


els 


d 

els 


= /*■ 


But,  by  hypothesis  Tz o //,.  Let  it  be  bfi.  Hence,  by  the  first 
equation,  if  jx0  be  the  value  of  [x  at  the  lowest  point 

els 

^^Tx’ 

whence,  by  the  second  equation, 


or 


d_ 

els 

<Tz_ 
0 lx 2 


1 * 

b dx  ’ 


Integrating  we  find 


tan  1 


elz 

dx 


b’ 


no  constant  being  required  if  we  take  the  axis  of  x so  as  to  touch 
the  curve  at  its  lowest  point.  Integrating  again  we  have 


no  constant  being  added,  if  the  origin  be  taken  at  the  lowest 
point.  We  may  write  the  equation  in  the  form 

x £ 
sec  =-  = €&. 
o 


Fioin  this  form  of  the  equation  we  see  that  the  curve  has  vertical 
asymptotes  at  a horizontal  distance  nb  from  each  other.  Hence 
irb  is  the  greatest  possible  span,  if  the  ends  are  on  the  same 
level,  or  the  horizontal  projection  of  the  greatest  possible  span 
if  they  be  not  on  the  same  level ; b denoting  the  length  of  a 
uniform  rod  or  wire  of  the  material  equal  in  weight  to  the 
tension  of  the  catenary  at  any  point,  and  equal  in  sectional  area 
to  the  sectional  area  of  the  catenary  at  the  same  point.  The 
greatest  possible  value  of  b is  the  “length  modulus  of  rupture” 
(§§  G87,  G88  below). 


Catenary  of 

uniform 

strength. 


128 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[584. 


Flexible  584.  When  a perfectly  flexible  string  is  stretched  over  a 

string  on  i 

smooth  smooth  surface,  and  acted  on  by  no  other  force  throughout  its 
length  than  the  resistance  of  this  surface,  it  will,  when  in 
stable  equilibrium,  lie  along  a line  of  minimum  length  on  the 
surface,  between  any  two  of  its  points.  For  (§  564)  its  equili- 
brium can  be  neillier  disturbed  nor  rendered  unstable  by 
placing  staples  over  it,  through  which  it  is  free  to  slip,  at  any 
two  points  where  it  rests  on  the  surface : and  for  the  inter- 
mediate part  the  energy  criterion  of  stable  equilibrium  is  that 
just  stated. 

There  being  no  tangential  force  on  the  string  in  this  case, 
and  the  normal  force  upon  it  being  along  the  normal  to  the 
surface,  its  osculating  plane  (§  576)  must  cut  the  surface  every- 
where at  right  angles.  These  considerations,  easily  translated 
into  pure  geometry,  establish  the  fundamental  property  of  the 
geodetic  lines  on  any  surface.  The  analytical  investigations 
of  §§  578,  579,  when  adapted  to  the  case  of  a chain  of  not  given 
length,  stretched  between  two  given  points  on  a given  smooth 
surface,  constitute  the  direct  analytical  demonstration  of  this 
property. 

In  this  case  it  is  obvious  that  the  tension  of  the  string  is 
the  same  at  every  point,  and  the  pressure  of  the  surface 
upon  it  is  [§  576  (3j]  at  each  point  proportional  to  the  curvature 
of  the  string. 

On  rough  585.  No  real  surface  being  perfectly  smooth,  a cord  or  chain 
may  rest  upon  it  when  stretched  over  so  great  a length  of  a 
geodetic  on  a convex  rigid  body  as  to  be  not  of  minimum  length 
between  its  extreme  points  : but  practically,  as  in  tying  a cord 
round  a ball,  for  permanent  security  it  is  necessary,  by  staples 
or  otherwise,  to  constrain  it  from  lateral  slipping  at  successiv  c 
points  near  enough  to  one  another  to  make  each  fiee  poition  a 
true  minimum  on  the  surface. 

Rope  coiled  586.  A very  important  practical  case  is  supplied  by  the 
cyUnderUsh  consideration  of  a rope  wound  round  a rough  cylinder.  We 
may  suppose  it  to  lie  in  a plane  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  as  we 
thus  simplify  the  question  very  considerably  without  sensibly 


586.] 


STATICS. 


120 


injuring  the  utility  of  the  solution.  To  simplify  still  further,  we  Rope  coiled 
shall  suppose  that  no  forces  act  on  the  rope,  but  tensions  and  cylinder.11*'1 
the  reaction  of  the  cylinder.  In  practice  this  is  equivalent  to 
the  supposition  that  the  tensions  and  reactions  are  very  large 
compared  with  the  weight  of  the  rope  or  chain ; which,  how- 
ever, is  inadmissible  in  some  important  cases ; especially  such 
as  occur  in  the  application  of  the  principle  to  brakes  for  laying 
submarine  cables,  to  dynamometers,  and  to  windlasses  (or 
capstans  with  horizontal  axes). 

If  R be  the  normal  reaction  of  the  cylinder  per  unit  of  length 
of  the  coid,  at  any  point;  T and  T -f  8T  the  tensions  at  the 
extremities  of  an  arc  8s;  8d  the  inclination  of  these  lines;  we 
have,  as  in  § 576, 

T86  = R8s. 

And  the  friction  called  into  play  is  evidently  equal  to  8T 

When  the  rope  is  about  to  slip,  the  friction  has  its  greatest 
value,  and  then 


8T=  gR8s  = gT86. 
This  gives,  by  integration, 


T=  T^e, 


showing  that,  for  equal  successive  amounts  of  integral  curva- 
tuie  (§  10),  the  tension  of  the  rope  augments  in  geometrical 
progression.  To  give  an  idea  of  the  magnitudes  involved 
suppose  g = 0 25,  6=  27 r,  then 

T=  T0e 5w  = 4 81 T0  approximately. 


lienee  if  the  rope  be  wound  three  times  round  the  post  ni- 
cy mder  the  ratio  of  the  tensions  of  its  ends,  when  motion  is 
about  to  commence,  is 


(4-81)3  : 1 or  about  111  : 1. 

d!!Ucl  7h  566  ih0W’  7 the  aid  °f  friction’  one  easily 

oh  ck  the  motion  of  a large  ship,  by  the  simple  expedient  of 

ScUonlTr  a t"  r°UQd  a of 

for  dynamometers  ""P0^06  'n  other  specially 

VOL.  II. 


9 


130 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[587. 


Rope  coiled 
about  rough 
cylinder. 


Elastic  wire. 


Elastic  wire, 
fibre,  bar, 
rod,  lamina, 
or  beam. 


587.  With  the  aid  of  the  preceding  investigations,  the 
student  may  easily  work  out  for  himself  the  formulae  expressing 
the  solution  of  the  general  problem  of  a cord  under  the  action 
of  any  forces,  and  constrained  by  a rough  surface ; they  are 
not  of  sufficient  importance  or  interest  to  find  a place  here. 

588.  An  elongated  body  of  elastic  material,  which  for 
brevity  we  shall  generally  call  a Wire,  bent  or  twisted  to  any 
decree,  subject  only  to  the  condition  that  the  radius  of  curva- 
ture and  the  reciprocal  of  the  twist  (§  119)  are  everywhere 
very  great  in  comparison  with  the  greatest  transverse  dimen- 
sion, presents  a case  in  which,  as  we  shall  see,  the  solution  of 
the  general  equations  for  the  equilibrium  of  an  elastic  solid  is 
either  obtainable  in  finite  terms,  or  is  reducible  to  compara- 
tively easy  questions  agreeing  in  mathematical  conditions  with 
some  of  the  most  elementary  problems  of  hydrokinetics,  elec- 
tricity, and  thermal  conduction.  And  it  is  only  for  the  deter- 
mination of  certain  constants  depending  on  the  section  of  the 
wire  and  the  elastic  quality  of  its  substance,  which  measure  its 
flexural  and  torsional  rigidity,  that  the  solutions  of  these  pro- 
blems are  required.  When  the  constants  of  flexure  and  torsion 
are  known,  as  we  shall  now  suppose  them  to  be,  whether  from 
theoretical  calculation  or  experiment,  the  investigation  of  the 
form  and  twist  of  any  length  of  the  wire,  under  the  influence 
of  any  forces  which  do  not  produce  a violation  of  the  condition 
stated  above,  becomes  a subject  of  mathematical  analysis  in- 
volving only  such  principles  and  formulae  as  those  that  con- 
stitute the  theory  of  curvature  (§§  5—13)  and  twist  (§§  119— 
123)  in  geometry  or  kinematics. 


589  Before  entering  on  the  general  theory  of  elastic  solids, 
we  shall  therefore,  according  to  the  plan  proposed  in  § o73, 
examine  the  dynamic  properties  and  investigate  the  conditions 
of  equilibrium  of  a perfectly  elastic  wire,  without  admitting 
any  other  condition  or  limitation  of  the  circumstances  than 
what  is  stated  in  § 588,  and  without  assuming  any  special 
quality  of  isotropy,  or  of  crystalline,  fibrous  or  laminated  struc- 
ture in  the  substance.  The  following  short  geometrical  digres- 
sion  is  a convenient  preliniinaiy . 


590.] 


STATICS. 


131 


590.  The  geometrical  composition  of  curvatures  with  one 
another,  or  with  rates  of  twist,  is  obvious  from  the  definition 
and  principles  regarding  curvature  given  above  in  §§  5 — 13 
and  twist  in  §§  119 — 123,  and  from  the  composition  of  angular 
velocities  explained  in  § 96.  Thus  if  one  line,  0®,  of  a rigid 
body  be  always  held  parallel  to  the  tangent,  PT,  at  a point* P 
moving  with  unit  velocity  along  a curve,  whether  plane  or 
tortuous,  it  will  have,  round  an  axis  perpendicular  to  0®  and 
to  the  radius  of  curvature  (that  is  to  say,  perpendicular  to  the 
osculating  plane),  an  angular  velocity  numerically  equal  to  the 
curvature.  The  body  may  besides  be  made  to  rotate  with  any 
angular  velocity  round  0®.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  a line  of  it, 
be  kept  always  parallel  to  a transverse  (§  120)  PA,  the 
component  angular  velocity  of  the  rigid  body  round  0®  will 
at  every  instant  be  equal  to  the  <f  rate  of  twist  ” (§  120)  of  the 
tians verse  round  the  tangent  to  the  curve.  Again,  the  angular 
velocity  round  0&  may  be  resolved  into  components  round 
two  lines  02&,  0U,  perpendicular  to  one  another  and  to  0® ; 
and  the  whole  curvature  of  the  curve  may  be  resolved  accord- 
ingly into  two  component  curvatures  in  planes  perpendicular 
to  those  two  lines  respectively.  The  amounts  of  these  com- 
ponent curvatures  are  of  course  equal  to  the  whole  curvature 
multiplied  by  the  cosines  of  the  respective  inclinations  of  the 
osculating  plane  to  these  planes.  And  it  is  clear  that  each 

component  curvature  is  simply  the  curvature  of  the  projection 
ot  the  actual  curve  on  its  plane*. 


591.  Besides  showing  how  the  constants  of  flexural  and 
orsional  rigidity  are  to  be  determined  theoretically  from  the 
lorm  of  the  transverse  section  of  the  wire,  and  the  proper  data 
as  to  the  elastic  qualities  of  its  substance,  the  complete  theory 
simp  y indicates  that,  provided  the  conditional  limit  (S  588) 
of  deformation  is  not  exceeded,  the  following  laws  will  be 
obeyed  by  the  wire  under  stress  : 


* The  curvature  of  the  projection  of  a curve  on  a plane  inclined  n + 
angle  a to  the  osculating  plane,  is  (l/olcosa  if  th*  ,11  1 d 4 an 

•ions.  dlffi0ulty  m ProvmR  either  of  these  expres. 


Composi- 
tion and  re- 
solution of 
curvatures 
in  a curved 
line. 


9—2 


132 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[591. 


Laws  of 
flexure  and 
torsion. 


Let  the  whole  mutual  action  between  the  parts  of  the 
wire  on  the  two  sides  of  the  cross  section  at  any  point  (being  of 
course  the  action  of  the  matter  infinitely  near  this  plane  on  one 
side,  upon  the  matter  infinitely  near  it  on  the  other  side),  be 
reduced  to  a single  force  through  any  point  of  the  section  and  a 
single  couple.  Then — 

I The  twist  and  curvature  of  the  wire  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  this  section  are  independent  of  the  force,  and  depend  solely 
on  the  couple. 


II.  The  curvatures  and  rates  of  twist  producible  by  any 
several  couples  separately,  constitute,  if  geometrically  com- 
pounded, the  curvature  and  rate  of  twist  which  are  actually 
produced  by  a mutual  action  equal  to  the  resultant  of  those 

couples. 

592.  It  may  be  added,  although  not  necessary  for  our 
present  purpose,  that  there  is  one  determinate  point  in  the 
cross  section  such  that  if  it  be  chosen  as  the  point  to  which 
the  forces  are  transferred,  a higher  order  oi  approximation  is- 
obtained  for  the  fulfilment  of  these  laws  than  if  any  otherr 
point  of  the  section  be  taken.  That  point,  which  m the  case 
of  a wire  of  substance  uniform  through  its  cross  section  is  the? 
centre  of  inertia  of  the  area  of  the  section,  we  shall  generally 
call  the  elastic  centre,  or  the  centre  of  elasticity,  of  the  section; 
It  has  also  the  following  important  property The  line  or 
elastic  centres,  or,  as  we  shall  call  it,  the  elastic  central  line  . 
remains  sensibly  unchanged  in  length  to  whatever  stress  withim 
our  conditional  limits  (§  588)  the  wire  be  subjected.  The  elon- 
gation or  contraction  produced  by  the  neglected  resultant  foice., 
if  this  is  in  such  a direction  as  to  produce  any,  will  cause  the? 
line  of  rigorously  no  elongation  to  deviate  only  mfimtesima  yl! 
from  the  elastic  central  line,  in  any  part  of  the  wire  fimteh 
curved.  It  will,  however,  clearly  cause  there  to  be  no  line  o 
rigorously  unchanged  length , in  any  straight  part  of  the  wire 
but  as  the  whole  elongation  would  be  infinitesimal  m compan 
sion  with  the  effective  actions  with  which  we  are  concernec 
this  case  constitutes  no  exception  to  the  preceding  statement 


593.] 


STATICS. 


133 


593.  Considering  now  a wire  of  uniform  constitution  and  Warping  of 
figure  throughout,  and  naturally  straight;  let  any  two  planes  tion^by1  sec 
of  reference  perpendicular  to  one  another  through  its  elastic  flexure,  in-d 
central  line  when  straight,  cut  the  normal  section  through  finitesima1, 
P in  the  lines  PI{  and  PL.  These  two  lines  (supposed  to 
belong  to  the  substance,  and  move  with  it)  will  remain  in- 
finitely nearly  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  and  to  the  tan- 
gent, PT,  to  the  central  line,  however  the  wire  may  be  bent  Rotations 
or  twisted  within  the  conditional  limits.  Let  k and  A be  the  ^toP°nd" 
component  curvatures  (§  590)  in  the  two  planes  perpendicular  tSSSL”* 
to  PK  and  PL  through  PT,  and  let  r be  the  twist  (§  120)  of 
the  wire  at  P.  We  have  just  seen  (§  590)  that  if  P be  moved 
at  a unit  rate  along  the  curve,  a rigid  body  with  three  rectan- 
gulai  axes  of  reference  ©"3L,  (DiT  kept  always  parallel  to 
PL->  PL,  PT,  will  have  angular  velocities  k,  A,  t round  those 
axes  respectively.  Hence  if  the  point  P and  the  lines  PT, 

1 P->  PL  be  at  rest  while  the  wire  is  bent  and  twisted  from  its 
unstrained  to  its  actual  condition,  the  lines  of  reference  P'K' , 

P'L'y  P T'  through  any  point  P'  infinitely  near  P,  will  ex- 
perience a rotation  compounded  of  k . PP'  round  P'K',  A PP' 
round  PL',  and  t . PP'  round  FT. 


594.  Considering  now  the  elastic  forces  called  into  action,  potentiai 
we  see  that  if  these  constitute  a conservative  system,  the  work  eS force 
required  to  bend  and  twist  any  part  of  the  wire  from  its  un-  lw2and 
strained  to  its  actual  condition,  depends  solely  on  its  ficrUre  in  wire‘ 
these  two  conditions.  Hence  if  w . PP'  denote  the  amount  of 

this  work,  for  the  infinitely  small  length  PP'  of  the  rod,  w 
must  be  a function  of  k,  A,  t ; and  therefore  if  K,  L,  T denote 
the  components  of  the  couple-resultant  of  all  the  forces  which 
must  act  on  the  section  through  P'  to  hold  the  part  PP'  in  its 
strained  state,  it  follows,  from  §§  240,  272,  274,  that 

KS/c  = 8Kw,  L8 A = 8\W,  T8t  = 8Tw (1)? 

where  8Kw,  8Kw,  8rw  denote  the  augmentations  of  w due  respec- 
ively  to  infinitely  small  augmentations  8k,  8\,  8t,  of  k,  A,  r. 

595.  Now  however  much  the  shape  of  any  finite  length  of 
the  wire  may  be  changed,  the  condition  of  § 588  requires 


134 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[595. 


Potential  clearly  that  the  changes  of  shape  in  each  infinitely  small  part, 

elastic  force  that  is  to  say,  the  strain  (§  154)  of  the  substance,  shall  be 

twisted.  everywhere  very  small  (infinitely  small  in  order  that  the  theory 
wire.  J J ' ; , , . TT  , . . . , « 

may  be  rigorously  applicable).  Hence  the  principle  ol  super- 
position [§  591,  II.]  shows  that  if  k,  r be  each  increased  or 
diminished  in  one  ratio,  K,  L,  T will  be  each  increased  or 
diminished  in  the  same  ratio:  and  consequently  w in  the 
duplicate  ratio,  since  the  angle  through  which  each  couple  acts 
is  altered  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  amount  of  the  couple,  or,  in 
algebraic  language,  w is  a homogeneous  quadratic  function  of 

K>y  Xj  T • 


Thus  if  A,  B , C,  a,  b,  c denote  six  constants,  we  have 


w = %(Ak2  + AX2  + Ct2  + 2«Xt  + 2 6tk  + 2ckX) 

(2). 

Compo- 
nents of 
restituent 
couple. 

Hence,  by  § 594  (1), 

K = Ak  + cX  + br  ] 

L =ck  +B\+ar  l 

T = bn  +a\  + Ct^ 

(3). 

By  the  known  reduction  of  the  homogeneous  quadratic  function, 
these  expressions  may  of  course  be  reduced  to  the  following 

simple  forms  : — 

w = KAV+iW+4£»a)  \ (4\ 

La=Aa$„  La=Aa$J  ‘ 

where  $15  S3  are  linear  functions  of  k,  X,  r.  And  if  these 
functions  are  restricted  to  being  the  expressions  for  the  com- 
ponents round  three  rectangular  axes,  of  the  rotations  k,  X,  t 
viewed  as  angular  velocities  round  the  axes  PK,  PL , PT,  the 
positions  of  the  new  axes,  PQV  PQ2,  PQ3 , and  the  values  of  At, 
A A are  determinate;  the  latter  being  the  roots  of  the  detei- 
minant  cubic  [§  181  (11)]  founded  on  (A,  B,  C,  a,  b , c).  Hence' 
we  conclude  that 

Three  prin-  596.  There  are  in  general  three  determinate  rectangular 

3 ST  directions,  PQV  PQS,  PQ»  through  any  point  P of  the  middle 

3°iSre.  line  of  a wire,  such  that  if  opposite  couples  he  applied  to  any 

two  parts  of  the  wire  in  planes  perpendicular  to  any  one  o 

them,  every  intermediate  part  will  experience  rotation  in  a. 

Three  plane  parallel  to  those  of  the  balanced  couples.  n monieii  s 

principal  * 1 


596.] 


STATICS. 


135 


of  the  couples  required  to  produce  unit  rate  of  rotation  round  torsion- 
these  three  axes  are  called  the  principal  torsion-flexure  rigidities  rigidities, 
of  the  wire.  They  are  the  elements  denoted  by  Av  A2,  Aa  in 
the  preceding  analysis. 

597.  If  the  rigid  body  imagined  in  § 593  have  moments  of 
inertia  equal  to  Av  A2,  As  round  three  princij3al  axes  through 
© kept  always  parallel  to  the  principal  torsion-flexure  axes 
through  P,  while  P moves  at  unit  rate  along  the  wire,  its 
moment  of  momentum  round  any  axis  (§§  281,  236)  will  be 
equal  to  the  moment  of  the  component  torsion-flexure  couple 
round  the  parallel  axis  through  P. 

598.  The  form  assumed  by  the  wire  when  balanced  under  Three  prin- 
the  influence  of  couples  round  one  of  the  three  principal  axes  mafspirais." 
is  of  course  a uniform  helix  having  a line  parallel  to  it  for  axis, 

and  lying  on  a cylinder  whose  radius  is  determined  by  the 
condition  that  the  whole  rotation  of  one  end  of  the  wire  from 
its  unstrained  position,  the  other  end  being  held  fixed,  is  equal 
to  the  amount  due  to  the  couple  applied. 


Let  l be  the  length  of  the  wire  from  one  end,  E,  held  fixed,  to 
the  other  end,  E',  where  a couple,  L,  is  applied  in  a plane  per- 
pendicular to  the  principal  axis  PQX  through  any  point  of  the 

wire.  The  rotation  being  [§  595  (4)]  at  the  rate  ~ , per  unit 

Ai 

of  length,  amounts  on  the  whole  to  l — . This  therefore  is  the 

Ai 

angular  space  occupied  by  the  helix  on  the  cylinder  on  which  it 
lies.  Hence  if  r denote  the  radius  of  this  cylinder,  and  the 
inclination  of  the  helix  to  its  axis  (being  the  inclination  of  PQ 
to  the  length  of  the  wire),  we  have 


LI  . . . 
r - =1  sin  i.  : 

Ai 


A,  sin  t. 

i*  — 1 L 


L 


whence 


(5). 


136 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[599. 


Case  in 
which 
elastic  cen- 
tral line  is 
a normal 
axis  of 
torsion. 


Case  of 
equal  flexi- 
bility in  a! 
directions. 


599.  In  the  most  important  practical  cases,  as  we  shall 
see  later,  those  namely  in  which  the  substance  is  either  “ iso- 
tropic,’’ as  is  the  case  sensibly  with  common  metallic  wires, 
or,  as  in  rods  or  beams  of  fibrous  or  crystalline  structure,  with 
an  axis  of  elastic  symmetry  along  the  length  of  the  piece,  one 
of  the  three  normal  axes  of  torsion  and  flexure  coincides 
with  the  length  of  the  wire,  and  the  two  others  are  perpendi- 
cular to  it;  the  first  being  an  axis  of  pure  torsion,  and  the  two 
others  axes  of  pure  flexure.  Thus  opposing  couples  round  the 
axis  of  the  wire  twist  it  simply  without  bending  it ; and  op- 
posing couples  in  either  of  the  two  principal  planes  of  flexure, 
bend  it  into  a circle.  The  unbent  straight  line  of  the  wire, 
and  the  circular  arcs  into  which  it  is  bent  by  couples  in  the 
two  principal  planes  of  flexure,  are  what  the  three  principal 
spirals  of  the  general  problem  become  in  this  case. 

A simple  proof  that  the  twist  must  be  uniform  (§  123)  is 
found  by  supposing  the  whole  wire  to  turn  round  its  curved 
axis;  and  remarking  that  the  work  done  by  a couple  at  one 
end  must  be  equal  to  that  undone  at  the  other. 

600.  In  the  more  particular  case  in  which  two  principal 
rigidities  against  flexure  are  equal,  every  plane  through  the 
length  of  the  wire  is  a principal  plane  of  flexure,  and  the 
rigidity  against  flexure  is  equal  in  all.  This  is  clearly  the  case 
with  a common  round  wire,  or  rod:  or  with  one  of  square 
section.  It  will  be  shown  later  to  be  the  case  for  a rod  of 
isotropic  material  and  of  any  form  of  normal  section  which  is 
“ kinetically  symmetrical,”  § 285,  round  all  axes  in  its  plane 
through  its  centre  of  inertia. 

601.  In  this  case,  if  one  end  ot  the  rod  or  wire  be  held 

fixed,  and  a couple  be  applied  in  any  plane  to  the  othei  end, 
a uniform  spiral  (or  helical)  form  will  be  produced  round  an 
axis  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  couple.  The  lines  of  the 
substance  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  spiral  are  not,  however, 
parallel  to  their  original  positions,  as  (§  598)  in  each  of  the 
three  principal  spirals  of  the  general  problem:  and  lines 

traced  along  the  surface  of  the  wire  parallel  to  its  length 
when  straight,  become  as  it  were  secondary  spirals,  cii  cling 


STATICS. 


137 


601.] 

round  the  main  spiral  formed  by  the  central  line  of  the  Cp°Jeji_ 
deformed  wire;  instead  of  being  all  spirals  of  equal  step,  as  in  directions!1 
each  one  of  the  principal  spirals  of  the  general  problem.  Lastly, 
in  the  present  case,  if  we  suppose  the  normal  section  of  the 
wire  to  be  circular,  and  trace  uniform  spirals  along  its  surface 
when  deformed  in  the  manner  supposed  (two  of  which,  for 
instance,  are  the  lines  along  which  it  is  touched  by  the  in- 
scribed and  the  circumscribed  cylinder),  these  lines  do  not 
become  straight,  but  become  spirals  laid  on  as  it  were  round 
the  wire,  when  it  is  allowed  to  take  its  natural  straight  and 
untwisted  condition. 

Let,  in  § 595,  PQX  coincide  with  the  central  line  of  the  wire, 
and  let  Ax  = A , and  A2  = Aa  = B ; so  that  A measures  the  rigidity 
of  torsion  and  B that  of  flexure.  One  end  of  the  wire  beinsr 
held  fixed,  let  a couple  G be  applied  to  the  other  end,  round  an 
axis  inclined  at  an  angle  6 to  the  length.  The  rates  of  twist  and 
of  flexure  each  per  unit  of  length,  according  to  (4)  of  § 595, 
will  be 

G cos  6 G sin  0 
~T~’  and  -B~> 

respectively.  The  latter  being  (§  9)  the  same  thing  as  the 
curvature,  and  the  inclination  of  the  spiral  to  its  axis  being  6,  it 

follows  (§  126,  or  § 590,  footnote)  that  ^ ^ ^ is  the  radius  of 

(jT 

curvature  of  its  projection  on  a plane  perpendicular  to  this  line, 
that  is  to  say,  the  radius  of  the  cylinder  on  which  the  spiral  lies. 

602.  A wire  of  equal  flexibility  in  all  directions  may  clearly  Wire 
be  held  in  any  specified  spiral  form,  and  twisted  to  any  stated  any^iven0 
degree,  by  a determinate  force  and  couple  applied  at  one  end,  twist! and 
the  other  end  being  held  fixed.  The  direction  of  the  force 
must  be  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  spiral,  and,  with  the  couple, 
must  constitute  a system  of  which  this  line  is  (§  559)  the 
central  axis:  since  otherwise  there  could  not  be  the  same 
system  of  balancing  forces  in  every  normal  section  of  the 
spiral.  All  this  may  be  seen  clearly  by  supposing  the  wire  to 
be  first  brought  by  any  means  to  the  specified  condition  of 
strain;  then  to  have  rigid  pflanes  rigidly  attached  to  its  two 
ends  perpendicular  to  its  axis,  and  these  planes  to  be  rigidly 


138 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Wire 

strained  to 
any  given 
spiral  and 
twist. 


[602. 


connected  by  a bar  lying  in  this  line.  The  spiral  wire  now 
left  to  itself  cannot  but  be  in  equilibrium:  although  if  it  be 
too  long  (according  to  its  form  and  degree  of  twist)  the  equili- 
brium may  be  unstable.  The  force  along  the  central  axis,  and 
the  couple,  are  to  be  determined  by  the  condition  that,  when 
the  force  is  transferred  after  Poinsot’s  manner  to  the  elastic 
centre  of  any  normal  section,  they  give  two  couples  together 
equivalent  to  the  elastic  couples  of  flexure  and  torsion. 

Let  a be  the  inclination  of  the  spiral  to  the  plane  perpendicular 
to  its  axis ; r the  radius  of  the  cylinder  on  which  it  lies ; t the 
rate  of  twist  given  to  the  wire  in  its  spiral  form.  The  curvature 

o 

COS  CL 

is  (§  126)  equal  to  — - — ; and  its  plane,  at  any  point  of  the 

spiral,  being  the  plane  of  the  tangent  to  the  spiral  and  the 
diameter  of  the  cylinder  through  that  point,  is  inclined  at  the 
angle  a to  the  plane  perpendicular  to  the  axis.  Hence  the  com- 
ponents in  this  plane,  and  in  the  plane  through  the  axis  of  the 
cylinder  of  the  flexural  couple,  are  respectively 

B cos2  a . B cos2  a . 

cos  a,  and  sin  a. 

r r 


Also,  the  components  of  the  torsional  couple,  in  the  same  planes, 
are  A t sin  a,  and  -At  cos  a. 

Hence,  for  equilibrium, 

B cos2  a . . 

Q = — cos  a + At  sin  a 


-Rr 


r 

B cos2  a . 


sin  a — At  cos  a 


■(6), 


which  give  explicitly  the  values,  G and  R,  of  the  couple  and  force 
required,  the  latter  being  reckoned  as  positive  when  its  direction 
is  such  as  to  pull  out  the  spiral,  or  when  the  ends  of  the  rigid  bar 
supposed  above  are  pressed  inwards  by  the  plates  attached  to  the 
ends  of  the  spiral. 

If  we  make  R = 0,  we  fall  back  on  the  case  considered  previ- 
ously (§  601).  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  make  <7  = 0,  we  have 

1 B cos3  a 

T = 7 — . ) 

r A sin  a 
n B cos2  a _ At 

and  ^ ~ ~ r2  sin  a r cos  a ’ 

from  which  we  conclude  that 


STATICS. 


139 


603.] 


603.  A wire  of  equal  flexibility  in  all  directions  may  be  ™8^for 
held  in  any  stated  spiral  form  by  a simple  force  along  its  axis 
between  rigid  pieces  rigidly  attached  to  its  two  ends,  provided  smKl°  force- 
that,  along  with  its  spiral  form,  a certain  degree  of  twist  be 
given  to  it.  The  force  is  determined  by  the  condition  that  its 
moment  round  the  perpendicular  through  any  point  of  the 
spiral  to  its  osculating  plane  at  that  point,  must  be  equal 
and  opposite  to  the  elastic  unbending  couple.  The  degree  of 
twist  is  that  due  (by  the  simple  equation  of  torsion)  to  the 
moment  of  the  force  thus  determined,  round  the  tangent  at 
any  point  of  the  spiral.  The  direction  of  the  force  being, 
according  to  the  preceding  condition,  such  as  to  press  together 
the  ends  of  the  spiral,  the  direction  of  the  twist  in  the  wire  is 
opposite  to  that  of  the  tortuosity  (§9)  of  its  central  curve. 


604.  The  principles  and  formulas  (§§  598,  603)  with  which  spiral 
we  have  just  been  occupied  are  immediately  applicable  to  the  sprmgs' 
theory  of  spiral  springs;  and  we  shall  therefore  make  a short 
digression  on  this  curious  and  important  practical  subject  before 
completing  our  investigation  of  elastic  curves. 

A common  spiral  spring  consists  of  a uniform  wire  shaped 
permanently  to  have,  when  unstrained,  the  form  of  a regular 
helix,  with  the  principal  axes  of  flexure  and  torsion  everywhere 
similarly  situated  relatively  to  the  curve.  When  used  in  the 
proper  manner,  it  is  acted  on,  through  arms  or  plates  rigidly  at- 
tached to  its  ends,  by  forces  such  that  its  form  as  altered  by  them 
is  still  a regular  helix.  This  condition  is  obviously  fulfilled  if 
(one  terminal  being  held  fixed)  an  infinitely  small  force  and 
infinitely  small  couple  be  ajjplied  to  the  other  terminal  along 
the  axis  and  in  a plane  perpendicular  to  it,  and  if  the  force  and 
couple  be  increased  to  any  degree,  and  always  kept  along  and 
in  the  plane  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  altered  spiral.  It 
would,  however,  introduce  useless  complication  to  work  out  the 
details  of  the  problem  except  for  the  case  (§  599)  in  which  one 
of  the  principal  axes  coincides  with  the  tangent  to  the  central 
line,  and  is  therefore  an  axis  of  pure  torsion;  as  spiral  springs 
in  practice  always  belong  to  this  case.  On  the  other  hand,  a very 
interesting  complication  occurs  if  we  suppose  (a  thing  easily 


140 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Spiral 

springs. 


[604. 


realized  in  practice,  though  to  be  avoided  if  merely  a good 
spring  is  desired)  the  normal  section  of  the  wire  to  be  of  such  a 
figure,  and  so  situated  relatively  to  the  spiral,  that  the  planes 
of  greatest  and  least  flexural  rigidity  are  oblique  to  the  tangent 
plane  of  the  cylinder.  Such  a spring  when  acted  on  in  the 
regular  manner  at  its  ends  must  experience  a certain  degree  of 
turning  through  its  whole  length  round  its  elastic  central  curve 
in  order  that  the  flexural  couple  developed  may  be,  as  we  shall 
immediately  see  it  must  be,  precisely  in  the  osculating  plane  of 
the  altered  spiral.  But  all  that  is  interesting  in  this  very 
curious  effect  will  be  illustrated  later  (§  624)  in  full  detail  in  the 
case  of  an  open  circular  arc  altered  by  a couple  in  its  own  plane, 
into  a circular  arc  of  greater  or  less  radius ; and  for  brevity 
and  simplicity  we  shall  confine  the  detailed  investigation  of 
spiral  springs  on  which  we  now  enter,  to  the  cases  in  which 
either  the  wire  is  of  equal  flexural  rigidity  in  all  directions,  or 
the  two  principal  planes  of  (greatest  and  least  or  least  and 
greatest)  flexural  rigidity  coincide  respectively  with  the  tangent 
plane  to  the  cylinder,  and  the  normal  plane  touching  the  central 
curve  of  the  wire,  at  any  point. 


605.  The  axial  force,  on  the  moveable  terminal  of  the  spring, 
transferred  according  to  Poinsot’s  method  (§  555)  to  any  point 
in  the  elastic  central  curve,  gives  a couple  in  the  plane  through 
that  point  and  the  axis  of  the  spiral.  The  resultant  of  this  and 
the  couple  which  we  suppose  applied  to  the  terminal  in  the 
plane  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  spiral  is  the  effective 
bending  and  twisting  couple  : and  as  it  is  in  a plane  perpen- 
dicular to  the  tangent  plane  to  the  cylinder,  the  component  of 
it  to  which  bending  is  due  must  be  also  perpendicular  to  this 
plane,  and  therefore  is  in  the  osculating  plane  of  the  spiral. 
This  component  couple  therefore  simply  maintains  a curvature 
different  from  the  natural  curvature  of  the  wire,  and  the  other, 
that  is,  the  couple  in  the  plane  normal  to  the  central  curve, 
pure  torsion.  The  equations  of  equilibrium  merely  express 
this  in  mathematical  language. 

Resolving  as  before  (§  602)  the  flexural  and  the  torsional 
couples  each  into  components  in  the  planes  through  the  axis  of 


G05.] 


STATICS. 


141 


the  spiral,  and  perpendicular  to  it,  we  have 

~ -./cos2  a cos2  a \ , . . , 

G — B\ ) COS  a + At  sm  a , 

\ r r0  / 

~n  t>  ( U COS  ct0\  * f a / 

— Rr  = B ( — 9 ) sm  a - At  cos  a , 

\ r rn  / 


-(7), 


, , „1n/1  COS  a sin  a COS  an  sm  an 

and,  by  § 1 26,  t = 9 0 


Spiral 

springs. 


where  A denotes  the  torsional  rigidity  of  the  wire,  and  B its 
flexural  rigidity  in  the  osculating  plane  of  the  spiral;  a0  the  in- 
clination, and  rn  the  radius  of  the  cylinder,  of  the  spiral  when 
unstrained ; a and  r the  same  parameters  of  the  spiral  when 
under  the  influence  of  the  axial  force  R and  couple  G ; and  t the 
degree  of  twist  in  the  change  from  the  unstrained  to  the  strained 
condition. 


These  equations  give  explicitly  the  force  and  couple  required 
to  produce  any  stated  change  in  the  spiral ; or  if  the  force  and 
couple  are  given  they  determine  a , r'  the  parameters  of  the 
altered  curve. 


As  it  is  chiefly  the  external  action  of  the  spring  that  we  are 
concerned  with  in  practical  applications,  let  the  parameters  a,  r 
of  the  spiral  be  eliminated  by  the  following  assumptions  : — 


x —l  sin  a,  <f>  = 


L cos  a -] 


x0  = l sin  a0 , 


, l COS  a 
— 9 


(8), 


where  l denotes  the  length  of  the  wire,  <£  the  angle  between 
planes  through  the  two  ends  of  the  spiral,  and  its  axis,  and  cc  the 
distance  between  planes  through  the  ends  and  perpendicular  to 
the  axis  in  the  strained  condition;  and,  similarly,  <£o,  xQ  for  the 
unstrained  condition;  so  that  we  may  regard  (</>,  x)  and  (c f>o,  x0) 
as  the  co-ordinates  of  the  movable  terminal  relatively  to' the 
fixed  in  the  two  conditions  of  the  spring.  Thus  the  preceding 
equations  become 

L = ? < '/(*’-  «*■)*-  ».■) « J(l‘-  *?)+f  (x*  - xM  X 

R=-T>  <) « V(^V)  + ^ - XM  * 


M9)- 


142 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[605. 


Spiral 

springs. 


Here  we  see  that  Ld<f>  + lldx  is  the  differential  of  a function  of 
the  two  independent  variables,  x,  cf>.  Thus  if  we  denote  this 
function  by  E,  we  have 

B = if  { J(P-  <t>  - J{1‘-  *„*) *„}' + i f (a*  ■ - *A)* 

_dE  r>_dE 
L = d^’ 

a conclusion  which  might  have  been  inferred  at  once  from  the 
general  principle  of  energy,  thus  : — 

606.  The  potential  energy  of  the  strained  spring  is  easily 
seen  from  § 595  (4),  above,  to  be 


^[B  (zr-  + At^I, 


if  A denote  the  torsional  rigidity,  B the  flexural  rigidity  in  the 
plane  of  curvature,  zr  and  zr0  the  strained  and  unstrained  cur- 
vatures, and  r the  torsion  of  the  wire  in  the  strained  condition, 
the  torsion  being  reckoned  as  zero  in  the  unstrained  condition. 
The  axial  force,  and  the  couple,  required  to  hold  the  spring  to 
any  given  length  reckoned  along  the  axis  of  the  spiral,  and  to 
any  given  angle  between  planes  through  its  ends  and  the  axes, 
are  of  course  (§  272)  equal  to  the  rates  of  variation  of  the 
potential  energy,  per  unit  of  variation  of  these  co-ordinates 
respectively.  It  must  be  carefully  remarked,  however,  that,  if 
the  terminal  rigidly  attached  to  one  end  of  the  spring  be 
held  fast  so  as  to  fix  the  tangent  at  this  end,  and  the  motion  of 
the  other  terminal  be  so  regulated  as  to  keep  the  figure  of  the 
intermediate  spring  always  truly  spiral,  this  motion  will  be 
somewhat  complicated  ; as  the  radius  of  the  cylinder,  the  in- 
clination of  the  axis  of  the  spiral  to  the  fixed  direction  of  the 
tangent  at  the  fixed  end,  and  the  position  of  the  point  in  the 
axis  in  which  it  is  cut  by  the  plane  perpendicular  to  it  through 
the  fixed  end  of  the  spring,  all  vary  as  the  spring  changes  in 
figure.  The  effective  components  of  any  infinitely  small  motion 
of  the  moveable  terminal  are  its  component  translation  along, 
and  rotation  round,  the  instantaneous  position  of  the  axis  of 
the  spiral  (two  degrees  of  freedom),  along  with  which  it  will 
generally  have  an  infinitely  small  translation  in  some  direction 


606.] 


STATICS. 


143 


and  rotation  round  some  line,  each  perpendicular  to  this  axis, 
to  be  determined  from  the  two  degrees  of  arbitrary  motion,  by 
the  condition  that  the  curve  remains  a true  spiral. 

607.  In  the  practical  use  of  spiral  springs,  this  condition  is 
not  rigorously  fulfilled  : but,  instead,  either  of  two  plans  is 
generally  followed: — (1)  Force,  without  any  couple,  is  applied 
pulling  out  or  pressing  together  two  definite  points  of  the  two 
terminals,  each  as  nearly  as  may  be  in  the  axis  of  the  unstrained 
spiral;  or  (2)  One  terminal  being  held  fixed,  the  other  is 
allowed  to  slide,  without  any  turning,  in  a fixed  direction,  being 
as  nearly  as  may  be  the  direction  of  the  axis  of  the  spiral  when 
unstrained.  The  preceding  investigation  is  applicable  to  the 
infinitely  small  displacement  in  either  case  : the  couple  being 
put  equal  to  zero  for  case  (1),  and  the  instantaneous  rotatory 
motion  lound  the  axis  of  the  spiral  equal  to  zero  for  case  (2). 

For  infinitely  small  displacements  let  0 = 0o  + 30,  and 
x = x0  + 8x,  in  (10),  so  that  now 


T dE  dE 

d*j>*  d8x‘ 

Then,  retaining  only  terms  of  the  lowest  degree  relative  to  Sa; 

and  30  m each  formula,  and  writing  x and  0 instead  of  x and 
0O,  we  have  0 


x 


B ~ 1; '[ (j'  i'i  _ A j + (A  — 7/)  xtf>8<f>\ 

1 

L = I*  {( A - B)  + [B  ( la  - Xs)  + Ax2]  30} 
Example  l.-For  a spiral  of  45°  inclination  we  have 

and  0*  = | p : 

and  the  formulae  become 


(11). 


B ^ 1^2  [(^1  B)  + (-4  — jB)  r80] 
L = \ [(A  ~ B)  8x+(A  + B)  r80] 


(12). 


Spiral 

springs. 


144 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[007. 


Spiral  A careful  study  of  this  case,  illustrated  if  necessary  by  a model 

springs.  J 

easily  made  out  of  ordinary  iron  or  steel  wire,  will  be  found  very 
instructive. 


Spiral 
spring  ol 
infinitely 
small  in- 
clination : 


oc 

Example  2. — Let  be  very  small.  Neglecting,  therefore,  its 
L 

square,  we  have  = and  L = yS<£  = B8  — • and  E = ^2Bx. 

The  first  of  these  is  simply  the  equation  of  direct  flexure  (§  595). 
The  interpretation  of  the  second  is  as  follows  : — 


608.  In  a spiral  spring  of  infinitely  small  inclination  to  the 
plane  perpendicular  to  its  axis,  the  displacement  produced  in 
the  moveable  terminal  by  a force  applied  to  it  in  the  axis  of  the 
spiral  is  a simple  rectilineal  translation  in  the  direction  of  the 
axis,  and  is  equal  to  the  length  of  the  circular  arc  through 
which  an  equal  force  carries  one  end  of  a rigid  arm  or  crank 
equal  in  length  to  the  radius  of  the  cylinder,  attached  per- 
pendicularly to  one  end  of  the  wire  of  the  spring  supposed 
straightened  and  held  with  the  other  end  absolutely  fixed,  and 
the  end  which  bears  the  crank  free  to  turn  in  a collar.  This 
statement  is  due  to  J.  Thomson^,  who  showed  that  in  pulling 
out  a spiral  spring  of  infinitely  small  inclination  the  action 
exercised  and  the  elastic  quality  used  aie  the  same  as  m a 
virtually  a torsion-balance  with  the  same  wire  straightened  (§  433).  This 
fine":  theory  is,  as  he  proved  experimentally,  sufficiently  approximate 

for  most  practical  applications;  spiral  springs,  as  commonly 
made  and  used,  being  of  very  small  inclination.  There  is  no 
difficulty  in  finding  the  requisite  correction,  for  the  actual  incli- 
nation in  any  case,  from  the  preceding  formulae.  The  funda- 
mental principle  that  spiral  springs  act  chiefly  by  torsion  seems 
to  have  been  first  discovered  by  Binet  in  1814f. 

Elastic  609.  In  continuation  of  §§  590,  593,  597,  we  now  return 
^ttfngans"  to  the  case  of  a uniform  wire  straight  and  untwisted  (that  is, 
coupie.nd  cylindrical  or  prismatic)  when  free  from  stress.  Let  us  suppose 
one  end  to  be  held  fixed  in  a given  direction,  and  no  force 
from  without  to  influence  the  wire  except  that  transmitted  to  it 
by  a rigid  frame  attached  to  its  other  end  and  acted  on  by  a 

* Cavil),  and  Dub.  Math.  Jour.  1848. 

+ St  Venant,  Comptes  Rendu s.  Sept.  18G4. 


STATICS. 


145 


609.] 

force,  P,  in  a given  line,  AB , and  a couple,  G,  in  a plane  per- 
pendicular to  this  line.  The  form  and  twist  it  will  have  when 
in  equilibrium  are  determined  by  the  condition  that  the  torsion 
and  flexure  at  any  point,  P,  of  its  length  are  those  due  to  the 
couple  G compounded  with  the  couple  obtained  by  bringing  R 
to  P.  It  follows  that  the  rigid  body  of  § 597  will°  move 
exactly  as  there  specified  if  it  be  set  in  motion  with  the  proper 
angular  velocity,  and,  0 being  held  fixed,  a force  equal  and 
parallel  to  R be  applied  at  a point  ©,  fixed  relatively  to  the 
body  at  unit  distance  from  0,  in  the  line 

This  beautiful  theorem  was  discovered  by  Kirchhoff ; to  whom 
also  the  first  thoroughly  general  investigation  of  the  equations 
of  equilibrium  and  motion  of  an  elastic  wire  is  due  * 

To  prove  the  theorem,  it  is  only  necessary  to  remark  that 
the  rate  of  change  of  the  moment  of  P round  any  line  through 
, kept  parallel  to  itself  as  P moves  along  the  curve,  in  the 
elastic  problem,  is  equal  simply  to  the  moment  round  the  parallel 
hue  through  ©,  of  R at  © in  the  kinetic  analogue.  It  may  be 
added  that  G of  the  elastic  problem  corresponds  to  the  constant 
moment  of  momentum  round  the  line  through  © parallel  to 
the  constant  direction  of  P in  the  kinetic  analogue. 

61°.  The  comparison  thus  established  between  the  static 
problem  of  the  bending  and  twisting  of  a wire,  and  the  kinetic 
problem  of  the  rotation  of  a rigid  body,  affords  highly  interest- 
ing illustrations,  and,  as  it  were,  graphic  representations,  of  the 
circumstances  of  either  by  aid  of  the  other;  the  usefulness  of 
v nch  m promoting  a thorough  mental  appropriation  of  both 
mst  be  felt  by  every  student  who  values  rather  the  physical 
subject  than  the  mechanical  process  of  working  through  mathe- 
matical expressions,  to  which  so  many  minds  able  for  better 
[ gs  in  science  have  unhappily  been  devoted  of  late  years 
When  particularly  occupied  with  the  kinetic  problem  in 
chap,  ix  we  shall  have  occasion  to  examine  the  rotations 
coiresponding  to  the  spirals  of  §§  601-603,  and  to  point  out 
also  the  general  character  of  the  elastic  curves  corresponding 
to  some  of  the  less  simple  cases  of  rotatory  motion. 

G1“ht  ^ einos 

VOL.  II. 


KirchhofFs 
kinetic  com- 
parison. 


10 


146 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[611. 


Common 
pendulum 
and  plane 
elastic 
curve. 


Graphic 
construc- 
tion of  elas- 
tic curve 
transmit- 
ting force  in 
one  plane. 


611.  For  the  present  we  confine  ourselves  to  one  example, 
which,  so  far  as  the  comparison  between  the  static  and  kinetic 
problems  is  concerned,  is  the  simplest  of  all— the  Elastic  Curve 
of  James  Bernoulli,  and  the  common  pendulum.  A uniform 
straight  wire,  either  e equally  flexible  in  all  planes  through  its 
leno’th,  or  having  its  directions  of  maximum  and  minimum 
flexural  rigidity  in  two  planes  through  its  whole  length,  is  acted 
on  by  a force  and  couple  in  one  of  these  planes,  applied  either 
directly  to  one  end,  or  by  means  of  an  arm  rigidly  attached  to 
it,  the  other  end  being  held  fast.  The  force  and  couple  may, 
of  course  (§  558),  be  reduced  to  a single  force,  the  extreme  case 
of  a couple  being  mathematically  included  as  an  infinitely  small 
force  at  an  infinitely  great  distance.  To  avoid  any  restriction 
of  the  problem,  we  must  suppose  this  force  applied  to  an  arm 
rigidly  attached  to  the  wire,  although  in  any  case  in  which  the 
line  of  the  force  cuts  the  wire,  the  force  may  be  applied  directly 
at  the  point  of  intersection,  without  altering  the  circumstances 
of  the  wire  between  this  point  and  the  fixed  end.  The  wire 
will,  in  these  circumstances,  be  bent  into  a curve  lying  through- 
out in  the  plane  through  its  fixed  end  and  the  line  of  the  force, 
and  (§  599)  its  curvatures  at  different  points  will,  as  was  first 
shown  by  James  Bernoulli,  be  simply  as  their  distances  from 
this  line.  The  curve  fulfilling  this  condition  has  clearly  just 
two  independent  parameters,  of  which  one  is  conveniently  re- 
garded as  the  mean  proportional,  a,  between  the  radius  of 
curvature  at  any  point  and  its  distance  from  the  line  of  force, 
and  the  other,  the  maximum  distance,  b,  of  the  wire  from  the 
line  of  force.  By  choosing  any  value  for  each  of  these  para- 
meters it  is  easy  to  trace  the  corresponding  curve  with  a very 
hicrh  approximation  to  accuracy,  by  commencing  with  a small 
circular  arc  touching  at  one  extremity  a straight  line  at  the 
o-iven  maximum  distance  from  the  line  of  force,  and  continuing 
bv  small  circular  arcs,  with  the  proper  increasing  radii,  accord- 
ing to  the  diminishing  distances  of  their  middle  points  from 
the  line  of  force.  The  annexed  diagrams  are,  however,  not 
so  drawn ; but  are  simply  traced  from  the  forms  actual} 
assumed  by  a flat  steel  spring,  of  small  enough  ^adth  not  to  ■ 
be  much  disturbed  by  tortuosity  in  the  cases  in  which  diffeient. 


STATICS. 


147 


611.] 


parts  of  it  cross  one  another.  The  mode  of  application  of  the  Equation  °f 
force  is  sufficiently  explained  by  the  indications  in  the  elastic 

J r J curve. 

diagram. 


Let  the  line  of  force  be  the  axis  of  x,  and  let  p be  the  radius 
of  curvature  at  any  point  (x,  y)  of  the  curve.  The  dynamical 
condition  stated  above  becomes 


n „ 

py=T  = a~ 


■(1). 


where  B denotes  the  flexural  rigidity,  T the  tension  of  the  cord, 
and  a a linear  parameter  of  the  curve  depending  on  these 
elements.  Hence,  by  the  ordinary  formula  for  p~\ 


a 


y= 


,<£y 

dx 2 


( 


i+f&Y 

dx  7 


.(2). 


Multiplying  by  2 dy  and  integrating,  we  have 


and  finally, 


(3); 


x = 


W-C)dy 
4-C*  + 2Cy2-y4)± 


(4), 


which  is  the  equation  of  the  curve  expressed  in  terms  of  an 
elliptic  integral. 


If,  in  the  first  integral,  (3),  we  put  — = 0,  we  find 

CCiC 


y = * (G  * 2a2)* (5), 

the  upper  sign  within  the  bracket  giving  points  of  maximum,  and 
the  lower,  points,  if  any  real,  of  minimum  distance  from  the  axis. 
Hence  there  are  points  of  equal  maximum  distance  from  the  line  of 
force  on  its  two  sides,  but  no  real  minima  when  C < 2a2;  which 
therefore  comprehends  the  cases  of  diagrams  1 ...  5.  But  there  are 
real  minima  as  well  as  maxima  when  C > 2a2,  which  is  therefore 
the  case  of  diagram  7.  In  this  case  it  may  be  remarked  that 
the  analytical  equations  comprehend  two  equal  and  similar  de- 

10—2 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[Gil- 


118 


Equation  of 
the  plane 
elastic 

curve. 


Fig. 


611.] 


STATICS. 


149 


tached  curves  symmetrically  situated  on  the  two  sides  of  the  line  Equation  of 

of  force;  of  which  one  only  is  shown  in  the  diagram.  elastic 

curve. 

The  intermediate  case,  (7=  2a2,  is  that  of  diagram  6.  For  it 
the  final  integral  degrades  into  a logarithmic  form,  as  follows: — 


x 


= f yfJy  _ f 


2a? dy 

(4  a2-y-)h  Jy(W-y2) 


2\b: 


or,  with  the  integrations  effected,  and  the  constant  assigned  to 
make  the  axis  of  y be  that  of  symmetry, 


/.  o , 2a  + (4a2  — y2)^ 

x=~  (4a--  yy  + a log ^ — (6). 

y 

This  equation,  when  the  radical  is  taken  with  the  sign  indicated, 
represents  the  branch  proceeding  from  the  vertex,  first  to  the 
negative  side  of  the  axis  of  y,  crossing  it  at  the  double  point,  and 
going  to  infinity  towards  the  positive  axis  of  x as  an  asymptote. 
The  other  branch  is  represented  by  the  same  equation  with  the 
sign  of  the  radical  reversed  in  each  place. 


It  may  be  remarked  that  in  (3)  the  sign  of  ( 1 + can 

\ dx2) 

only  change,  for  a point  moving  continuously  along  the  curve, 
When  % becomes  infinite.  The  interpretation  is  facilitated  by 


putting 


dy  = tan  6 , or  (l  + = - cos  d, 


dx 


which  reduces  (3)  to 


y2=  2a2  cos  6 + C (7). 

Here,  when  C>  2a~  (the  case  in  which,  as  we  have  seen  above, 
there  are  minimum  as  well  as  maximum  values  of  y on  one  side 
of  the  line  of  force),  there  is  no  limit  to  the  value  of  0.  It  in- 
creases, of  course,  continuously  for  a point  moving  continuously 

along  the  curve;  the  augmentation  being  2t r for  one  complete 
period  (diagram  7). 

When  C < 2a2,  6 has  equal  positive  and  negative  values  at  the 
points  in  which  the  curve  cuts  the  line  of  force.  These  values 
being  given  by  the  equation 


150 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[611. 


Uui'piano °f  are  °^tnse  when  C is  positive  (diagram  3),  and  acute  when  C is 

elastic  negative  (diagram  1).  The  extreme  negative  value  of  C is  of 

course  - 2a2. 

If  we  take  C = - 2 a2  + b2, 

=*=  b will  be  the  maximum  positive  or  negative  value  of  y , as  we 
see  by  (7) ; and  if  we  suppose  b to  be  small  in  comparison  with 
a , we  have  the  case  of  a uniform  spring  bent,  as  a bow,  but 
slightly,  by  a string  stretched  between  its  ends. 


Bow  slightly  612.  An  important  particular  case  is  that  of  figure  1 which 

bent.  Till.  ° 

corresponds  to  a bent  bow  having  the  same  flexural  rigidity 
throughout.  If  the  amount  of  bending  be  small,  the  equation 
is  easily  integrated  to  any  requisite  degree  of  approximation. 
We  will  merely  sketch  the  process  of  investigation. 


Let  e be  the  maximum  distance  from  the  axis,  corresponding 

cly 

to  x = 0.  Then  y = e gives  = 0,  and  (3)  becomes 


whence 


dy  Je2-  y*J 4®2  -e2+  if 
2a2  — e2  + if 


(9). 


For  a first  approximation,  omit  e2  - y2  in  comparison  with  a2 
where  they  occur  in  the  same  factors,  and  we  have 

dy  _ Je2  - if 
dx  a 


or,  since  y = e when  x — 0, 


x 

i/  = e cos  - 
J a 


(10), 


the  harmonic  curve,  or  curve  of  sines,  which  is  the  simplest  form 
assumed  by  a vibrating  cord  or  pianoforte-wire. 

For  a closer  approximation  we  may  substitute  for  y,  in  those 
factors  where  it  was  omitted,  the  value  given  by  (10);  and  so  on. 
Thus  we  have 


dy 

dx 


G12.J 


STATICS. 


151 


or 


dy  _ dx  A 


+ 


3e* 


oes 

» ~ cos 


Je^  — y3  a \ 16a3  16a 

from  which,  by  integration, 


2x\ 
a)  ’ 


cos 


•i  y_  */ 
e a \ 


1 + 


3e2  \ 3e* 

It Up)  ~ 32a3  Sm 


2® 

a 


and 


y = e cos 


/,  3e  \)  3e8  . x . 2x 

i - I I + , v,— 3 ) > + rrrr-  „ SU1  - Sill 

(a  \ 1 6a  / J 32a* 


613.  As  we  choose  particularly  the  common  pendulum  foi 
the  corresponding  kinetic  problem,  the  force  acting  on  the 
rigid  body  in  the  comparison  must  be  that  of  gravity  in 
the  vertical  through  its  centre  of  gravity.  It  is  convenient, 
accordingly,  not  to  take  unity  as  the  velocity  of  the  point 
travelling  along  the  bent  wire,  but  the  velocity  gravity  would 
generate  in  a body  falling  through  a height  equal  to  half  the 
constant,  a,  of  § 611  : and  this  constant,  a,  will  then  be  the 
length  of  the  isochronous  simple  pendulum.  Thus  if  an  elastic 
cuive  be  held  with  its  line  of  force  vertical,  and  if  a point,  P, 
be  moved  along  it  with  a constant  velocity  equal  to  Jga,  ( a 
denoting  the  mean  proportional  between  the  radius  of  curvature 
at  any  point  and  its  distance  from  the  line  of  force,)  the  tangent 
at  P will  keep  always  parallel  to  a simple  pendulum,  of  length 
a,  placed  at  any  instant  parallel  to  it,  and  projected  with  the 
same  angular  velocity.  Diagrams  1...5  correspond  to  vibra- 
tions of  the  pendulum.  Diagram  6 corresponds  to  the  case  in 
which  the  pendulum  would  just  reach  its  position  of  unstable 
equilibrium  in  an  infinite  time.  Diagram  7 corresponds  to 
cases  in  which  the  pendulum  flies  round  continuously  in  one 
direction,  with  periodically  increasing  and  diminishing  velocity. 

ie  extreme  case,  of  the  circular  elastic  curve,  corresponds  to 
a pendulum  flying  round  with  infinite  angular  velocity,  which  of 
course  experiences  only  infinitely  small  variation  in  the  course 
of  the  revolution.  A conclusion  worthy  of  remark  is,  that  the 
rectification  of  the  elastic  curve  is  the  same  analytical  problem 

as  n mg  t ie  time  occupied  by  a pendulum  in  describing  any 
given  angle.  ° y 


Bowslightly 

bent. 


Plane 

elastic  curve 
and  com- 
mon pen- 
dulum. 


152 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[614. 


Wireofany  614.  Hitherto  we  have  confined  our  investigation  of  the 

shape  dis-  , 

turbed  by  form  and  twist  of  a wire  under  stress  to  a portion  ot  the  whole 

forces  und. 

couples  wire  not  itself  acted  on  by  force  lrom  without,  but  merely 

applied  J ... 

through  its  enaao-ed  in  transmitting  force  between  two  equilibrating  systems 

length.  O ts  o X 11 

applied  to  the  wire  beyond  this  portion;  and  we  have,  thus, 
not  included  the  very  important  practical  cases  of  a curve 
deformed  by  its  own  weight  or  centrifugal  force,  or  fulfilling 
such  conditions  of  equilibrium  as  we  shall  have  to  use  after- 
wards in  finding  its  equations  of  motion  according  to  D’Alem- 
bert’s principle.  We  therefore  proceed  now  to  a perfectly 
general  investigation  of  the  equilibrium  of  a curve,  uniform  or 
not  uniform  throughout  its  length;  either  straight,  or  bent  and 
twisted  in  any  way,  when  free  from  stress ; and  not  restricted 
by  any  condition  as  to  the  positions  of  the  three  principal 
flexure-torsion  axes  (§  596);  under  the  influence  of  any  dis- 
tribution whatever  of  force  and  couple  through  its  whole 
length. 

Let  a,  /3 , y be  the  components  of  the  mutual  force,  and  $,  y,  £ 
those  of  the  mutual  couple,  acting  between  the  matter  on  the 
two  sides  of  the  normal  section  through  ( x , y,  z).  Those  for  the 
normal  section  through  (x  + 8a?,  y + by,  z + bz)  will  be 


da  d/3  2 , dy  - 

a + ^ 8s,  7 + 5; &>> 


(Is 


<+s* 

Hence,  if  Xbs,  Ybs,  Zbs,  and  Lbs,  Mbs,  Ms  be  the  components 
of  the  applied  force,  and  applied  couple,  on  the  portion  Ss  of  the 
wire  between  those  two  normal  sections,  we  have  (§  551)  for  the 
equilibrium  of  this  part  of  the  wire 


da.  y d(3  y dy 

A = Ts’~  Ts'  ds 


(1), 


and  (neglecting,  of  course,  infinitely  small  terms  of  the  second 
order,  as  Sybs) 

- Zbs  = ~Ss  + yby  - (Ibz,  etc. ; 
ds 


or 


_LJA+ydJ -{S% , * 

ds  ' ds  ds  ds  ds 


dx 
^ds » 


■ di  Ddx  dy  ,9 


GIL] 


STATICS. 


153 


We  may  eliminate  a,  (3,  y from  these  six  equations  by  means  of 
the  following  convenient  assumption— 


d.tj  ..  U W-V  « y 

ads 


cly 

ds 


dz 

ds 


•(3), 


Longitudi- 
nal tension. 


T meaning  the  component  of  the  force  acting  across  the  normal 
section,  along  the  tangent  to  the  middle  line.  From  this,  and 
the  second  and  third  of  (2),  we  have 


ds 


dz 

ds 


N+d-i 

ds 


dy 
ds  ' 


This,  and  the  symmetrical  expressions  for  [3  and  y,  used  in  (1), 
give 


We  have  besides,  from  (2), 


To  complete  the  mathematical  expression  of  the  circumstances, 
it  only  remains  to  introduce  the  equations  of  torsion-flexure. 
For  this  purpose,  let  any  two  lines  of  reference  for  the  substance 
of  the  wire,  PI i.,  PL,  be  chosen  at  right  angles  to  one  another  in 
the  normal  section  through  P.  Let  /c0,  A0  be  the  components  of 
the  curvature  (§  589)  in  the  planes  perpendicular  to  these  lines, 
and  through  the  tangent,  PT,  when  the  wire  is  unstrained;  and 
k,  A what  they  become  under  the  actual  stress.  Let  r0  denote 
the  rate  of  twist  (§  119)  of  either  line  of  reference  round  the 
tangent  from  point  to  point  along  the  wire  in  the  unstrained 
condition,  and  r in  the  strained,  so  that  t — t0  is  the  rate  of  twist 
produced  at  P by  the  actual  stress.  Thus  [§  595  (3)]  we  have 


£1  + 7] m + £n  =J  (k-k0)  + c (A  - A0)  + b (t  - r0) 
&’+  Vm'+  &'  = c(k-k0)  +B{  A-A0)  +a(r-r0) 
tdx  dy  .dz  . . 

^ ds  + V ds  + ^ds  = K“)  + a (X“  Xo)  + 0{t-t0) 


...(G), 


Equations 
of  torsion- 
flexure. 


154 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[614. 


Equations 
of  torsion- 
flexure. 


Torsion, 
and  two 
components 
of  curvature, 
of  wire  (or 
component 
angular 
velocities 
of  rotating 
solid). 


where  (l,  m,  n),  (l',  m,  n'), 
of  PA”,  PL,  PT;  so  that 


dx  dy  dz\ 
ds  ’ ds) 


) denote  the  directions 


7 dx  dy  dz  7,  dx  , dy  , dz  . 

Z--  + m -r  + n~r=  0,  l + m --  + n - = 0 
ds  ds  ds  ds  ds  ds 

ll'  + mm' + nw!  — 0 

F+m2+n*=l,  l'3+m'a+n'*=  1 


.(7). 


Now  if  lines  0 K,  OJj,  OtT,  each  of  unit  length,  he  drawn,  as  in 
§ 593,  always  parallel  to  PK,  PL,  PT,  and  if  P be  carried  at 
unit  velocity  along  the  curve,  the  component  velocity  of  tL 
parallel  to  OtT,  or  that  of  T parallel  to  OtK  with  its  sign  changed, 
is  (§  593)  equal  to  k;  and  similar  statements  apply  to  A and  r. 
Hence, 


Equations  (7)  reduce  (l,  m,  n),  (V,  m,  n)  to  one  variable  element, 
being  the  co-ordinate  by  which  the  position  of  the  substance  of 
the  wire,  round  the  tangent  at  any  point  of  the  central  curve,  is 
specified  : and  (8)  express  k,  A,  t in  terms  of  this  co-ordinate, 
and  the  three  Cartesian  co-ordinates  x,  y,  z of  P.  The  specifi- 
cation of  the  unstrained  condition  of  the  wire  gives  k0,  A0,  t0  as 
functions  of  s.  Thus  (6)  gives  £,  y,  £ each  in  terms  of  s,  and 
the  four  co-ordinates,  and  their  differential  coefficients  relatively 
to  s.  Substituting  these  in  (4)  aud  (5)  we  have  four  differential 
equations  which,  with 


dx 2 dy2  dz 2 

ds 3 + ds 2 + ds 2 


(9), 


constitute  the  five  equations  by  which  the  five  unknown  functions 
(the  four  co-ordinates,  and  the  tension,  T ) are  to  be  determined 
in  terms  of  s,  or  by  means  of  which,  with  s and  T eliminated, 
the  two  equations  of  the  curve  may  be  found,  and  the  co-ordinate 
for  the  position  of  the  normal  section  round  the  tangent  deter- 
mined in  terms  of  x,  y,  z. 


STATICS. 


155 


614.] 


The  terminal  conditions  for  any  specified  circumstances  are  Terminal 
easily  expressed  in  the  proper  mathematical  terms,  by  aid  0f  condltKms- 
equations  (2).  Thus,  for  instance,  if  a given  force  and  a given 
couple  be  directly  applied  to  a free  end,  or  if  the  problem  be 
limited  to  a portion  of  the  wire  terminated  in  one  direction  at  a 
point  Q,  and  if,  in  virtue  of  actions  on  the  wire  beyond,  we  have 
a given  force  (aoJ  (30 , y0)  and  a given  couple  (f0,  rj0,  £0)  acting  on 
the  normal  section  through  Q of  the  portion  under  consideration, 
and  if  s0  is  the  length  of  the  wire  from  the  zero  of  reckoning  for 
s up  to  the  point  Q,  and  Z0,  M0,  J\r0  the  values  of  Z,  M,  JV  at  this 
point,  the  equations  expressing  the  terminal  conditions  will  be 


t t ( dy  dz\ 


ds 

dr) 


ds 

dz 


<-<•’  -s-Ma£-4) 


when  s = s 


y (io). 


From  these  we  see,  by  taking  Zo  = 0,  M0  = 0,  iVo  = 0,  a0  = 0, 
& = 0>  7o = 0,  4 = 0,  t)0  = 0,  4 = 0,  that 


615.  For  the  simple  and  important  case  of  a naturally 
straight  wire,  acted  on  by  a distribution  of  force,  but  not  of 
couple,  through  its  length,  the  condition  fulfilled  at  a perfectly 
fiee  end,  acted  on  by  neither  force  nor  couple,  is  that  the  curva- 
tuie  is  zero  at  the  end,  and  its  rate  of  variation  from  zero,  per 
unit  of  length  from  the  end,  is,  at  the  end,  zero.  In  other  words, 
the  curvatures  at  points  infinitely  near  the  end  are  as  the 
squares  of  their  distances  from  the  end  in  general  (or,  as  some 
higher  power  of  these  distances,  in  singular  cases).  The  same 
statements  hold  for  the  change  of  curvature  produced  by  the 
stress,  if  the  unstrained  wire  is  not  straight,  but  the  other 
circumstances  the  same  as  those  just  specified. 


616.  As  a very  simple  example  of  the  equilibrium  of  a strai„ht 
wire  subject  to  forces  through  its  length,  let  us  suppose  the  &yuttie 
natural  form  to  be  straight,  and  the  applied  forces  to  be  in  beut> 
mes,  and  the  couples  to  have  their  axes  all  perpendicular  to 
i s ength  and  to  be  not  great  enough  to  produce  more  than 
an  infinitely  small  deviation  from  the  straight  line.  Further, 


15G 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[GIG. 


beaxrfinfi  *n  orc^er  that  these  forces  and  couples  may  produce  no  twist, 
benty  Uttl°  ^ the  three  flexure-torsion  axes  he  perpendicular  to  and 
along  the  wire.  But  we  shall  not  limit  the  problem  further 
by  supposing  the  section  of  the  wire  to  be  uniform,  as  we 
should  thus  exclude  some  of  the  most  important  practical 
applications,  as  to  beams  of  balances,  levers  in  machinery, 
beams  in  architecture  and  engineering.  It  is  more  instructive 
to  investigate  the  equations  of  equilibrium  directly  for  this 
case  than  to  deduce  them  from  the  equations  worked  out  above 
for  the  much  more  comprehensive  general  problem.  The  par- 
ticular principle  for  the  present  case  is  simply  that  the  rate  of 
variation  of  the  rate  of  variation,  per  unit  of  length  along  the 
wire,  of  the  bending  couple  in  any  plane  through  the  length,  is 
equal,  at  any  point,  to  the  applied  force  per  unit  of  length,  with 
the  simple  rate  of  variation  of  the  applied  couple  subtracted. 
This,  together  with  the  direct  equations  (§  599)  between  the 
component  bending  couples,  gives  the  required  equations  of 
equilibrium. 

The  diagram  representing  a section  of  the  wire  in  the  plane 
xy , let  OP  = x,  PP'=hx.  Let  Y and  JY  be  the  components 


in  the  plane  of  the  diagram,  of  the  applied  force  and  couple, 
each  reckoned  per  unit  of  length  of  the  wire ; so  that  } Sx 
and  JYSx  will  be  the  amounts  of  force  and  couple  in  this 
plane,  actually  applied  to  the  portions  of  the  wire  between  P 
and  P' . 

Let,  as  before  (§  614),  /3  and  y denote  the  components- parallel 
to  OY  and  OZ  of  the  mutual  force*,  and  £ and  77  the  components 


* These  forces,  being  each  in  the  plane  of  section  of  the  solid  separating  the 
portions  of  matter  between  which  they  act,  are  of  the  kind  called  shearing  forces. 
See  below,  § 6G2. 


STATICS. 


157 


GIG.] 


in  the  plane  XOY.  XOZ,  of  the  mutual  couple,  between  the  straight 
portions  of  matter  on  the  two  sides  of  the  normal  section  through  nitely  little 
P;  and  (Y,  y and  rj'  the  same  for  P'.  The  matter  between 
these  two  sections  is  balanced  under  these  actions  from  the 
matter  contiguous  to  it  beyond  them,  and  the  force  and  couple 
applied  to  it  from  without.  These  last  have,  in  the  plane  XOY , 
components  respectively  equal  to  YSx  and  X8x : and  hence  for 
the  equilibrium  of  the  portion  PP', 

- /3  + YSx  + /3'  = 0,  by  forces  parallel  to  0 Y, 
and  — £ + XSx  + £'  + (38x  = 0,  by  couples  in  plane  XO  Y, 

the  term  (38x  in  this  second  equation  being  the  moment  of  the 
couple  formed  by  the  infinitely  nearly  equal  forces  /?,  /3 ' in  the 
dissimilar  parallel  directions  through  P and  P\  Now 

P - P ^ Zx,  an(U'-£  = ?S*. 


c lx 

Hence  the  preceding  equations  give 

^ = _ r 

dx 

1=-^. 

and  these,  by  the  elimination  of  /3, 

d2'(  dN 


dx 


0); 


dx3  dx 


+ Y 


.(2). 


Similarly,  by  forces  and  couples  in  the  plane  XOZ, 

dar]  _ dM  „ 
dx 3 dx  + 


•(3), 


couples  in  this  plane  being  reckoned  positive  when  they  tend  to 
turn  from  the  direction  of  OX  to  that  of  OZ ■ which  is  opposite 
to  the  convention  (551)  generally  adopted  as  being  proper  when 
the  three  axes  are  dealt  with  symmetrically. 

Since  the  wire  deviates  infinitely  little  from  the  straight  line 
OX,  the  component  curvatures  are 

in  the  plane  XO  Y, 

UjJO 


and 


d'z 

dx2 


>> 


XOZ, 


158 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[016. 


Straight 
beam  infi- 
nitely little 
bent. 


Case  of  in- 
dependent 
flexure  in 
two  planes. 


Hence  the  equations  of  flexure  are 
y p d2y  daz ' 

^Blh?  + adS‘ . 

d2y  d2z 

r,  = a^+cdJ 


w, 


where  B and  C are  the  flexural  rigidities  (§  596)  in  the  planes 
xy  and  xz , and  a the  coefficient  expressing  the  couple  in  either 
produced  by  unit  curvature  in  the  other ; three  quantities  which 
are  to  be  regarded,  in  general,  as  given  functions  of  x.  Substi- 
tuting these  expressions  for  £ and  y,  in  (2)  and  (3),  we  have 
the  required  equations  of  equilibrium. 

617.  If  the  directions  of  maximum  and  minimum  flexural 
rigidity  lie  throughout  the  wire  in  two  planes,  the  equations 
of  equilibrium  become  simplified  by  these  planes  being  chosen 
as  planes  of  reference,  X 0 Y,  XOZ.  The  flexure  in  either  plane 
then  depends  simply  on  the  forces  in  it,  and  thus  the  problem 
divides  itself  into  the  two  quite  independent  problems  of  in- 
tegrating the  equations  of  flexure  in  the  two  principal  planes, 
and  so  finding  the  projections  of  the  curve  on  two  fixed  planes 
agreeing  with  their  position  when  the  rod  is  straight. 


In  this  case,  and  with  XOY , XOZ  so  chosen,  we  have  cc  = 0. 
Hence  the  equations  of  flexure  (4)  become  simply 


i=Bd~y 

4 dx2’ 


_ drz  _ 
V~Cdx*> 


and  the  differential  equations  of  the  curve,  found  by  using  these 
in  (2)  and  (3), 


where 


Here  £9  and  are  to  be  generally  regarded  as  known  functions 
of  x,  given  explicitly  by  (G),  being  the  amounts  of  component 
simple  forces  perpendicular  to  the  wire,  reckoned  per  unit  of  its 
length,  that  would  produce  the  same  figure  as  the  distribution  of 
force  and  couple  we  have  supposed  actually  applied  throughout 


617.J 


STATICS. 


159 


the  length.  Later,  when  occupied  with  the  theory  of  magnetism,  Case  of  m- 
, ® ’ . . . . : . ° ’ dependent 

we  shall  meet  with  a curious  instance  or  the  relation  expressed  flexure  in 

by  (6).  In  the  meantime  it  may  be  remarked  that  although  the  twoplane8‘ 
figure  of  the  wire  does  not  sensibly  differ  when  the  simple  distri- 
bution of  force  is  substituted  for  any  given  distribution  of  force 
and  couple,  the  shearing  forces  in  normal  sections  become 
thoroughly  altered  by  this  change  of  circumstances,  as  is  shown 
by  (1).  When  the  wire  is  uniform,  B and  C are  constant,  and 
the  equations  of  equilibrium  become 


<Py  l?  d'z  __  % 

dx*  ~ B ’ £ U*~~C 


The  simplest  example  is  obtained  by  taking  $ and  % each  Plank  bent 
constant,  a very  interesting  and  useful  case,  being  that  of  a weight'™ 
uniform  beam  influenced  only  by  its  own  weight,  except  where 
held  or  pressed  by  its  supports.  Confining  our  attention  to 
flexure  in  the  one  principal  plane,  XOY,  and  supposing  this  to 
be  vertical,  so  that  — ffw >>  if  w be  the  mass  per  unit  of  length  • 

we  have,  for  the  complete  integral,  of  course 

V = ~ GrV*4  + + K"x  + A""). (8), 


where  A,  K\  etc.,  denote  constants  of  integration.  These,  four 
in  number,  are  determined  by  the  terminal  conditions ; which, 

foi  instance,  may  be  that  the  value  of  y and  of  is  given  for 

dx 

each  end.  Or,  as  for  instance  in  the  case  of  a plank  simply 
resting  with  its  ends  on  two  edges  or  trestles,  and  free  to  turn 
round  either,  the  condition  may  be  that  the  curvature  vanishes 
at  each  end  : so  that  if  OA.  be  taken  as  the  line  through  the 
points  of  support,  we  have 

!/  = 0| 

d‘y  f > when  x = 0 and  when  x = /, 

da?  J 

l being  the  length  of  the  plank.  The  solution  then  is 

• V ~ r ~ 2£c3  + V'x') (9). 

Hence,  by  putting  * , }/,  we  find  y . for  the  distance 


Plank  sup- 
ported  by 
its  ends. 


160 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[017. 


Plank  sup- 
ported  by 
its  ends ; 


by  its 
middle. 


l»y  which  the  middle  point  is  deflected  from  the  straight  line 
joining  the  points  of  support. 


Or,  as  in  the  case  of  a plank  balanced  on  a trestle  at  its  middle 
(taken  as  zero  of  x),  or  hung  by  a rope  tied  round  it  there,  we 
may  have 

y = o] 

dy  _ > when  x = 0, 
dx  J 


and 


d°y 


dx 

dy 

dx 3 


= 0 


= 0 


when  x—  \l  [see  above,  § 614  (10)]. 


The  solution  in  this  case  is,  for  the  positive  half  of  the  plank, 


j'“gjr-A(*4-2W+fP**) (io). 


B 


By  putting  x~^l,  we  find  y 


qw  3 1*  TT 
= ^-. . Hence 


B ' 16.24 


Droops  com* 
pared. 


Plank  sup- 
ported by  its 
ends  or 
middle. 


618.  When  a uniform  bar,  beam,  or  plank  is  balanced  on  a 
single  trestle  at  its  middle,  the  droop  of  its  ends  is  only  § of  the 
droop  which  its  middle  has  when  the  bar  is  supported  on  trestles 
at  its  ends.  From  this  it  follows  that  the  former  is  § and  the 
latter  ■§  of  the  droop  or  elevation  produced  by  a force  equal  to 
half  the  weight  of  the  bar,  applied  vertically  downwards  or 
upwards  to  one  end  of  it,  if  the  middle  is  held  fast  in  a hori- 
zontal position.  For  let  us  first  suppose  the  whole  to  rest  on  a 
trestle  under  its  middle,  and  let  two  trestles  be  placed  under 
its  ends  and  gradually  raised  till  the  pressure  is  entirely  taken 
off  from  the  middle.  During  this  operation  the  middle  remains 
fixed  and  horizontal,  while  a force  increasing  to  half  the  weight, 
applied  vertically  upwards  on  each  end,  raises  it  through  a 
height  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  droops  in  the  two  cases  above 
referred  to.  This  result  is  of  course  proved  directly  by  com- 
paring the  absolute  values  of  the  droop  in  those  two  cases  as 
found  above,  with  the  deflection  from  the  tangent  at  the  end  of 
the  cord  in  the  elastic  curve,  figure  2,  of  § 611,  which  is 
cut  by  the  cord  at  right  angles.  It  may  be  stated  otherwise 


STATICS. 


1G1 


6 18.] 


thus : the  droop  of  the  middle  of  a uniform  beam  resting  on  Plank  sup- 
trestles  at  its  ends  is  increased  in  the  ratio  of  5 to  13  by  lav  inor  ends  or  ^ 

J J o middle* 

a mass  equal  in  weight  to  itself  on  its  middle  : and,  if  the 
beam  is  hung  by  its  middle,  the  droop  of  the  ends  is  increased 
in  the  ratio  of  3 to  11  by  hanging  on  each  of  them  a mass 
equal  to  half  the  weight  of  the  beam. 


619.  The  important  practical  problem  of  finding  the  distri-  by  three  or 
bution  of  the  weight  of  a solid  on  points  supporting  it,  when  epoinl8- 
moie  than  two  of  these  are  in  one  vertical  plane,  or  when 
there  are  more  than  three  altogether,  which  (§  568)  is  indeter- 
minate* if  the  solid  is  perfectly  rigid,  may  be  completely  solved 
lor  a uniform  elastic  beam,  naturally  straight,  resting  on  three 
or  more  points  in  rigorously  fixed  positions  all  nearly  in  one 
horizontal  line,  by  means  of  the  preceding  results. 

If  there  are  i points  of  support,  the  i- 1 parts  of  the  rod 
between  them  in  order  and  the  two  end  parts  will  form  i+1 
curves  expressed  by  distinct  algebraic  equations  [§  617(8)],  each 
involving  four  arbitrary  constants.  For  determining  these  con- 
stants we  have  4 i + 4 equations  in  all,  expressing  the  following 
conditions : — ° 


I.  Hie  oidinates  of  the  inner  ends  of  the  projecting  parts  of 
the  rod,  and  of  the  two  ends  of  each  intermediate  part,  are 
respectively  equal  to  the  given  ordinates  of  the  correspond  in g 
points  of  support  [2 i equations]. 

. ^ie  curves  011  the  two  sides  of  each  support  have  co- 
incident tangents  and  equal  curvatures  at  the  point  of  transi- 
tion from  one  to  the  other  [2 i equations]. 

III.  The  curvature  and  its  rate  of  variation  per  unit  of 
length  along  the  rod,  vanish  at  each  end  [4  equations]. 

Ihus  the  equation  of  each  part  of  the  curve  is  completely 
determined:  and  then,  by  § 616,  we  find  the  shearing  force 
in  any  normal  section.  The  difference  between  these  in  the 

* It  need  scarcely  be  remarked  that  indeterminateness  does  not  exist  in 
«ature.  How  it  may  occur  in  the  problems  of  abstract  dynamics,  and's  obv 
at  d by  taking  something  more  of  the  properties  of  matter  ini  account  z 
instructively  illustrated  by  the  circumstances  referred  to  in  the  text 
VOL.  II. 


11 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


1 62 


[019. 


neighbouring  portions  of  the  rod  on  the  two  sides  of  a point 
of  support,  is  of  course  ecpial  to  the  pressure  on  this  point. 


Plank  sup-  620.  The  solution  for  the  case  of  this  problem  in  which 
tnds°andltS  two  of  the  points  of  support  are  at  the  ends,  and  the  third 
midway  between  them  either  exactly  in  the  line  joining  them, 
or  at  any  given  very  small  distance  above  or  below  it,  is  found 
at  once,  without  analytical  work,  from  the  particular  results 
stated  in  § 618.  Thus  if  we  suppose  the  beam,  after  being 
first  supported  wholly  by  trestles  at  its  ends,  to  be  gradually 
pressed  up  by  a trestle  under  its  middle,  it  will  bear  a force 
simply  proportional  to  the  space  through  which  it  is  raised 
from  the  zero  point,  until  all  the  weight  is  taken  off  the  ends, 
and  borne  by  the  middle.  The  whole  distance  through  which 

: <]VJ  8£4 

the  middle  rises  during  this  process  is,  as  we  found,  ^ ; 

and  this  whole  elevation  is  § of  the  droop  of  the  middle  in  the 
first  position.  If  therefore,  for  instance,  the  middle  trestle  be 
fixed  exactly  in  the  line  joining  those  under  the  ends,  it  will 
bear  § of  the  whole  weight,  and  leave  to  be  borne  by  each 
end.  And  if  the  middle  trestle  be  lowered  from  the  line  join- 
ing the  end  ones  by  T75  of  the  space  through  which  it  would 
have  to  be  lowered  to  relieve  itself  of  all  pressure,  it  will  bear 
just  i of  the  whole  weight,  and  leave  the  other  two  thirds  to 
be  equally  borne  by  the  two  ends. 


Rotation  of 
a wire  round 
its  elastic 
central  line. 


Elastic  uni- 
versal 
flexure 
joint ; § 1S9. 


621.  A wire  of  equal  flexibility  in  all  directions,  and 
straight  when  freed  from  stress,  offers,  when  bent  and  twisted 
in  any  manner  whatever,  not  the  slightest  resistance  to  being 
turned  round  its  elastic  central  curve,  as  its  conditions  of 
equilibrium  are  in  no  way  affected  by  turning  the  whole  wire 
thus  equally  throughout  its  length.  The  useful  application  of 
this  principle,  to  the  maintenance  of  equal  angular  motion  in 
two  bodies  rotating  round  different  axes,  is  rendered  somewhat 
difficult  in  practice  by  the  necessity  of  a perfect  attachment 
and  adjustment  of  each  end  of  the  wire,  so  as  to  have  the  tan- 
gent to  its  elastic  central  curve  exactly  in  line  with  the  axis 
of  rotation.  But  if  this  condition  is  rigorously  fulfilled,  and 
the  wire  is  of  exactly  equal  flexibility  in  every  direction,  and 


621.] 


STATICS. 


1G3 


exactly  straight  when  free  from  stress,  it  will  give,  against  any  Equable 
constant  resistance,  an  accurately  uniform  motion  from  one  to  titi£g jSkt. 
another  of  two  bodies  rotating  round  axes  which  may  be  in- 
clined to  one  another  at  any  angle,  and  need  not  be  in  one 
plane.  If  they  are  in  one  plane,  if  there  is  no  resistance  to 
the  rotatory  motion,  and  if  the  action  of  gravity  on  the  wire 
is  insensible,  it  will  take  some  of  the  varieties  of  form  (§  612) 
of  the  plane  elastic  curve  of  James  Bernoulli.  But  however 
much  it  is  altered  from  this ; whether  by  the  axes  not  being  in 
one  plane ; or  by  the  torsion  accompanying  the  transmission  of 
a couple  from  one  shaft  to  the  other,  and  necessarily,  when  the 
axes  are  in  one  plane,  twisting  the  wire  out  of  it;  or  by  gravity 
the  Mastic  central  curve  will  remain  at  rest,  the  wire  in  every 
normal  section  rotating  round  it  with  uniform  angular  velocity 
equal  to  that  of  each  of  the  two  bodies  which  it  connects! 

Under  Properties  of  Matter,  we  shall  see,  as  indeed  may  be 
judged  at  once  from  the  performances  of  the  vibrating  sprino- 
of  a chronometer  for  twenty  years,  that  imperfection*  in  the 
elasticity  of  a metal  wire  does  not  exist  to  any  such  degree  as 
to  prevent  the  practical  application  of  this  principle,  even  in 
mechanism  required  to  be  durable. 

It  is  right  to  remark,  however,  that  if  the  rotation  he  too 
rapid,  the  equilibrium  of  the  wire  rotating  round  its  unchanged 
elastic  central  curve  may  become  unstable,  as  is  immediately  dis- 
covered by  experiments  (leading  to  very  curious  phenomena) 
when,  as  is  often  done  m illustrating  the  kinetics  of  ordinary 
rotation,  a rigid  body  is  hung  by  a steel  wire,  the  upper  end  of 
winch  is  kept  turning  rapidly. 

622.  If  the  wire  is  not  of  rigorously  equal  flexibility  in  all  Pmcttau 
directions,  there  will  be  a periodic  inequality  in  the  communi- 
cated  angular  motion,  having  for  period  a half  turn  of  either 
body : or  . the  w.re,  when  unstressed,  is  not  exactly  straight 
there  w.J  be  a periodic  inequality,  having  the  whole  turn  for 

HIT4  wi  °th7  rrt'  if  4 anJ  4'  bG  anSle3  simultane- 
ously turned  through  by  the  two  bodies,  with  a constant  work- 

mg  couple  transmitted  from  one  to  the  other  through  the  wire 

4 4 ""U  n0t  be  zero>  as  in  the  proper  elastic  universal 

11—2 


Practical 

inequalities. 


Elastic  ro- 
tating joint. 


Rotation 
round  its 
elastic  cen- 
tral circle, 
of  a straight 
wire  made 
into  a hoop. 


164 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


flexure  joint,  but  will  be  a function  of  sin  2< p and  cos  2 </>  if  the 
first  defect  alone  exists ; or  it  will  be  a function  of  sin  cf>  and 
cos  <£  if  there  is  the  second  defect  whether  alone  or  along  with 
the  first.  It  is  probable  that,  if  the  bend  in  the  wire  when 


unstressed  is  not  greater  than  can  be  easily  provided  against 
in  actual  construction,  the  inequality  of  action  caused  by  it 
may  be  sufficiently  remedied  without  much  difficulty  in 
practice,  by  setting  it  at  one  or  at  each  end,  somewhat  inclined 
to  the  axis  of  the  rotating  body  to  which  it  is  attached.  But 
these  considerations  lead  us  to  a subject  of  much  greater  interest 
in  itself  than  any  it  can  have  from  the  possibility  of  usefulness 
in  practical  applications.  The  simple  cases  we  shall  choose 
illustrate  three  kinds  of  action  which  may  exist,  each  either 
alone  or  with  one  or  both  the  others,  in  the  equilibrium  of  a 
wire  not  equally  flexible  in  all  directions,  and  straight  v>  hen 
unstressed. 


623.  A uniform  wire,  straight  when  unstressed,  is  bent  till 
its  two  ends  meet,  which  are  then  attached  to  one  another,  with 
the  elastic  central  curve  through  each  touching  one  straight 
line : so  that  whatever  be  the  form  of  the  normal  section,  and 
the  quality,  crystalline  or  non-crystalline,  of  the  substance,  the 
whole  wire  must  become,  when  in  equilibrium,  an  exact  circle 


(Gravity  being  not  allowed  to  produce  any  disturbance).  It  is- 
required  to  find  what  must  be  done  to  turn  the  whole  wire 
uniformly  through  any  angle  round  its  elastic  central  circle. 

If  the  wire  is  of  exactly  equal  flexibility  in  all  directions*,  itl 
will,  as  we  have  seen  (§  621),  offer  no  resistance  at  all  to  this- 
action,  except  of  course  by  its  own  inertia;  and  if  it  is  once 
set  to  rotate  thus  uniformly  with  any  angular  velocity,  great  or: 
small,  it  would  continue  so  for  ever  were  the  elasticity  perfect, 
and  were  there  no  resistance  from  the  air  or  other  matter 

touching  the  axis. 


To  avoid  restricting  the  problem  by  any  limitation,  we  must 
ippose  the  wire  to  be  such  that,  if  twisted  and  bent  m any 
ay,  the  potential  energy  of  the  elastic  action  develope  , pen 

* In  this  case,  clearly  it  might  have  been  twisted  before  its  ends  were  put 
gether,  without  altering  the  circular  form  taken  when  left  wxth  Us  ends  joined. 


023.] 


STATICS. 


1G5 


unit  of  length,  is  a quadratic  function  of  the  twist,  and  two  com-  notation 
ponents  of  the  curvature  (§§  590,  595),  with  six  arbitrarily  given  SfcSn 
coefficients.  But  as  the  wire  has  no  twist*,  three  terms  of  this  ofa  straigl 
function  disappear  in  the  case  before  us,  and  there  remain  only  intoahooj 
three  terms, — those  involving  the  squares  and  the  product  of 
the  components  of  curvature  in  planes  perpendicular  to  two 
rectangular  lines  of  reference  in  the  normal  section  through 
any  point.  The  position  of  these  lines  of  reference  may  be 
conveniently  chosen  so  as  to  make  the  product  of  the  com- 
ponents of  curvature  disappear : and  the  planes  perpendicular 
to  them  will  then  be  the  planes  of  maximum  and  minimum 
flexural  rigidity  when  the  wire  is  kept  free  from  twistf.  There 
is  no  difficulty  in  applying  the  general  equations  of  § G14  to 
express  these  circumstances  and  answer  the  proposed  question. 

Leaving  this  as  an  analytical  exercise  to  the  student,  we  take  a 
shorter  way  to  the  conclusion  by  a direct  application  of  the 
principle  of  energy. 

Let  the  potential  energy  per  unit  of  length  be  1(Bk*+  (7A2), 

Avlien  k and  A are  the  component  curvatures  in  the  planes  of 
maximum  and  minimum  flexural  rigidity:  so  that,  as  in  § 617, 

B and  C are  the  measures  of  the  flexural  rigidities  in  these 
planes.  Now  if  the  wire  be  held  in  any  way  at  rest  with  these 
planes  through  each  point  of  it  inclined  at  the  angles  cf>  and 
bir-cji  to  the  plane  of  its  elastic  central  circle,  the  radius  of  this 

circle  being  r,  we  should  have  k = ~ cos  </>,  A = i sin  <£.  Hence, 
since  2v r is  the  whole  length, 

O / 


* Which  we  have  supposed,  i 


■>  in  order  that  it  may  take  a circular  form  • 

1 a •l-.M_-J.__  • ,, 


1GG 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[G23. 


Rotftt  ion 
round  its 
elastic  cen- 
tral circle, 
of  a straight 
wire  made 
into  a hoop. 


Let  us  now  suppose  every  infinitely  small  part  of  the  wire  to 
be  acted  on  by  a couple  in  the  normal  plane,  and  let  L be  the 
amount  of  this  couple  per  unit  of  length,  which  must  be  uniform 
all  round  the  ring  in  order  that  the  circular  form  may  be  re- 
tained, and  let  this  couple  be  varied  so  that,  rotation  being  once 
commenced,  c/>  may  increase  at  any  uniform  angular  velocity. 
The  equation  of  work  done  per  unit  of  time  (§§  240,  287)  is 


27rrL(j>  = 


dE_  dE  • 
dt  d<p  ^ 


And  therefore,  by  (1), 

T B-C 

— L = 3 — 


• , , B-C  . 

sin  cp  cos  <p  = - — 2-  sm  2 <p, 


which,  shows  that  the  couple  required  in  the  normal  plane 
through  every  point  of  the  ring,  to  hold  it  wdth  the  planes  of 
greatest  flexural  rigidity  touching  a cone  inclined  at  any  angle, 
(f),  to  the  plane  of  the  circle,  is  proportional  to  sin  2</> ; is  in  the 
direction  to  prevent  cp  from  increasing;  and  when  $ = 


B-C 


amounts  to  — — =-  per  unit  length  of  the  circumference.  From 
2r  1 

this  we  see  that  there  are  two  positions  of  stable  equilibrium, 

being  those  in  which  the  plane  of  least  flexural  rigidity  lies 

in  the  plane  of  the  ring ; and  two  positions  of  unstable  equili- 
brium,— being  those  m which  the  plane  of  greatest  flexuial 
rigidity  is  in  the  plane  of  the  ring. 


Rotation 
round  its 
elastic  cen- 
tral circle, 
of  a hoop  of 
wire  pqually 
llexibleinall 
directions, 
but  circular 
when  un- 
strained. 


624.  A wire  of  uniform  flexibility  in  all  directions,  so  shaped 
as  to  be  a circular  arc  of  radius  a when  free  from  stress,  is  bent 
till  its  ends  meet,  and  these  are  joined  as  in  § 623,  so  that  the 
whole  becomes  a circular  ring  of  radius  r.  It  is  required  to 
find  the  couple  which  will  hold  this  ring  turned  round  the 
central  curve  through  any  angle  cp  in  every  normal  section, 
from  the  position  of  stable  equilibrium  (which  is  of  course  that 
in  which  the  naturally  concave  side  of  the  wire  is  on  the 
concave  side  of  the  ring,  the  natural  curvature  being  eitlici 
increased  or  diminished,  but  not  reversed,  when  the  wiie  is 
bent  into  the  ring).  Applying  the  principle  ot  eneigy  exactly 
as  in  the  preceding  section,  we  find  that  in  this  case  the  couple 


624.] 


STATICS. 


1G7 


is  proportional  to  sin  <£,  and  that  when  </>  = hr,  its  amount  per  Rotation 

L round  its 

13  . n elastic  cen- 

it  13  denote  the  tral  circle, 


unit  of  length  of  the  circumference  is 


ar 


flexural  rigidity. 

hor  in  this  case  we  have  the  potential  energy 
E = nrB  {(a  “ r C°S  + (}  siu  } = 0 ~^rC0Scf>+h)  (2)’ 


of  a hoop  of 
wire  equally 
flexible  in 
all  direc- 
tions, but 
circular 
when  un- 
strained. 


and 


r 1 (IE  B . 

Jj  = o TI  ~ — sin 

at r acp  ar 


(3). 


If  every  part  of  the  ring  is  turned  half  round,  so  as  to  bring 
the  naturally  concave  side  of  the  wire  to  the  convex  side  of  the 
ring,  we  have  of  course  a position  of  unstable  equilibrium. 


625.  A wire  of  unequal  flexibility  in  different  directions  is  Wireun- 
formed  so  that,  when  free  from  stress,  it  constitutes  a circular  fbie^ndbrer- 
arc  of  radius  a,  with  the  plane  of  greatest  flexural  rigidity  at  tions^d 
each  point  touching  a cone  inclined  to  its  plane  at  an  angle  a.  Xenun- 
Its  ends  are  then  brought  together  and  joined,  as  in  §§  623?  624,  SS„. 
so  that  the  whole  becomes  a closed  circular  ring,  of  any  given  by  baianc- 
radius  r.  It  is  required  to  find  the  changed  inclination,  <£,  to  appHedPtoS 
the  plane  of  the  ring,  which  the  plane  of  greatest  flexural  ^ 
rigidity  assumes,  and  the  couple,  G,  in  the  plane  of  the  ring, 
which  acts  between  the  portions  of  matter  on  each  side  of  any 
normal  section. 

I he  two  equations  between  the  components  of  the  couple 
and  the  components  of  the  curvature  in  the  planes  of  greatest 

and  least  flexural  rigidity  determine  the  two  unknown  quantities 
of  the  problem. 

These  equations  are 

B G r C0S  ^ ~ a C°S  a)  = *7  cos  </> 

C'  (j.  sin  ~ “ sin  = G sin  <f>  | 

1 1 

since -cos a and  - sin  a are  the  components  of  natural  curva- 
turc  in  the  principal  planes,  and  therefore  I cos  4,  - 1 cos  a,  and 

^ CO 


Wire  un- 
equally flex- 
ible in  differ- 
ent direc- 
tions, and 
circular 
when  un- 
strained, 
bent  to  an- 
other circle 
by  balanc- 
ing couples 
applied  to 
its  ends. 


1G8  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS,  [G25. 

1 1 

- sin  <h  — sin  a,  are  the  changes  from  the  natural  to  the  actual 
r a 

curvatures  in  these  planes  maintained  by  the  corresponding  com- 
ponents G cos  c jj  and  G sin  <£  of  the  couple  G. 


The  problem,  so  far  as  the  position  into  which  the  wire  turns 
round  its  elastic  central  curve,  may  be  solved  by  an  application 
of  the  principle  of  energy,  comprehending  those  of  §§  623,  624 
as  particular  cases. 

Let  L be  the  amount,  per  unit  of  length  of  the  ring,  of  the 
couple  which  must  be  applied  from  without,  in  each  normal 
section,  to  hold  it  with  the  plane  of  maximum  flexural  rigidity 
at  each  point  inclined  at  any  given  angle,  <£,  to  the  plane  of  the 
ring.  We  have,  as  before  (§§  623,  624),  for  the  potential  energy 
of  the  elastic  action  in  the  ring  when  held  so, 


E — 7 it  \ B 


COS  COS  a 


a 


+ c 


L = 


Hence 
_1  dE 

2n  rdcji 


-H(: 


cos  <f>  cos  a\  sin  cjj 


a 


+ 1 


'sin  </> 

sin  a\2) 

r 

a ) ) 

, /sin  <£ 

sin  a\ 

l r 

a ) 

.(5). 


This  equated  to  zero  is  the  same  as  (4)  with  G eliminated,  and 
determines  the  relation  between  </>  and  r,  in  order  that  the  ring 
when  altered  to  radius  r instead  of  a may  be  in  equilibrium  in 
itself  (that  is,  without  any  application  of  couple  in  the  normal 
section).  The  present  method  has  the  advantage  of  facilitating 
the  distinction  between  the  solutions,  as  regards  stability  or  insta- 
bility of  the  equilibrium,  since  (§  291)  for  stable  equilibrium 
E is  a minimum,  and  for  unstable  equilibrium  a maximum. 

As  a particular  case,  let  C = go  , which  simplifies  the  problem 
very  much.  The  terms  involving  C as  a factor  in  (5)  and  (6) 
become  nugatory  in  this  case,  and  require  of  course  that 


sin  (f) 
r 


sin  a 
a 


= 0. 


But  the  former  method  is  clearer  and  better  for  the  present  case; 
as  this  result  is  at  once  given  by  the  second  of  equations  (4);  and 
then  the  value  of  G,  if  required,  is  found  from  the  first.  A e 
conclude  what  is  stated  in  the  following  section: — 


STATICS. 


169 


626.] 


626.  Let  a uniform  hoop,  possessing  flexibility  only  in  one  Con^ai  ^ 
tangent  plane  to  its  elastic  central  line  at  each  point,  be  given,  developable 

1 r , surface. 

so  shaped  that  when  under  no  stress  (for  instance,  when  cut 
through  in  any  normal  section  and  uninfluenced  by  force  from 
other  bodies)  it  rests  in  the  form  of  a circle  of  radius  a,  with 
its  planes  of  inflexibility  all  round  touching  a cone  inclined 
to  the  plane  of  this  circle.  This  is  very  nearly  the  case  with 
a common  hoop  of  thin  sheet-iron  fitted  upon  a conical  vat, 
or  on  either  end  of  a barrel  of  ordinary  shape.  Let  such  a 
hoop  be  shortened  (or  lengthened),  made  into  a circle  of  radius 
a by  riveting  its  ends  together  (§  623)  in  the  usual  way,  and 
left  with  no  force  acting  on  it  from  without.  It  will  rest  with 
its  plane  of  inflexibility  inclined  at  the  angle  </)  = sin-1  (?'sin  a/a) 
to  the  plane  of  its  circular  form,  and  the  elastic  couple  acting 
in  this  plane  between  the  portions  of  matter  on  the  two  sides 
of  any  normal  section  will  be 

_ B /cos  (f)  cos  a\ 
cos  (f>  \ r a )’ 

These  results  we  see  at  once,  by  remarking  that  the  component 
curvature  in  the  plane  of  inflexibility  at  each  point  must  be 
invariably  of  the  same  value,  sin  a/a,  as  in  the  given  unstressed 
condition  of  the  hoop  : and  that  the  component  couple,  G cos  </>, 
in  the  plane  perpendicular  to  that  of  inflexibility  at  each 
point,  must  be  such  as  to  change  the  component  curvature  in 
this  plane  from  cos  a/a  to  cos  </>/r. 

The  greatest  circle  to  which  such  a hoop  can  be  changed  is 
of  course  that  whose  radius  is  a/sin  a : and  for  this  <f>  = \n r,  or  the 
surface  of  inflexibility  at  each  point  (the  surface  of  the  sheet- 
metal  in  the  practical  case)  becomes  the  plane  of  the  circle : 
and  therefore  (?  = c o , showing  that  if  a hoop  approaching 
infinitely  nearly  to  this  condition  be  made,  in  the  manner  ex- 
plained, the  internal  couple  acting  across  each  normal  section 
will  be  infinitely  great,  which  is  obviously  true. 

627.  Another  very  important  and  interesting  case  readily 
dealt  with  by  a method  similar  to  that  which  we  have  applied 
to  the  elastic  wire,  is  the  equilibrium  of  a jflane  elastic  plate 


170 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[027. 


plane  clastic  kent  to  a shaPe  differing  infinitely  little  from  the  plane,  by  any 
plate.  forces  subject  to  certain  conditions  stated  below  (§  632).  Some 
definitions  and  preliminary  considerations  may  be  conveniently 
taken  first. 


Definitions.  (1)  A surface  of  a solid  is  a surface  passing  through  always 
the  same  particles  of  the  solid,  however  it  is  strained. 

(2)  The  middle  surface  of  a plate  is  the  surface  passing 
through  all  those  of  its  particles  which,  when  it  is  free  from 
stress,  lie  in  a plane  midway  between  its  two  plane  sides. 

(3)  A normal  section  of  a plate,  or  a surface  normal  to  a 
plate,  is  a surface  which,  when  the  plate  is  free  from  stress, 
cuts  its  sides  and  all  planes  parallel  to  them  at  right  angles, 
being  therefore,  when  unstrained,  necessarily  either  a single 
plane  or  a cylindrical  (or  prismatic)  surface. 

(4)  The  deflection  of  any  point  or  small  part  of  the  plate,  is 
the  distance  of  its  middle  surface  there  from  the  tangent  plane 
to  the  middle  surface  at  any  conveniently  chosen  point  of 
reference  in  it. 

(5)  The  inclination  of  the  plate,  at  any  point,  is  the  inclina- 
tion of  the  tangent  plane  of  the  middle  surface  there  to  the 
tangent  plane  at  the  point  of  reference. 

(0)  The  curvature  of  a plate  at  any  point,  or  in  any  part,  is 
the  curvature  of  its  middle  surface  there. 

(7)  In  a surface  infinitely  nearly  plane  the  curvature  is  said 
to  be  uniform,  if  the  curvatures  in  every  two  parallel  normal 
sections  are  equal. 

(8)  Any  diameter  of  a plate,  or  distance  in  a plate  infinitely 
nearly  plane,  is  called  finite,  unless  it  is  an  infinitely  great  mul- 
tiple of  the  least  radius  of  curvature  multiplied  by  the  greatest 
inclination. 

Choosing  XOY  as  the  tangent  plane  at  the  point  of  reference, 
let  (x,  y,  z)  be  any  point  of  its  middle  surface,  i its  inclination 

there,  and  - its  curvature  in  a normal  section  through  that 


Geometrical 

prelimi- 

naries. 


STATICS. 


171 


G27.] 


point,  inclined  at  an  angle  <£  to  ZOX.  We  have 

tani=v/Glil5) 

and,  if  i be  infinitely  small, 

1 d*z  d2z  . d2z  . , 

- = , o cos"d>  + 2 — =— sm  </>  cos  $ + -7-=  sin  <6  . 
r dx3  r c/xx/y  ^ ^ c/y2 

To  prove  these,  let  £,  77,  £ be  the  co-ordinates  of  any  point  of  the 
surface  infinitely  near  ( x , y,  z).  Then,  by  the  elements  of  the 
differential  calculus, 


•(1), 


.(2). 


«,  clz  . dz  , fd2z 


e+2 


d2z 


dh 


dy  1 2 \dx~ s dxdy  + dy2^ 


.(3). 


Let  £ = p cos  <£,  rj  = p sin  <£, 

so  that  we  have 

£~Ap  + bBp2,  where  A = — cos  </>  + ~ sin  d> 

ax  ay 

i p d2z  „ rZ2s;  d2z  . „ 

and  b = — cos'</>  + 2 — — 7-  sin  <b  cos  d>  + — sm'd> 
ax'  efcxc/y  ^ ^ c/y- . r 

Then  by  the  formula  for  the  curvature  of  a plane  curve  (§  9), 

- = s , or,  as  A is  infinitely  small,  - = !?, 

r (i+4«)i  j *r 

and  thus  (2)  is  proved. 

It  follows  that  the  surface  represented  by 

z = £ (Ax2- h 2cxy  + By2) (4), 

is  a surface  of  uniform  curvature  if  A,  B,  c be  constant  through- 
out the  admitted  range  of  values  of  (x,  y);  these  being  limited 
by  the  condition  that  Ax  + cy,  and  cx  + By  must  be  everywhere 
infinitely  small. 


628.  When  a plane  surface  is  bent  to  any  other  shape  than 
a developable  surface  (§  139),  it  must  experience  some  degree 
of  stretching  or  contraction.  But  an  essential  condition  for  the 
theory  of  elastic  plates  on  which  we  are  about  to  enter,  is  that 
the  amount  of  the  stretching  or  contraction  thus  necessary  in 
the  middle  surface  is  at  most  incomparably  smaller  than  the 
stretching  and  contraction  of  the  two  sides  (§  141)  due  to  cur- 
vature. It  will  be  shown  in  § G29  that  this  condition,  if  we 


Geometrical 

prelimi- 

naries. 


172 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[028. 


exclude  the  case  of  bending  into  a surface  differing  infinitely 
little  from  a developable  surface,  is  equivalent  to  the  fol- 
lowing : — 

of 'flexure”  ^ie  deflection  [§  627  Def.  (4)]  is,  at  all  places  finitely 

Ii°stretchnig  627  Def.  (8)]  distant  from  the  point  of  reference,  incom- 
of  middle  parably  smaller  than  the  thickness. 

surface  x ° 

with  that 'of  And  if  we  extend  the  signification  of  “ deflection  ” from  that 
eithLi  side.  c|egneq  (4)  0f  g Q27,  to  distance  from  some  true  developable  sur- 
face, the  excluded  case  is  of  course  brought  under  the  statement. 

Although  the  truth  of  this  is  obvious,  it  is  satisfactory  to 
prove  it  by  investigating  the  actual  degrees  of  stretching  and 
contraction  referred  to. 


stretching  629.  Let  us  suppose  a given  plane  surface  to  be  bent  to 

of  a plane  by  . rr . * 1 _ . 

rynciastic  some  curved  form  without  any  stretching  or  contracting  of 

oranticlas-  , , _ ° 

tie  flexure,  lines  radiating  from  some  particular  point  of  it,  0 ; and  let  it 
be  required  to  find  the  stretching  or  contraction  in  the  cir- 
cumference of  a circle  described  from  0 as  centre,  with  any 
radius  a,  on  the  unstrained  plane.  If  the  stretching  in  each 
part  of  the  circumference,  and  not  merely  on  the  whole,  is  to  be 
found,  something  more  as  to  the  mode  of  the  bending  must  be 
specified;  which,  for  simplicity,  in  the  first  place,  we  shall 
suppose  to  be,  that  any  point  P of  the  given  surface  moves  in 
a plane  perpendicular  to  the  tangent  plane  through  0,  during 
the  straining. 

Let  a , 9 be  polar  co-ordinates  of  P in  its  primitive  position, 
and  r,  6 those  of  the  projection  on  the  tangent  plane  through  0, 
of  its  position  in  the  bent  surface,  and  let  z be  the  distance  of 
this  position  from  the  tangent  plane  through  0.  An  element, 
add , of  the  unstrained  circle,  becomes 

(rW+  dr2  + dzf 

on  the  bent  surface;  and,  therefore,  for  the  stretching*  of  this 
element  we  have 

/r2  dr2  dz 2 
C ~ \a2  + cddd2  + a2d02) 

* Ratio  of  the  elongation  to  the  unstretched  length. 


(!)• 


STATICS. 


173 


G29.] 


Hence  if  e denote  the  ratio  of  the  elongation  of  the  whole  cir-  Stretching 

° . of  a plane  by 

cumference  to  its  unstretched  length,  or  the  mean  stretching  of  synciastic 

® ° or  nnticlas- 

the  circumference,  tic  flexure. 


1 f2ir 

- o-  / 

**  J o 


<70 


{(? 


2 + a2dO* 


dr 2 

+ »wy 


-l) 


/ 


•(2), 


where  we  must  suppose  2:  and  r known  functions  of  6.  Confining 
ourselves  now  to  distances  from  0 within  which  the  curvature 
of  the  surface  is  sensibly  uniform,  we  have 


2 . O 

a 1 . a /,  .a 

z=2~>  an(l  r = P sin  - = ci  (1  - 1 -2  + 


etc. 


(3), 


*P  p 

if  p be  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  normal  section  through  0 
and  P:  and,  if  we  take  as  the  zero  line  for  0 that  in  which  the 
tangent  plane  is  cut  by  one  of  the  principal  normal  planes  (§130), 


1 1 

- = - cos 

p px 


'■6  + - sin2 0 = \ (—  4-  ~\+  i cos  20  ...(4), 

P%  \Pi  pJ  \p,  pJ 


where  p, , p2  are  the  principal  radii  of  curvature.  Hence  the 
term  dr2  j a' d63  under  the  radical  sign,  disappears  if  we  include  no 
terms  involving  higher  powers  than  the  first,  of  the  small  fraction 
a2/p2  ; and,  to  this  degree  of  approximation 

'“I1  _ 1 (s  - })  *ia’e  "**}*-  si«le 

or,  by  (4),  and  reductions,  finally 


! ,//  1 
6 = -<ra  j 


1 


+ ^ ( — 2 — 

PP2  " \PX  P 


Using  this  in  (2)  we  find 


-5)  cos  20  + \(—  cos  4^1  ...(d). 
5a  ' \P  1 Pj  ) 


e = ~ 


7T 


a* 


PXP* 


• (6). 


The  whole  amount  of  stretching  thus  expressed  will,  it  follows 
from  (5),  be  distributed  uniformly  through  the  circumference,  if, 
instead  of  compelling  each  point  P to  remain  in  the  plane  through 
0,  perpendicular  to  XOY,  we  allow  it  to  yield  in  the  direction 
of  the  circumference  through  a space  equal  to 

^{^~i-)sia2e+i(k-i) sinW} 

From  (6)  we  conclude  that 


(7). 


Stretching 
of  a piano 
by  synclas- 
tic  or  anti- 
clastic 
flexure. 


Stretching 
of  a curved 
surface  by 
flexure  not 
fulfilling 
Gauss’s 
condition. 


Gauss's 
t heorem 
regarding 
flexure. 


174  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [G30. 

630.  If  a plane  area  be  bent  to  a uniform  degree  of  curva- 
ture throughout,  without  any  stretching  in  any  radius  through 
a certain  point  of  it,  and  with  uniform  stretching  or  contraction 
over  the  circumference  of  every  circle  described  from  the  same 
point  as  centre,  the  amount  of  this  contraction  (reckoned 
negative  where  the  actual  effect  is  stretching)  is  equal  to  the 
ratio  of  one-sixth  of  the  square  of  the  radius  of  the  circle,  to 
the  rectangle  under  the  maximum  and  minimum  radii  of  cur- 
vature of  normal  sections  of  the  surface ; or  which  is  the  same 
thing,  the  ratio  of  two-thirds  of  the  rectangle  under  the  maxi- 
mum and  minimum  deflections  of  the  circumference  from  the 
tangent  plane  of  the  surface  at  the  centre,  to  the  square 
of  the  radius ; or,  which  is  the  same,  the  ratio  one-third  of 
the  maximum  deflection  to  the  maximum  radius  of  curva- 
ture. 

If  the  surface  thus  bent  be  the  middle  surface  of  a plate  of 
uniform  thickness,  and  if  each  line  of  particles  perpendicular 
to  this  surface  in  the  unstrained  plate  remain  perpendicular  to 
it  when  bent,  the  stretching  on  the  convex  side,  and  the  con- 
traction on  the  concave  side,  in  any  normal  section,  is  obviously 
equal  to  the  ratio  of  half  the  thickness,  to  the  radius  of  curva- 
ture. The  comparison  of  this,  with  the  last  form  of  the  pre- 
ceding statement,  proves  that  the  second  of  the  two  conditions 
stated  in  § G28  secures  the  fulfilment  of  the  first. 

631.  If  a surface  already  bent  as  specified,  be  again  bent  to 
a different  shape  still  fulfilling  the  prescribed  conditions,  or  if 
a surface  given  curved  be  altered  to  any  other  shape  by  bend- 
in  «•  according  to  the  same  conditions,  the  contraction  pro- 
cluced  in  the  circumferences  of  the  concentric  circles  by  this 
bending,  will  of  course  be  equal  to  the  increment  in  the  value 
of  the  ratio  stated  in  the  preceding  section.  Hence  if  a curved 
surface  be  bent  to  any  other  figure,  without  stretching  in  any 
part  of  it,  the  rectangle  under  the  two  principal  radii  of  curva- 
ture at  every  point  remains  unchanged.  This  is  Gauss  s cele- 
brated theorem  regarding  the  bending  of  curved  surfaces,  of 
which  we  gave  a more  elementary  demonstration  in  our  intio- 
ductory  Chapter  (see  §§  138,  150). 


STATICS. 


175 


632.] 

632.  Without  further  preface  we  now  commence  the  theory  Limitations 
of  the  flexure  of  a plane  elastic  plate  with  the  iDromised  (§  627)  forces  and 
statement  of  restricting1  conditions.  be  admitted 

° in  elemen- 

(1)  Of  the  forces  applied  from  without  to  any  part  of  the  °[aet1“tic 
plate,  bounded  by  a normal  surface  [§  627  (3)],  the  components 
parallel  to  any  line  in  the  plane  of  the  plate  are  either  evan- 
escent or  are  reducible  to  couples.  In  other  words  the  algebraic 

sum  of  such  components,  for  any  part  of  the  plate  bounded  by 
a normal  surface,  is  zero. 

(2)  The  principal  radii  of  curvature  of  the  middle  surface  are 
everywhere  infinitely  great  multiples  of  the  thickness  of  the 
plate. 

(3)  The  deflection  is  nowhere,  within  finite  distance  from  the 
point  of  reference,  more  than  an  infinitely  small  fraction  of  the 
thickness.  This  condition  has  a definite  meaning  for  an  infi- 
nitely large  plate,  which  may  be  explained  thus  : — it  would  be 
necessary  to  go  to  a distance  equal  to  a large  multiple  of  the 
product  of  the  least  radius  of  curvature  into  the  greatest  incli- 
nation, to  reach  a place  where  the  deflection  is  more  than  a 
very  small  fraction  of  the  thickness  of  the  plate.  The  conside- 
ration of  this  condition,  is  of  great  importance  in  connection 
with  the  theory  of  the  propagation  of  waves  through  an  infi- 
nite plane  elastic  plate,  but  scarcely  belongs  to  our  present 
subject. 

(I)  IS  either  the  thickness  of  the  plate  nor  the  moduluses  of 
elasticity  of  its  substance  need  be  uniform  throughout,  but  if 
they  vary  at  all  they  must  vary  continuously  from  place  to 
place;  and  must  not  any  of  them  be  incomparably  greater  in 
one  place  than  in  another  within  any  finite  area  of  the  plate. 

633.  1 he  general  theory  of  clastic  solids  investigated  later  Results  of 

shows  that  when  these  conditions  are  fulfilled  the  distribution  C 
of  stiain  through  the  plate  possesses  the  following  properties,  a^vanco! 
the  statement  of  which  at  present,  although  not  necessary  for 
the  particular  problem  on  which  we  are  entering,  will  promote 

a thorough  understanding  and  appreciation  of  the  principles 
involved.  1 


17G 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[633. 


Results  of  (1)  The  stretching  of  any  part  of  the  middle  surface  is  in- 
theory finitely  small  in  comparison  with  that  of  either  side,  in  every 
in  , # 

advance,  part  of  the  plate  where  the  curvature  is  finite. 

(2)  The  particles  in  any  straight  line  perpendicular  to  the 
plate  when  plane,  remain  in  a straight  line  perpendicular  to 
the  curved  surfaces  into  which  its  sides,  and  parallel  planes  of 
the  substance  between  them,  become  distorted  when  it  is  bent. 
And  hence  the  curves  in  which  these  surfaces  are  cut  by  any 
plane  through  that  line,  have  one  point  in  it  for  centre  of  curva- 
ture of  them  all. 

(3)  The  whole  thickness  of  the  plate  remains  unchanged,  at 
every  point;  but  the  half  thickness  on  one  side  (which  when 
the  curvature  is  synclastic  is  the  convex  side)  of  the  middle 
surface  becomes  diminished  and  on  the  other  side  increased,  by 
equal  amounts  comparable  with  the  elongations  and  shorten- 
ings of  lengths  equal  to  the  half  thickness,  measured  on  the 
two  side  surfaces  of  the  plate. 

634.  The  conclusions  from  the  general  theory  on  which  we 
shall  found  the  equations  of  equilibrium  and  motion  of  an 
elastic  plate  are  as  follows  : — 

Laws  for  Let  a naturally  plane  plate  be  bent  to  any  surface  of  uni- 
efastic  plate  form  curvature  [§  627  (7)]  throughout,  the  applied  forces  and 
advance.111  the  extents  of  displacement  fulfilling  the  conditions  and  restric- 
tions of  § 632 : Then — 

(1)  The  force  across  any  section  of  the  plate  is,  at  each 
point  of  it,  in  a line  parallel  to  the  tangent  plane  to  the  middle 
surface  in  the  neighbourhood. 

(2)  The  forces  across  any  set  of  parallel  normal  sections  are 
equally  inclined  to  the  directions  of  the  normal  sections  at  all 
points  (that  is  to  say,  are  in  directions  which  would  be  parallel 
if  the  plate  were  bent,  and  which  deviate  actually  from  parallel- 
ism only  by  the  infinitely  small  deviations  produced  in  the 
normal  sections  of  the  flexure). 

(3)  The  amounts  of  force  across  one  normal  section,  or  any 


634.] 


STATICS. 


177 


set  of  parallel  normal  sections,  on  equal  infinitely  small  areas,  Laws  for 
are  simply  proportional  to  the  distances  of  these  areas  from  the  eilSpinte 
middle  surface  of  the  plate.  advance.111 

(4)  The  component  forces  in  the  tangent  planes  of  the  nor- 
mal sections  are  equal  and  in  dissimilar  directions  in  sections 
which  are  perpendicular  to  one  an- 
other. For  proof,  see  § 661.  The 
meaning  of  “dissimilar  directions” 
in  this  expression  is  explained  by 
the  diagram;  where  the  arrow-heads 
indicate  the  directions  in  which 
the  portions  of  matter  on  the  two 
sides  of  each  normal  section  would 

yield  if  the  substance  were  actually  

divided,  half  way  through  the  plate  from  one  side,  by  each  of 
the  normal  sections  indicated  by  dotted  lines. 

(5)  By  the  law  of  superposition,  we  see  that  if  the  applied 
forces  be  all  doubled,  or  altered  in  any  other  ratio,  the  curva- 
ture in  every  normal  section,  and  all  the  internal  forces  specified 
m (1),  (2),  (3),  (4),  are  changed  in  the  same  ratio;  and  the 
potential  energy  of  the  internal  forces  becomes  changed  accord- 
ing to  the  square  of  the  same  ratio. 

635.  From  § 634  (3)  it  follows  immediately  that  the  forces 
experienced  by  any  portion  of  the  plate  bounded  by  a normal 
section  through  the  circumference  of  a closed  polygon  or  curve 
of  the  middle  surface,  from  the  action  of  the  contiguous  matter 
of  the  plate  all  round  it,  may  be  reduced  to  a set  of  couples 
by  taking  them  in  groups  over  infinitely  small  rectangles 
into  which  the  bounding  normal  section  may  be  imagined  as 
divided  by  normal  lines.  From  § 634  (2)  it  follows  that  the 
distribution  of  couple  thus  obtained  is  uniform  along  each 
straight  portion,  if  any  there  is,  of  the  boundary,  and  equal 
per  equal  lengths  in  all  parallel  parts  of  the  boundary. 

636.  From  § 634  (4)  it  follows  that  the  component  couples 
round  axes  perpendicular  to  the  boundary  are  equal  in  plrts 

^7^  at  nght  angles  to  one  another,  and  are  in 

12 


Stress- 
couple  act- 
ing across 
a normal 
section. 


Twisting 

component 

proved 

equal  roun 

any  two  pe; 

pendiculai 

axes. 


178 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[636. 

directions  related  to  one  another 
in  the  manner  indicated  by  the 
circular  arrows  in  the  diagram ; 
that  is  to  say,  in  such  directions 
that  if  the  axis  is,  according  to 
the  rule  of  § 234,  drawn  outwards 
from  the  portion  of  the  plate 
under  consideration,  for  one  point 
of  the  boundary  it  must  be  drawn 
inwards  for  every  point  where  the  boundary  is  perpendicular  to 
its  direction  at  that  point. 


Principal 
axes  of 
bending 
stress. 


637.  We  may  now  prove  that  there  are  two  normal  sections, 
at  right  angles  to  one  another,  in  which  the  component  couples 
round  axes  perpendicular  to  them  vanish,  and  that  in  these 
sections  the  component  couples  round  axes  coincident  with  the 
sections  are  of  maximum  and  minimum  values. 


Principal 
axes  of 
bending 
stress  in- 
vestigated. 


Let  OAB  be  a right-angled  triangle  of  the  plate.  Let  A and  II 

he  the  two  com- 
ponent couples 
acting  on  the 
side  OA ; K and 
II  those  on  the 
side  OB ; and  G 
and  II  those  on 
the  side  AB ; 
X the  amount  of 

C|Pjp  each  couple  be- 

ing reckoned  per 
i unit  of  length 

of  the  side  on  which  it  acts,  and  the  axes  and  directions  of  the 
several  couples  being  as  indicated  by  the  circular  arrows  when 
each  is  reckoned  as  positive.  Then,  if  AB  = a,  and  BAO  - <£,  e 
whole  amounts  of  the  couples  on  the  three  sides  are  respectively 

Aa  cos  <j>,  II a cos  <£, 

Ka  sin  </>,  ITa  sin  <£, 

Ga,  7/a. 


G37.] 


STATICS. 


179 


Resolving  the  two  latter  round  OX  and  OY,  we  have 
Ga  cos  0 - II a sin  0 round  OX, 
an(l  Ga  sin  0 + Ha  cos  <f>  „ OY. 

But  if  the  portion  in  question,  of  the  plate,  were  to  become  rigid, 

its  equilibrium  would  not  be  disturbed  (§  564);  and  therefore 
we  must  have 

Ga  cos  $ -Ha  sin  <£  = A a cos  <P  + Tla  sin  0 by  couples  round  OX  ) 
und  (1). 

6 a sin  0 + Ha  cos  0 = K«  sin  0 + n«  cos  0 ,,  ^ OY) 

From  these  we  find  immediately 

G = A cos20  + 211  sin  0 cos  0 + K sin20,  ^ 

11=  (K  - A)  sin  0 cos  0 + II  (cos20  - sin20)  J 

Hence  the  values  of  0,  which  make  II  vanish,  give  to  G its 

maximum  and  minimum  values,  and  being  determined  by  the 
equation 

tan  2 0 = - - — H /q\ 

i(K-A)  (3)> 

differ  from  one  another  by  > 77-. 

. A modlfication  of  these  formulae,  which  we  shall  find  valuable 
is  obtained  by  putting  * 

2 = £(K  + A),  © = £(K-A) (4). 

This  reduces  (2)  to 

G — 5 + n sin  2 0 — © cos  20 ) 

n cos  20  + ©sin  20 / (5)’ 

which  again  become 

G = 2 + n cos  2 (0  — a)  1 

H-  - Q sin  2 (0  - a)  J (3)> 

where  a [being  a value  of  0 given  by  (3)],  and  Q are  taken  so 

that  H = O sin  2a,  © = - Q cos  2a,  ) ^ 

so  that,  of  course,  0 = (n2+©2)*  J 

Thi.s  analysis  demonstrates  the  following  convenient  synthesis  of 
the  whole  system  of  internal  force  in  question 


Principal 
axes  of 
bending 
stress  in- 
vestigated. 


12—2 


180 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[638. 


Syncinstic  638.  The  action  experienced  by  each  part  of  the  plate,  in 
clastic11'  virtue  of  the  internal  forces  between  it  and  the  surrounding 
fined.  contiguous  matter  of  the  plate,  being  called  a stress  [in  accord- 
ance with  the  general  use  of  this  term  defined  below  (§  658)], 
may  be  regarded  as  made  up  of  two  distinct  elements — (1)  a 
synclastic  stress,  and  (2)  an  anticlastic  stress ; as  we  shall  call 
them. 


(1)  Synclastic  stress  consists  of  equal  direct  bending  action 
round  every  straight  line  in  the  plane  of  the  plate.  Its  amount- 
may  be  conveniently  regarded  as  measured  by  the  amount,  Z. 
of  the  mutual  couple  between  the  portions  of  matter  on  the  two 
sides  of  any  straight  normal  section  of  unit  length.  Its  effect- 
would  be  to  produce  equal  curvature  in  all  normal  sections 
(that  is  to  say,  a spherical  figure)  if  the  plate  were  equally 
flexible  in  all  directions. 


Anticlastic 
stress  re- 
ferred to  its 
principal 
axes ; 


referred  to 
axes  in- 
clined to 
them  at  45°. 


(2)  Anticlastic  stress  consists  of  two  simple  bending  stresse: 
of  equal  amounts  in  opposite  directions  round  two  sets  o 
parallel  straight  lines  perpendicular  to  one  another  in  tin 
plane  of  the  plate.  Its  effect  would  be  uniform  anticlastic 
curvature,  with  equal  convexities  and  concavities,  if  the  plat; 
were  equally  flexible  in  all  directions.  Its  amount  is  reckone 
as  the  amount,  £1,  of  the  mutual  couple  between  the  portion 
of  matter  on  the  two  sides  of  a straight  normal  section  of  uni 
length,  parallel  to  either  of  these  two  sets  of  lines.  It  give 
rise  to  couples  of  the  same  amount,  O,  between  the  portions  ( 
matter  on  each  side  of  a normal  section  of  unit  length  paralk 
to  either  of  the  sets  of  lines  bisecting  the  right  angles  betwee 

those ; but  the  couples  now  referre 
to  are  in  the  plane  of  the  norms 
section  instead  of  perpendicular  1 
it.  This  is  proved  and  illustrate 
by  the  annexed  diagram,  represen 
ing  [a  particular  case  of  the  diagram 
and  equations  (1)  of  § 637]  the  equ 
librium  of  an  isosceles  right- angle 
triangle  under  the  influence  of  couple 


Cipn/i 


each  equal  to  OVl>  applied  to  it  round  axes  coinciding  wr 


638.] 


STATICS. 


181 


its  legs,  and  a third  couple,  O round  an  axis  perpendicular  to 
its  hypotenuse. 

If  two  pairs  of  rectangular  axes,  each  bisecting  the  right  Octantai  re- 
angles  formed  by  the  other,  be  chosen  as  axes  of  reference,  an  composition 
anticlastic  stress  having  any  third  pair  of  rectangular  lines  for  tic  stress, 
its  axes  may,  as  the  preceding  formulae  [§  637  (5)]  show,  be 
resolved  into  two  having  their  axes  coincident  with  the  two 
pairs  of  axes  of  reference  respectively,  by  the  ordinary  cosine 
formula  with  each  angle  doubled.  Hence  it  follows  that  any 
two  anticlastic  stresses  may  be  compounded  into  one  by  the  Construc- 
same  geometrical  construction  as  the  parallelogram  of  forces,  raiieiogram. 
made  upon  lines  inclined  to  one  another  at  an  angle  equal  to 
twice  that  between  the  corresponding  axes  of  the  two  given 
stresses ; and  the  position  of  the  axes  of  the  resultant  stress 
will  be  indicated  by  the  angles  of  this  diagram  each  halved. 

639.  Precisely  the  same  set  of  statements  are  of  course  Geometrical 
applicable  to  the  curvature  of  a surface.  Thus  the  jDroposition  anal°KUes- 
proved  in  § G37  (3)  for  bending  stresses  has,  for  its  analogue 
in  curvature,  Euler’s  theorem  proved  formerly  in  § 130 ; and 
analogues  to  the  series  of  definitions  and  propositions  founded 
on  it  and  derived  from  it  may  be  at  once  understood  without 
more  words  or  proof. 


Eet  z = £ ( kx 2 + 2v 7xy  + A?/2)  (1) 

be  the  equation  of  a curved  surface  infinitely  near  a point  0 at 
which  it  is  touched  by  the  plane  YOX.  Its  curvature  may  be 
regarded  as  compounded  of  a cylindrical  curvature,  A,  with  axis 
parallel  to  OX,  a cylindrical  curvature,  k,  with  axis  parallel  to 
OY,  and  an  anticlastic  curvature,  tv,  with  axis  bisecting  the 
angles  A OY,  YOX'.  Thus,  if  tv  and  A each  vanished,  the  surface 
would  be  cylindrical,  with  1/k  for  radius  of  curvature  and  gene- 
rating lines  parallel  to  0 Y.  Or,  if  k and  A each  vanished,  there 
would  be  anticlastic  curvature,  with  sections  of  equal  maximum 
curvature  in  the  two  directions,  bisecting  the  angles  XOY  and 
YOX',  and  radius  of  curvature  in  those  sections  equal  to  1/tv. 

If  now  we  put 


Two  cylin* 
drical  cur- 
vatures 
round  per- 
pendicular 
axes,  and  an 
anticlastic 
curvature 
round  axi$ 
bisecting 
their  right 
angles ; 


o-=£(k  + A),  $ = A) 


(2), 


or  a spheri- 
cal curva- 
ture and 
two  anti- 
clastic  cur- 
vatures; 


or  a spheri- 
cal and  one 
anticlastic 
curvature. 


Work  done 
in  bending. 


182 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[639. 


the  equation  of  the  surface  becomes 

z — ^{<r  ( x 2 + y')  4-  S'  (xr  — y~)  + 2zrxy) . 

or,  if  x = r cos  <£,  y — r sin  <£,  ) 

z - {o-  + $ cos  2<f>  + tjj  sin  2 <£}  r2/ 


or,  lastly, 


z — 1 {cr  + w cos  2 (<£  - a)  [ r2, 
& = oj  COS  2a,  -ui  = oj  sin  2a 


(3); 

W; 

.(5). 


In  these  formulse  o-  measures  the  spherical  curvature ; and  $ and 
zr  two  components  of  anticlastic  curvature,  referred  to  the  pair 
of  axes  X'X , Y'Y,  and  the  other  pair  bisecting  their  angles.  The 
resultant  of  S and  zs  is  an  anticlastic  curvature  u>,  with  axes  in- 
clined, in  the  angle  XOY  at  angle  a to  OX,  and  in  YOX'  at 
angle  a to  0 Y. 


640.  The  notation  of  §§  637,  639  being  retained,  the  work 
done  on  any  area  A of  the  plate  experiencing  a change  of  cur- 
vature (8/c,  8X,  8zr)  under  the  action  of  a stress  (K,  A,  II),  is 


(KSk  + ASA  + 2IlSw)  A (1); 

or  (22Scr  + 2©S'&  + 2nSto)  A. (-)> 

if,  as  before, 


2 = J(K  + A),  ® = — A),  cr— |(k  + A),  ^ — \{k  — X)...(X). 

Let  PQP'Q'  be  a rectangular  portion  of  the  plate  with  its 
centre  at  0,  and  its  sides  Q'P,  P'Q  parallel  to  OX,  and  Q'P',  PQ 
parallel  to  OY.  If 

z = \ ( kxz  + 2zrxy  + Ay2) 

be  the  equation  of  the  curved  surface,  we  have 


dz  dz  . 

— =KX+zry,  -r  = zrx  + A y, 
dx  dy 

and  therefore  the  tangent  plane  at  ( x , y)  deviates  in  direction 
from  XO  Y by  an  infinitely  small  rotation 

KX+zry  round  0 Tl  ^ 

and  wx  + Ay  „ OX  j 

Hence  the  rotation  from  XOY  to  the  mean  taugent  plane  for  all 
points  of  the  side  PQ  or  Q'P'  is 

=f  | Q'P  ■ k round  0 Y, 
t l Q'P .«  „ OX. 


and 


STATICS. 


183 


640.] 


Hence  if  the  tangent  plane,  XOY , at  0 remaibs  fixed,  while  the  Workdono 
curvature  changes  from  (k,  za,  X)  to  (k  + 8k,  zz+8w,  A.+  8A),  the 
work  done  by  the  couples  PQ . K round  OY,  and  PQ.  II  round 
OX,  distributed  over  the  side  PQ , will  be 

£<?'P.P0.(K8ic  + n8cr), 

and  an  equal  amount  will  be  done  by  the  equal  and  opposite 
couples  distributed  over  the  side  Q'P'  undergoing  an  equal  and 
opposite  rotation.  Similarly,  we  find  for  the  whole  work  done 
on  the  sides  P'Q  and  Q'P , 

PQ.Q'P  .(U8zt+K8k). 

Hence  the  whole  work  done  on  all  the  four  sides  of  the  rectangle 
is  PQ.  Q'P.  (K8k  + 2U8zt  + A8X): 

whence  the  proposition  to  be  proved,  since  any  given  area  of  the 
plate  may  be  conceived  as  divided  into  infinitely  small  rectangles. 

It  is  an  instructive  exercise  to  verify  the  result  by  beginning 
with  the  consideration  of  a portion  of  plate  bounded  by  any 
given  curve,  and  using  the  expressions  (1)  of  § 637,  by  which 
we  find,  for  the  couples  on  any  infinitely  short  portion,  ds,  of  its 
boundary,  specified  in  position  by  ( x , y), 


( 


- A ^ + II  da  round  OX 


and 


OY 


(5). 


But,  as  we  have  just  seen  in  (4),  the  rotation  experienced  by  the 
tangent  plane  to  the  plate  at  ( x , y),  when  the  curvature  changes 
from  (k,  zj,  X)  to  (k  + 8k,  tx  + 8w,  X + 8X),  is 

a,-8tzr  + ?/SA  round 

aiid  %8k  + ySzr  ,,  OY)  (6), 

the  tangent  plane  to  the  plate  at  0 being  supposed  to  remain  un- 
changed in  position;  and  therefore  the  work  done  on  the  portion 
ds  of  the  edge  is 

{(K  % - 11  s)  (xSk  + ySro)  + (n  S - A s)  (xSzj  + W *• 


The  required  work,  being  the  integral  of  this  over  the  whole 
of  the  bounding  curve,  is  therefore 

(K8/<  + 2n8w  + A8A)  A ; 


1S4 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[640. 


Work  c’o'ie 
in  bending. 


Partial  dif- 
ferential 
equations 
for  work 
done  in 
bending 
an  elastic 
plate. 


Potential 
energy  of  an 
elastic  plate 
held  bent. 


since 


/* % ds=~  fy^dg  = A> 


ds 


and  fx  ^ ds  = 0,  fy  ds  = 0, 

J ds  ’ ds  ’ 

each  integral  being  round  the  whole  closed  curve. 


641.  Considering  now  the  elastic  forces  called  into  action 
by  the  flexure  {k,  zj,  X)  reckoned  from  the  unstressed  condition 
of  the  plate  (plane,  or  infinitely  nearly  plane),  and  denoting  by 
w the  whole  amount  of  their  potential  energy,  per  unit  area  of 
the  plate,  we  have,  as  in  the  case  of  the  wire  treated  in  § 594, 

KS/c  = $kw,  ABX  = SKw,  2 II Star  = S-^w (7) ; 

or,  according  to  the  other  notation, 

22Scr  = Syw,  2©SA  = $$W,  2nS-ar  = (8)  ; 

where,  as  above  explained,  K and  A denote  the  simple  bending 
stresses  (measured  by  the  amount  of  bending  couple,  per  unit 
of  length)  round  lines  parallel  to  OY  and  OX  respectively:  IT 
the  anticlastic  stress  with  axes  at  45°  to  OX  and  OY : and  X 
and  © the  synclastic  stress  and  the  anticlastic  stress  with  OX 
and  OY  for  axes,  together  equivalent  to  K and  A.  Also,  as  in 
§ 595,  we  see  that  whatever  be  the  character,  eolotropic  or  iso- 
tropic, § 677,  of  the  substance  of  the  plate,  it  must  be  a homo- 
geneous quadratic  function  of  the  three  components  of  curva- 
ture, whether  (/c,  X,  ot)  or  (<x,  A,  vr).  From  this  and  (7),  or  (8), 
it  follows  that  the  coefficients  in  the  linear  functions  of  the 
three  components  of  curvature  which  express  the  components 
of  the  stress  required  to  maintain  it,  must  fulfil  the  ordinary 
conservative  relations  of  equality  in  three  pairs,  reducing  the 
whole  number  from  nine  to  six. 


Thus  A,  B,  C,  a,  b,  c denoting  six  constants  depending  on  the 
quality  of  the  solid  substance  and  the  thickness  of  the  plate,  we 

have  w = ( Akj  + BXJ  + Czd1  + 2(iXzs  + 2bzzK  + 2ckA) (9)  j 

and  lienee,  by  (7), 


K = A k + cX  + bzu  ' 
A = ck  +BX+  azr  >■ 
211  = 6k  + a A + Czs  _ 


(10). 


641.] 


STATICS. 


185 


Transforming  these  by  § G40  (3)  we  have,  in  terms  of  a,  $,  rs, 


v>=  |{(d  + B+  2c)  o-2  + (A  + B-2c)  y+C-K* 

+ 2 (b  — a)  $nr  + 2 (6  + a)  azu  + 2 (A  — B)  cr-Sr} (1 1), 

and  22  = (.4  + A + 2c)  or  + (4  - i?)  $ + (6  + a)  t?) 

2®  = (A-B)cr  + (A+B-2c)$+(b-a)v  L (12). 


2 IT  = (b  + a)  a + (b  — a)  § + C zu  _ 

These  second  forms  are  chiefly  useful  as  showing  immediately  the 
relations  which  must  be  fulfilled  among  the  coefficients  for  the 
important  case  considered  in  the  following  section. 


Potential 
energy  of  nn 
elastic  plate 
held  bent. 


642.  If  the  plate  be  equally  flexible  in  all  directions,  a Case  of 
synclastic  stress  must  produce  spherical  curvature:  an  anti-  bjityfn & 
clastic  stress  having  any  pair  of  rectangular  lines  in  the  plate  directions‘ 
for  its  axes  must  produce  anticlastic  curvature  having  these 
lines  for  sections  of  equal  greatest  curvature  on  the  opposite 
sides  of  the  tangent  plane : and  in  either  action  the  amount  of 
the  curvature  is  simply  proportional  to  the  amount  of  the 
stiess.  Hence  if  l)  and  ft  denote  two  coefficients  depending  on  Synclastic 
the  bulk-modulus  and  rigidity  of  the  substance  if  isotropic°(see  S&tari- 
§§  677,  680,  below),  and  on  the  thickness  of  the  plate,  we  have  p££esofa 


2 = f )<r,  © = ft^,  7T=fts7 (13). 

And  therefore  [§  640  (2)] 

w = ftc2  + ft(S-2  + CT2) (14). 


Hence  the  coefficients  in  the  general  expressions  of  § 641  fulfil, 
in  the  case  of  equal  flexibility  in  all  directions,  the  following 
conditions  : — 


a = 0,  6 = 0,  A=B,  2(A-c)  = C (15); 

and  the  newly-introduced  coefficients  and  k are  related  to  them 
thus:—  A +c  = ij,  %C  = A-c=k (16). 

643.  Let  us  now  consider  the  equilibrium  of  an  infinite  Plate  bent 
plate,  disturbed  from  its  natural  plane  by  forces  applied  to  it  foVeeZ 
in  any  way,  subject  only  to  the  conditions  of  § 632.  The  sub- 
stance may  be  of  any  possible  quality  as  regards  elasticity  in 
different  directions:  and  the  plate  itself  need  not  be  homo- 
geneous either  as  to  this  quality,  or  as  to  its  thickness,  in 
different  parts;  provided  only  that  round  every  point  it  is  in 
both  respects  sensibly  homogeneous  [§632  Def.  (4)]  to  distances 
great  in  comparison  with  the  thickness  at  that  point. 


186 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[644. 


Plate  bent 
bv  any 
forces. 


Conditions 
of  equi- 
librium. 


644.  Let  OX,  OF  be  rectangular  axes  of  reference  in  the 
plane  of  the  undisturbed  plate ; and  let  £ be  the  infinitely  small 
displacement  from  this  plane,  of  the  point  (x,  y)  of  the  plate, 
when  disturbed  by  any  forces,  specified  in  their  effective  com- 
ponents as  follows: — Take  a portion,  E,  of  the  plate  bounded  by 
a normal  surface  cutting  the  middle  surface  in  a line  en- 
closing an  infinitely  small  area  a in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
point  ( x , y ),  and  let  Za  denote  the  sum  of  the  component 
forces  perpendicular  to  XOY  on  all  the  matter  of  E in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  point  ( x , y ) : and  Lcr,  Ma  the  component 
couples  round  OX  and  OY  obtained  by  transferring,  according 
to  Poinsot,  the  forces  from  all  points  of  the  portion  E,  supposed 
for  the  moment  rigid,  to  one  point  of  it  which  it  is  convenient 
to  take  at  the  centre  of  inertia  of  the  area,  a,  of  the  part  of  the 
middle  surface  belonging  to  it.  This  force  and  these  couples, 
along  with  the  internal  forces  of  elasticity  exerted  on  the 
matter  of  E , across  its  boundary,  by  the  matter  surrounding 
it,  must  (§  564)  fulfil  the  conditions  of  equilibrium  for  E treated 
as  a rigid  body.  And  E,  being  not  really  rigid,  must  have  the 
curvature  due,  according  to  § 641,  to  the  bending  stress  con- 
stituted by  the  last-mentioned  forces.  These  conditions  ex- 
pressed mathematically  supply  five  equations  from  which,  four 
elements  specifying  the  internal  forces  being  eliminated,  we 
have  a single  partial  differential  equation  for  £ in  terms  of  x 
and  y,  which  is  the  required  equation  of  equilibrium. 


Let  a be  a rectangle  PQP'Q',  with  sides  8x  parallel  to  OX 

and  hj  parallel  to  0 Y. 
Let  aSy,  a'S?/  be  the  in- 
finitely nearly  equal  shear- 
ing forces  perpendicular 
to  the  plate  in  the  normal 
surfaces  through  PQ'  and 
QP'  respectively  : and  let 
(3,  (3 ' be  the  corresponding 
notation  for  PQ,  P’Q'. 


We  shall  have,  of  course, 

da  „ 1 r»  o 


04-k] 


STATICS. 


187 


The  results  of  these  actions  on  the  portion,  E , of  the  plate,  con-  Equations 
sidered  as  rigid,  are  forces  d8y,  (3'8x  through  the  middle  points  of  brium  of 
QP',  Q’P',  in  the  direction  of  z positive,  and  forces  aSy,  f38x  {>/ any6'1 

• • • forces  in- 

through  the  middle  points  of  PQ',  PQ,  in  the  direction  of  z vestigated. 
negative.  Hence,  towards  the  equilibrium  of  E as  a rigid  body, 
they  contribute 


(a'-  a)  8y  + (/3'-/3)  Sir,  or  4-  C~sj  8x8y,  component  force  parallel  to  OZ, 

aSy . 8x  couple  round  OY, 
and  /38x . 8y  „ „ OX) 


(in  these  last  two  expressions  the  difference  between  a and  a 
and  between  (3  and  /S'  ai-e  of  course  neglected).  Again,  if  K, 
A,  II  specify,  according  to  the  system  of  § 637,  the  bending 
stress  at  ( x , y),  we  shall  have  couples  infinitely  nearly  equal 
and  opposite,  on  the  pairs  of  opposite  sides,  of  which,  estimated 
in  components  round  OX  and  OY,  the  differences,  representing 
the  residual  turning  tendencies  on  E as  a rigid  body,  are  as 
follows : — 


round  OX, 


from  sides  PQ,  Q'P',  ~ 8y . 8x, 

dy 

” ” FV’QF'’d£8x-8y> 


round  OY, 


from  sides  PQ,  Q'P’, 


PQ\  QP', 


dn 

dy 

dK 

clx 


8y . &r, 

8x . 8y ; 


or  in  all, 
and 


round  OX, 


79 


OY, 


The  equations  of  equilibrium,  therefore,  between  these  and  the  Equations 
applied  forces  on  E treated  as  a rigid  body  give,  if  we  remove- pktebent1 
the  common  factor,  SxSy,  any 


da 


d/3 


Equations 
of  stret-s  in 
plate  bvnt 
by  any 
forces. 


Equations 
connecting 
stress  and 
curvature. 


Partial  dif- 
ferential 
equation  of 
the  bent 
surface. 


Boundary 

conditions; 


188 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[644. 


The  first  of  these,  with  a and  (3  replaced  in  it  by  their  values 
from  the  second  and  third,  becomes 

r/2K  ^ 0 d'  II  ^ d2 A_  7 dM  dL  (r)^ 

dx2  + **  dxdy  + dy*  dx  dy 

Now  k,  X,  -m  denoting  component  curvatures  of  the  plate,  accord- 
ing to  the  system  of  § 639,  we  have  of  course 


d2z  d2z 

K=dtf'  X = d7Ji) 


TS  = 


d*z 

dxdy 


(3), 


and  hence  (10)  o‘f  § 641  give 


v _ . d2z  d2z 
K — A.  — - + c — 7 — 3 -f-  b 


d2z  1 


dx 2 dy1  dxdy 

d2z 


d2z  7 d2z 
A = c -j^+B-j-, 
dx~  ay 


2 + a dxdy 


d2z  d2z  „ d2z 
211  = b —+a^r-9  + C- 


dxf  dy2  dxdy . 


(4). 


Using  these  in  (2)  we  find  the  required  differential  equation  of 
the  disturbed  surface.  On  the  general  supposition  (§  643)  we 
must  regard  A,  B,  C,  a,  b,  c as  given  functions  of  x and  y. 
In  the  important  practical  case  of  a homogeneous  plate  they  are 
constants ; and  the  required  equation  becomes  the  linear  partial 
differential  equation  of  the  fourth  order  with  constant  coeffi- 
cients, as  follows  : — 


, d4z  d4z  ,n 

A^+^bdrfd^  + ( 


2c) 


d4z  9 d4z  d d^  _ rr_  dM 
dx2dy2  + ~ dxdy3  dy4  dx 


d.L 

dy 


(5). 


For  the  case  of  equal  flexibility  in  all  directions,  according  to 
§ 642  (13),  this  becomes 

/ dz 4 d4z  d4z\  ^ dM  dL 

\dx2  + dx'dy2  + dy4)  dx  dy  _ 

A (d2  d2\2  „ dM  dL  I V 

°r  \dx2  + dy2)  dx  dy  J 

645.  To  investigate  the  boundary  conditions  for  a plate  of 
limited  dimensions,  we  may  first  consider  it  as  forming  part  of 
an  infinite  plate  bounded  by  a normal  surface  diawn  thiough  a 
closed  curve  traced  on  its  middle  surface.  The  preceding  in- 
vestigation leads  immediately  to  expressions  for  the  force  and 
couple  on  any  portion  of  the  normal  bounding  suiface.  If  then 


STATICS. 


189 


643.] 


the  portion  in  question  be  actually  cut  out  from  the  surround-  Boundary 
ing  sheet,  and  if  a distribution  of  force  and  couple  identical 
with  that  so  found  be  applied  to  its  edge,  its  elastic  condition 
will  remain  absolutely  unchanged  throughout  up  to  the  very 
normal  edge.  To  fulfil  this  condition  requires  three  equations, 
expressing  (1)  that  the  shearing  force  applied  to  the  edge  (that  ^ri^?n’s 
is,  the  applied  tangential  force  in  the  normal  surface  constitut- 
ing the  edge),  which  is  necessarily  in  the  direction  of  the 
normal  line  to  the  plate,  must  be  equal  to  the  required  amount, 
and  (2)  and  (3)  that  the  couple  applied  to  any  small  part  of  the 
edge  must  have  components  of  the  proper  amounts  round  any 
two  lines  in  the  plane  of  the  plate.  These  three  equations 
were  given  by  Poisson  as  necessary  for  the  full  expression  of 
the  boundary  condition;  but  Kirchhoff  has  demonstrated  thattwosuffl- 
they  express  too  much,  and  has  shown  that  two  equations  proved  bv 
suffice.  This  we  shall  prove  by  showing  that  when  a finite 
plate  is  given  in  any  condition  of  stress,  or  free  from  stress,  we 
may  apply,  round  axes  everywhere  perpendicular  to  its  normal 
surface-edge,  any  arbitrary  distribution  of  couple  without  pro- 
ducing any  change  except  at  infinitely  small  distances  from 
the  edge,  provided  a certain  distribution  of  force  also,  calcu- 
lated from  the  distribution  of  couple,  be  applied  to  the  edge, 
perpendicularly  to  the  plate. 


Let  X T,  —-8s,  be  an  infinitely  small  element  at  a point  (x, 
of  a curve  traced  on  the  middle  surface  of  an 


infinite  plate;  and,  PX  and  PY  being  parallel 
to  the  axes  of  x and  y,  let  YXP  = </>.  Then, 
if  £8s  denote  the  shearing  force  in  the  normal 
surface  to  the  plate  through  8s,  and,  as  before 
(§  644),  a . PY  and  [3 . PX  be  those  in  normal 
surfaces  through  PY  and  PX,  we  must  have, 
for  the  equilibrium  of  the  triangle  Y PX 
supposed  rigid  (§  5G4), 

£8 s — a.  PY + (3  .PX,  whence  £ = a sin  4>  + (3  cos  <£. 


V ) 


Using  here  for  a and  (3  their  values  by  (1)  of  § 644,  we  have 
j.  dU  dK\  / d\  dU\ 

£ = ~ V +~dj  + S/ sm * - {L  + 3y  + cU  ) 003  * W 


KirebhofTs 

boundary 

equations 

investi- 

gated. 


190 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


KircliliofT’s 

boundary 

equations 

investi- 

gated. 


Distribu- 
tion of 
shearing 
force  deter- 
mined, 
which 
produces 
same  flexure 
as  a given 
distribution 
of  couple 
round  axes 
perpen- 
dicular to 
boundary. 


[645. 


Next,  if  G8s  and  II8s  denote  the  components  round  XY,  and 
round  an  axis  perpendicular  to  it  in  the  plane  of  the  plate,  of 
the  couple  acting  across  the  normal  surface  through  8s  we  have 
[(2)  of  § 637], 

£?  = Acos2<£  + 211  sin  <£  cos  <£  + K sin2  (2), 

11=  (K  - A)  sin  <£  cos  + n (cos2  <£  - sin2<£) (3). 

If  (£,  G , H)  denoted  the  action  experienced  by  the  edge  in  virtue 
of  applied  forces,  all  the  plate  outside  a closed  curve,  of  which  8s 
is  an  element,  being  removed,  these  three  equations  would  ex- 
press the  same  as  the  three  boundary  equations  given  by  Poisson. 
Lastly,  let  %8s,  G8s,  ft) 8s  denote  the  force  perpendicular  to  the 
plate,  and  the  components  of  couple,  actually  applied  at  any 
point  ( x , y)  of  a free  edge  on  the  length  8s  of  the  middle  curve. 
As  we  shall  immediately  see  (§  648),  if 

(4), 

the  plate  will  be  in  the  same  condition  of  stress  throughout,  ex- 
cept infinitely  near  the  edge,  as  with  (£,  G,  II)  for  the  action  on 
the  edge.  Hence,  eliminating  £ and  H between  these  four  equa- 
tions, there  remain  to  us  (2)  unchanged  and  another,  or  in  all 
these  two — 


G = A cos2<£  + 2 IT  sin  <f>  cos  <£  + K sin2<£,  and 

(M + ^ + sin  ^ ~ (L + + S ) cos  ^ + ^ ~ sin  ^ cos  ^ + n (cos'^ _ sin2^ 

which  are  Kirchhoff’s  boundary  equations. 


646.  The  proposition  stated  at  the  end  of  last  section  is 
equivalent  to  this : — That  a certain  distribution  of  normal 
shearing  force  on  the  hounding  edge  of  a finite  plate  may  be 
determined  which  shall  produce  the  same  effect  as  any  given 
distribution  of  couple,  round  axes  everywhere  perpendicular  to 
the  normal  surface  supposed  to  constitute  the  edge.  To  prove 
this  let  equal  forces  act  in  opposite  directions  in  lines  EF,E'F' 
on  each  side  of  the  middle  line  and  parallel  to  it,  constituting 
the  supposed  distribution  of  couple.  It  must  be  understood 
that  the  forces  are  actually  distributed  along  their  lines  of 
action,  and  not,  as  in  the  abstract  dynamics  of  ideal  rigid  bodies, 
applied  indifferently  at  any  points  of  these  lines;  but  the 


STATICS. 


191 


64  6.] 

amount  of  the  force  per  unit  of  length,  though  equal  in  the  Distribu- 

....  1 ° ° . tion  of 

neighbouring  parts  of  the  two  lines,  must  differ  from  point  to 
point  along  the  edge,  to  constitute  any  other  than  a uniform  "lined, 
distribution  of  couple.  Lastly, 
we  may  suppose  the  forces  in 
the  opposite  directions  to  be  not 
confined  to  two  lines,  as  shown 
in  the  diagram,  but  to  be  diffused 
over  the  two  halves  of  the  edge 
on  the  two  sides  of  its  middle 
line;  and  further,  the  amount  of 
them  in  equal  infinitely  small 
breadths  at  different  distances 
from  the  middle  line  must  be 
proportional  to  these  distances, 
as  stated  in  § 634  (3),  if  the  given 

distribution  of  couple  is  to  be  thoroughly  such  as  H of  § 645. 

Let  now  the  whole  edge  be  divided  into  infinitely  small 
rectangles,  such  as  ABCD  in  the  diagram,  by  lines  drawn  per- 
pendicularly across  it.  In  one  of  these  rectangles  apply  a 
balancing  system  of  couples  consisting  of  a diffused  couple 
equal  and  opposite  to  the  part  of  the  given  distribution  of 
couple  belonging  to  the  area  of  the  rectangle,  and  a couple 
of  single  forces  in  the  lines  AD,  CB,  of  equal  and  opposite 
moment.  This  balancing  system  obviously  cannot  cause  any 
sensible  disturbance  (stress  or  strain)  in  the  plate,  except 
within  a distance  comparable  with  the  sides  of  the  rectangle ; 
and,  therefore,  when  the  same  tiling  is  done  in  all  the  rectangles 
into  which  the  edge  is  divided,  the  plate  is  only  disturbed  to 
an  infinitely  small  distance  from  the  edge  inwards  all  round. 

But  the  given  distribution  of  couple  is  thus  removed  (beino- 
directly  balanced  by  a system  of  diffused  force  equal  and 
opposite  everywhere  to  that  constituting  it),  and  there  remains 
only  the  set  of  forces  applied  in  the  cross  lines.  Of  these  there 
are  two  in  each  cross  line,  derived  from  the  operations  per- 
formed in  the  two  rectangles  of  which  it  is  a common  side,  and 
their  difference  alone  remains  effective.  Thus  we  see  that  if 
the  given  distribution  of  couple  be  uniform  along  the  edge,  it 


produces 
same  flexure 
as  a given 
distribution 
of  couple 
round  axes 
perpen- 
dicular to 
boundary. 


192 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[046. 

may  be  removed  without  disturbing  the  condition  of  the  plate 
except  infinitely  near  the  edge : in  other  words, 

Uniform  647.  A uniform  distribution  of  couple  alonq  the  whole  edae 

distribution  , , . * J 1 J J 

of  twisting  of  a finite  plate,  everywhere  round  axes  in  the  plane  of  the  plate , 

iCxure'10  an<^  PerPendicular  t°  ^e  edge,  produces  distortion,  spreading  to 
only  infinitely  small  distances  inwards  from  the  edge  all  round, 
and  no  stress  or  distortion  of  the  plate  as  a whole.  The  truth  of 
this  remarkable  proposition  is  also  obvious  when  we  consider 
that  the  tendency  of  such  a distribution  of  couple  can  only  be 
to  drag  the  two  sides  of  the  edge  infinitesimally  in  opposite 
directions  round  the  area  of  the  plate.  Later  (§  728)  we  shall 
investigate  strictly  the  strain,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  edge, 
produced  by  it,  and  we  shall  find  (§  729)  that  it  diminishes  with 
extreme  rapidity  inwards  from  the  edge,  becoming  practically  in- 
sensible at  distances  exceeding  twice  the  thickness  of  the  plate. 


The  distri- 
bution of 
shearing 
force  that 
produces 
same  flexure 
as  from  dis- 
tribution of 
twisting 
couple. 


648.  A distribution  of  couple  on  the  edge  of  a plate,  round 
axes  everywhere  in  the  plane  of  the  plate,  and  perpendicular  to 
the  edge,  of  any  given  amount  per  unit  of  length  of  the  edge,  may 
be  removed , and,  instead,  a distribution  of  force  perpendicular  to 
the  qolate,  equal  in  amount  per  unit  length  of  the  edge,  to  the  rate 
of  variation  per  unit  length  of  the  amount  of  the  couple,  without 
altering  the  flexure  of  the  plate  as  a whole,  or  producing  any  dis- 
turbance in  its  stress  or  strain  except  infinitely  near  the  edge. 

In  the  diagram  of  § 646  let  AB  — Ss.  Then  if  H be  the 
amount  of  the  given  couple  per  unit  length  along  the  edge,  be- 
tween AD,  BC , the  amount  of  it  on  the  rectangle  ABCD  is  Hh<, 
and  therefore  H must  be  the  amount  of  the  forces  introduced  along 
AD,  CB,  in  order  that  they  may  constitute  a couple  of  the  requi- 
site moment.  Similarly,  if  II'Ss  denote  the  amount  of  the  couple 
in  the  contiguous  rectangle  on  the  other  side  of  BC,  the  force  in 
BC  derived  from  it  will  be  Id'  in  the  direction  opposite  to  H. 
There  remains  effective  in  BC  a single  force  equal  to  the  differ- 
ence, H'—H. 

If  from  A to  B be  the  direction  in  which  we  suppose  s,  a length 
measured  along  the  edge  from  any  zero  point,  to  increase,  we  have 

did 


TT 


/ 


648.] 


STATICS. 


193 


Thus  we  are  left  with  single  forces,  equal  to  — - 8s,  applied  in  bu’tloi^or'" 

, _ S shearing 

lines  perpendicularly  across  the  edge,  at  consecutive  distances  p^duees* 

8s  from  one  another:  and  for  this  we  may  substitute,  with- sanlenexure 

. J ’ as  from  dis- 

out  causing  disturbance  except  infinitely  near  the  edge,  a con-  tribution  of 
..  . J ° ’ twisting 

tinuous  distribution  of  transverse  force,  amounting  to  dH/ds  per  couple. 

unit  length ; which  is  the  proposition  to  be  proved.  The  direc- 
tion of  this  force,  when  dH/ds  is  positive,  is  that  of  z negative : 
whence  immediately  the  form  of  it  expressed  in  (4)  of  § 645. 


649.  As  a first  example  of  the  application  of  these  equa-  Case  of  eir- 
tions,  we  shall  consider  the  very  simple  case  of  a uniform  cularstraui‘ 
plate  of  finite  or  infinite  extent,  symmetrically  influenced  in 
concentric  circles  by  a load  distributed  symmetrically,  and  by 
proper  boundary  appliances  if  required. 


Let  the  origin  of  co-ordinates  be  chosen  at  the  centre  of  sym- 
metry, and  let  r,  6 be  polar  co-ordinates  of  any  point  P,  so  that 

x = r cos  6,  y — r sin  6. 

The  second  member  of  (6),  § 644,  will  be  a function  of  r,  which 
for  brevity  we  may  now  denote  simply  by  ^ (being  the  amount 
of  load  per  unit  area  when  the  applied  forces  on  each  small  part 
are  reducible  to  a single  normal  force  through  some  point  of  it). 

Since  * is  now  a function  of  r,  and,  as  we  have  seen  before 
[§491  («)], 

2 Id/  du\ 

VK  = 

when  u is  any  function  of  r,  equation  (6)  of  § 644  becomes 

Adi  d T1  d / „ 

rdr\rdr[r<b\rdr)  ) = Z (')■ 

Hence 


Z a\t  frdr  f ^frZdr+lG(l°gr-1)ra+lC'rS+C"logr+C/"...(2)) 

which  is  the  complete  integral,  with  the  four  arbitrary  constants 
explicitly  shown.  The  following  expressions,  founded  on  inter- 
mediate integrals,  deserve  attention  now,  as  promoting  a thorough 
comprehension  of  the  solution ; and  some  of  them  will  be  required 
later  for  expressing  the  boundary  conditions.  The  notation  of 
(7)  will  be  explained  in  § 650  : — 

VOL.  II. 


13 


194 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[G49. 


Plate 

circularly 

strained. 


/inclination,  divided  by  radius  ; or  curvature  in 
\ normal  section  perpendicular  to  radius 


) 


C 


l dir^Srdr  jrjr2dr+ hCQ°gr-h)+ic+  r 

(curvature  in  radial  section) 

■p  — S*  /•*  jjjr^r+\f^jrZdr+mogr+mC'^ 


(sum  of  curvatures  in  rectangular  sections)] 

1 (dr 


V * 


-im 


rZdr  + C log  r + O' 


. d2z  dz  r. 

A -O  + c ~~T  = Cr 

or  rar 


■(3), 


••(4), 


• (5), 


lrdrf^jrZdr+  f~JrZdr+^C{(A  + c)  log r+tfA-c)}  j»  ...(G), 


//=0 


+ lC\A  + c)-C"(A-c)^ 


T d2z  . dk 

L — C . „ + -a.  — y , 

ar  rar 


•(7), 


Of  these  (6)  and  (8)  express,  according  to  the  notation  of  § 645, 
the  couple  and  the  shearing  force  acting  on  the  normal  surface 
cutting  the  middle  surface  of  the  plate  in  the  circle  of  radius  r. 
They  are  derivable  analytically  from  our  solution  (2)  by  means  of 
(2),  (3),  and  (1)  of  § 645,  with  (4)  of  § 644,  and  (15)  of  § 642. 
The  work  is  of  course  much  shortened  by  taking  y = 0,  and 
x = r,  and  using  (3)  and  (4)  of  the  present  section.  The  student 
may  go  through  this  process,  with  or  without  the  abbreviation,  as 
an  analytical  exercise  ; but  it  is  more  instructive,  as  well  as  more 
direct,  to  investigate  ah  initio  the  equilibrium  of  a plate  sym- 
metrically strained  in  concentric  circles,  and  so,  in  the  course 
of  an  independent  demonstration  of  (6)  § 644,  for  this  case, 
or  (1)  § 649,  to  find  expressions  for  the  flexural  and  shearing 

stresses. 


G50.] 


STATICS. 


195 


650.  It  is  clear  that,  in  every  part  of  the  plate,  the  normal 
sections  (§  G37)  of  maximum  and  minimum,  or  minimum  and 
maximum,  bending  couples  are  those  through  and  perpen- 
dicular  to  the  radius  drawn  from  0 the  centre  of  symmetry. 
At  distance  r from  0,  let  L and  G be  the  bending  couples  in 
the  section  through  the  radius,  and  in  the  section  perpen- 
dicular to  it ; so  that,  if  X and  k be  the  curvatures  in  these 
sections,  we  have,  by  (10)  of  § G41  and  (15)  of  § G42, 


A = AX  + ck  | 

Q-  CK  +A/c  J 

Let  also  f be  the  shearing  force  (§  61G,  footnote)  in  the 
circular  normal  section  of  radius  r.  The  symmetry  requires 
that  there  be  no  shearing  force  in  radial  normal  sections. 

Considering  now  an  element,  E,  bounded  by  two  radii 
making  an  infinitely  small  angle  SB  with  one  another,  and 
two  concentric  circles  of  radii  r-iSr  and  r + J&-  we  see 
that  the  equal  couples  LSr  on  its  radial  normal  sections,  round 
axes  falling  short  of  direct  opposition  by  the  infinitely  small 
angle  SB,  have  a resultant  equal  to  LSrSB  round  an  axis  per- 
pendicular to  the  middle  radius,  in  the  negative  direction  when 
L is  positive;  and  the  infinitely  nearly  equal  couples  on  its 
outer  and  inner  circular  edges  have  a resultant  round  the  same 

axis,  equal  to  ( GrSB ) Sr,  being  the  difference  of  the  values  taken 

'll  Whrt;  " f ' aQd  r + iBr  al'e  PUt  fOT  '•  There  is  also 

Itch  fi  6 Stearm8  WS  °n  the  outer  and  inner  ®dges, 

Tm,  H ^ ne”y,eqUal  t0  °f  which  moment  is 

these  toupltr  equilibrium  of  E under  the  action  of 


d 


~ LMe  + (Gr)  8, -SB  + irSBSr  = 0, 


or 


if. 


d 


L + 2r  = °- 


(10), 


be  nh  e d 1 fro  ^ ° W ‘ °0n Venien do>  we  suppose  no  couples  to 

bount:  e ^ ^ * “J  ^ °f  th*  ^ its 

* gGS-  Again’  considering  normal  forces  on  E,  we 


13—2 


Indepen- 
dent inves- 
tigation for 
circular 
strain. 


196 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[650. 


Indepen- 
dent inves- 
tigation for 
circular 
strain. 


Interpre- 
tation of 
terms  in 
integral. 


d 


have  4-  (£W>0)  Sr  for  the  sum  of  those  acting  on  it  from  the  con- 

Co  / 


tiguous  matter  of  the  plate,  and  ZrSd&r  from  external  matter 
if,  as  above,  Z denote  the  amount  of  applied  normal  force  per 
unit  area  of  the  plate.  Hence,  for  the  equilibrium  of  these 


forces, 

§;(&)  + Zr  = 0 (11). 


Substituting  for  £ in  (11)  by  (10);  for  L and  G in  the  result 
by  (9)  ; and,  in  the  result  of  this,  for  A and  k their  expressions 
by  the  differential  calculus,  which  are  dzjrdr  and  ddz/dr2,  since 
the  plate  is  a surface  of  revolution  differing  infinitely  little  from 
a plane  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  we  arrive  finally  at  (1)  the 
differential  equation  of  the  problem.  Of  the  other  formulae  of 
§ 649,  (6),  (7),  (8)  follow  immediately  from  (9)  and  (10)  now 
proved : except  H = 0,  which  follows  from  the  fact  that  the 
radial  and  circular  normal  sections  are  the  sections  of  maximum 
and  minimum,  or  minimum  and  maximum,  curvature. 

651.  We  are  now  able  to  perceive  the  meaning  of  each  of 
the  four  arbitrary  constants. 


(1)  G"  is  of  course  merely  a displacement  of  the  plate 
without  strain. 

(2)  G"  log  r is  a displacement  which  produces  anticlastic 
curvature  throughout,  with  ± (7"/r2  for  the  curvatures  in  the  two 
principal  sections : corresponding  to  which  the  bending  couples, 
L,  G , are  equal  to  ± (A  - c)  C"/r\  An  infinite  plane  plate,  with 
a circular  aperture,  and  a uniform  distribution  of  bending  couple 
applied  to  the  edge  all  round,  in  each  part  round  the  tangent  as 
axis,  would  experience  this  effect ; as  we  see  from  the  fact  that 
the  stress  in  the  plate,  due  to  G",  diminishes  according  to  the 
inverse  square  of  the  distance  from  the  centre  of  symmetry. 
It  is  remarkable  that  although  the  absolute  value  of  the  deflec- 
tion, C"  log  r,  is  infinite  for  infinite  values  of  r,  the  restrictive 
condition  (3)  of  § 632  is  not  violated  provided  C"  is  infinitely 
small  in  comparison  with  the  thickness : and  it  may  be  readily 
proved  that  the  law  (1)  of  § 633  is,  in  point  of  fact,  fulfilled  by 


STATICS. 


197 


G51.] 


this  deflection,  even  if  the  whole  displacement  has  rigorously  Jjhrp™- 
this  value,  C " log  r,  and  is  precisely  in  the  direction  perpen-  terms  m 
dicular  to  the  undisturbed  plane.  For  this  case  £=0,  or  there 
is  no  shear. 

(3)  | CV  is  a displacement  corresponding  to  spherical 
curvature  : and  therefore  involving  simply  a uniform  synclastic 
stress  [§  638  (1)],  of  which  the  amount  is  of  course  [§  641 
(10)  or  (11)]  equal  to  A+c  divided  by  the  radius  of  curva- 
ture, or  (A  + c)  x \C' , agreeing  with  the  equal  values  given 
for  L and  G by  (6)  and  (7)  of  § 649.  In  this  case  also  £ = 0,  or 
there  is  no  shearing  force.  A finite  plate  of  any  shape,  acted 
on  by  a uniform  bending  couple  all  round  its  edge,  becomes 
bent  thus  spherically. 

(4)  \ <7(log  r — l)r2  is  a deflection  involving  a shearing  force 
equal  to  — AG/r,  and  a bending  couple, 

£(7{(A-f  c)logr  + £(A-c)J, 
in  the  circle  of  distance  r from  the  centre  of  symmetry. 


652.  It  is  now  a problem  of  the  merest  algebra  to  find  Symmetri- 
the  flexure  of  a flat  ring,  or  portion  of  plane  plate  bounded  by  °f  flat  ring, 
two  concentric  circles,  when  acted  on  by  any  given  bending 
couples  and  transverse  forces  applied  uniformly  round  its 
outer  and  inner  edges.  For  equilibrium,  the  forces  on  the 
outer  and  inner  edges  must  be  in  contrary  directions,  and  of 
equal  amounts.  Thus  we  have  three  arbitrary  data : the 
amounts  of  the  couple  applied  to  the  two  edges,  each  reckoned 
per  unit  of  length,  and  the  whole  amount,  F}  of  the  force  on 
either  edge.  By  (4),  § 651,  or  (8)  of  § 649,  we  see  that 


— C = 


F 
2t rA 


>(12); 


and  there  remain  unknown  the  two  constants,  C'  and  G" , to  be 
determined  from  the  two  equations  given  by  putting  the  ex- 
pression for  G [(6)  of  § 649]  equal  to  the  equal  values  for  the 
values  of  r at  the  outer  and  inner  edges  respectively. 

Example. — A circular  table  (of  isotropic  material),  with  a 
concentric  circular  aperture,  is  supported  by  its  outer  edge, 


198 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[652. 


Symmotri-  which  rests  simply  on  a horizontal  circle ; and  is  deflected  by 

cal  flexure  1 J 7 J 

of  fiat  ring,  a load  uniformly  distributed  over  its  inner  edge  (or  vice  versd, 
inner  for  outer).  To  find  the  deflection  due  to  this  load  (which 
of  course  is  simply  added  to  the  deflection  due  to  the  weight, 
determined  below).  Here  G must  vanish  at  each  edge. 

The  radii  of  the  outer  and  inner  edges  being  a and  a , the 
equations  are 

1 G{(A  + c ) log  a + l(A-  c)}+  \C\A  + c)  - G"(A -c)\  = 0, 
and  the  same  with  a'  for  a.  Hence 


Flexure  of 
flat  ring 
equilibrated 
by  forces 
symmetri- 
cally distri- 
buted over 
its  edges ; 


C»(4-c)(i  - ^y-lCU+c) log%, 

and 

i C'  (A  + c)  ( a 2 - a'2)  = - $ C [(A +c)  (a2  log  a - a'2  log  a')  + \ (A  - c)  ( a 2 - a'2)] : 
and  thus,  using  for  C its  value  (12),  we  find  [(2)  § 649] 


F 

2vA 


[*(- 


log  r + 1 + 


a?  log  a - a'2  log 


a2 a'2  log 


a2  — a- 


- + i^rr)  ^+4t±£  — — IT-  lo°  J-+  G"'~\ 

~A  + cJ  - A-c  a2 -a2  J 


Putting  the  factor  of  r2  into  a more  convenient  form,  and  assign- 
ing C'"  so  that  the  deflection  may  be  reckoned  from  the  level  of 
the  inner  edge,  we  have  finally 


F 


Z 2t tA 


+ 


a' 


a ' . a 

,2  log 


a ■ 


a 


o 

?•" 


+ i 


A + c 
A-c 


d a ‘ log  — 
° a 

a2-  a!2 


iog  - i 


a a 

2 f 
a2  — a 


. a , oA  + c 

T7 


a']...  (13) 


Towards  showing  the  distribution  of  stress  through  the  breadth 
of  the  ring,  we  have  from  this,  by  § 649  (6), 


G = 


F 

27 ra 


A(A+c)(^r- 


a , r a' a 

— log  --log - - — — 
a a a a 


a 


lo 

'2 


which,  as  it  ought  to  do,  vanishes  when  r = a,  and  when  r = a. 


Further,  by  § 649  (8), 


(15), 


which  shows  that,  as  is  obviously  true,  the  whole  amount  of  the 
transverse  force  in  any  concentric  circle  of  the  ring  is  equal  to  F. 


STATICS. 


199 


653.] 


653.  Tlie  problem  of  § 652,  extended  to  admit  a load  dis- 
tributed  in  any  symmetrical  manner  over  the  surface  of  the 
ring  instead  of  merely  confined  to  one  edge,  is  solved lts  area- 
algebraically  in  precisely  the  same  manner,  when  the  terms 
dependent  on  Z \ and  exhibited  in  the  several  expressions  of 
§ 649,  are  found  by  integration.  One  important  remark  we 
have  to  make  however : that  much  needless  labour  is  avoided 
by  treating  Z as  a discontinuous  function  in  these  integrations 
in  cases  in  which  one  continuous  algebraic  or  transcendental 
function  does  not  express  the  distribution  of  load  over  the 
whole  portion  of  plate  considered.  Unless  this  jDlan  were 
followed,  the  expression  for  z,  dz/dr,  G,  and  £,  would  have  to  be 
worked  out  separately  for  each  annular  portion  of  plate  through 
which  Z is  continuous,  and  their  values  equated  on  each  side 
of  each  separating  circle.  Hence  if  there  were  % annular 
portions  to  be  thus  treated  separately  there  would  be  4>i 
arbitrary  constants,  to  be  determined  by  the  4 (i—  1)  equations 
so  obtained,  and  the  4 equations  expressing  that  at  the  outer 
and  inner  bounding  circular  edges  G has  the  prescribed  values 
(whether  zero  or  not)  of  the  applied  bending  couples,  and  that 
z and  £ have  each  a prescribed  value  at  one  or  other  of  these 
circles.  But  by  the  more  artful  method  (due  to  Fourier  and 
Poisson),  the  complication  of  detail  required  in  virtue  of  the 
discontinuity  of  Z is  confined  to  the  successive  integrations; 
and  the  arbitrary  constants,  of  which  there  are  now  but  four, 
are  determined  by  the  conditions  for  the  two  extreme  bounding 
edges. 


Example. — A circular  table  (of  isotropic  material),  with  a 
concentric  circular  aperture,  is  borne  by  its  outer  or  inner  edge 
which  rests  simply  on  a horizontal  circular  support,  and  is 
loaded  by  matter  uniformly  distributed  over  an  annular  area  of 
its  surface,  extending  from  its  inner  edge  outwards  to  a con- 
centric circle  of  given  radius,  c.  It  is  required  to  find  the 
flexure. 


First,  supposing  the  aperture  filled  up,  and  the  plate  uniform 
from  outer  edge  to  centre,  let  the  whole  circle  of  radius  c be 
uniformly  loaded  at  the  rate  w,  a constant,  per  unit  of  its  area. 


200 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[653. 


We  have 


Z = 

JrZdr= 

Sj 

<-*-4 

II 

frdrf~  J'rZdr  = 

When  r = 0 

IV 

0 

0 

0 

,,  <c 

w 

W 

Jar* 

r\wr4 

„ >c 

0 

\WC“ 

p«c2^  2 log?-  + l^ 

juivc-  ^4r2  log  I +c2^ 

i. 

ii. 

in. 

IV. 

f */’*/*/**- 
0 

four4 

fgtcc2  f 2r2  log  --  ?*2  + c2  log  - + £ c 
V c c 

V. 


Circular 
table  of 
isotropic 
material, 
supported 
symmetri- 
cally on  its 
edge,  and 
strained 
only  by  its 
own  weight. 


Of  these  results,  v.  used  in  (2)  gives  the  general  solution;  and 
iv.,  hi.,  and  ii.  in  (6)  and  (8)  give  the  corresponding  expressions 
for  G and  £.  If,  first,  we  suppose  the  value  of  G thus  found  to 
have  any  given  value  for  each  of  two  values,  r\  r",  of  r,  and  £ to 
have  a given  value  for  one  of  these  values  of  r,  we  have  three 
simple  algebraic  equations  to  find  C,  C,  C";  and  we  solve  a more 
general  problem  than  that  proposed  ; to  which  we  descend  by 
making  the  prescribed  values  of  G and  £ zero.  The  power  of 
mathematical  expression  and  analysis  in  dealing  with  discon- 
tinuous functions,  is  strikingly  exemplified  in  the  applicability 
of  the  result  not  only  to  the  contemplated  case,  in  which  c is  in- 
termediate between  r and  r";  but  also  to  cases  in  which  c is  less 
than  either  (when  we  fall  back  on  the  previous  case,  of  § 652), 
or  c greater  than  either  (when  we  have  a solution  more  directly 
obtainable  by  taking  Z = w for  all  values  of  r). 

If  the  plate  is  in  reality  continuous  to  its  centre,  and  uniformly 
loaded  over  the  whole  area  of  the  circle  of  radius  c,  we  must 
have  G = 0 and  G"  = 0 to  avoid  infinite  values  of  £ and  G at  the 
centre:  and  the  equation  £ = 0 for  the  outer  boundary  of  the 
disc  gives  C'  at  once,  completing  the  determination.  If,  lastly, 
we  suppose  c to  be  not  less  than  the  radius  of  the  disc,  we  have 
the  solution  for  a uniform  circular  disc  uniformly  supported 
round  its  edge,  and  strained  only  by  its  own  weight. 


654  If  now  we  consider  the  general  problem, — to  deter- 
probTemlo  mine  the  flexure  of  a plate  of  any  form,  with  an  arbitrary 
SoUr°  distribution  of  load  over  it,  and  with  arbitrary  boundary 
area-  appliances,  subject  of  course  to  the  condition  that  all  the 
applied  forces,  when  the  data  are  entirely  of  force,  must  con- 


STATICS. 


201 


054.] 


stitute  an  equilibrating  system ; we  may  immediately  reduce  Reduction 
this  problem  to  the  simpler  one  in  which  there  is  no  load  problem  to 

. 1 A 1 , . case  of  no 

distributed  over  the  area,  but  arbitrary  boundary  appliances  load  over 
only.  We  shall  merely  sketch  the  mathematical  investigation. 

First  it  is  easily  proved,  as  for  a corresponding  expression  for 
three  independent  variables  in  § 491  (c),  that 

(rfS  + 5?)  log  Ddx'dy'^r, (1), 

where  p is  any  function  of  two  independent  variables,  x',  y' ; 
p the  same  function  of  x , y;  D denotes  J{(x- x')2  + (y  - y')2}; 
and  ff  denotes  integration  over  an  area  comprehending  all  values 
of  x,  y',  for  which  p does  not  vanish.  Hence 


if 


u — Z 


XI  = 


4tt 


JJdx'dy'  log  Djj dx"dy"Z"  log  U . 


(2), 

(3), 


where  D'  = J{(x"  - x')*  + (y"  - y')3} ; and  if  Z"  and  Z denote 
the  values  for  ( x ",  y")  and  (pc,  y)  of  any  arbitrary  function  of  two 
independent  variables.  Let  this  function  denote  the  amount  of 
load  per  unit  of  area,  which  we  may  suppose  to  vanish  for  all 
values  of  the  co-ordinates  not  included  in  the  plate;  and  to  avoid 
trouble  regarding  limits,  let  all  the  integrals  be  supposed  to 
extend  from  -go  to  +co.  We  thus  have,  in  z = u,  a solution 
of  our  equation  (2):  and  therefore  z — u must  satisfy  the  same 
equation  with  the  second  member  replaced  by  zero  : or,  if  \ 
denote  a general  solution  of 


then  z = u + i (5) 

is  the  general  solution  of  (2).  The  boundary  conditions  for  jt  are 
of  course  had  by  substituting  u+\  for  z in  the  directly  prescribed 
boundary  equations,  whatever  they  may  be. 


655.  Mathematicians  have  not  hitherto  succeeded  in  solving  Fiatcircu- 
this  problem  with  complete  generality,  for  any  other  form  of  Sy  caKsehe 
plate  than  the  circular  ring  (or  circular  disc  with  concentric  sofeto 
circular  aperture).  Having  given  (§§  640,  653)  a detailed 


202 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Flat  circu- 
lar ring  the 
only  case 
hitherto 
solved. 


[G55. 


solution  of  the  problem  for  this  case,  subject  to  the  restriction  of 
symmetry,  we  shall  merely  indicate  the  extension  of  the  analysis 
to  include  any  possible  non-symmetrical  distribution  of  strain. 
The  same  analysis,  under  much  simpler  conditions,  will  occur  to 
us  again  and  again,  and  will  be  on  some  points  more  minutely 
detailed,  when  we  shall  be  occupied  with  important  practical 
problems  regarding  electric  influence,  fluid  motion,  and  electric 
and  thermal  conduction,  through  cylindrical  spaces. 


Taking  the  centre  of  the  circular  bounding  edges  as  origin  for 
polar  co-ordinates,  let 


x = r cos  6,  y = r sin  6. 


We  easily  find  by  transformation 

d~\  +ds\  _ 1 d / d\\  1 cl~i 

dx2  dy 2 r dr  \ dr)  + r2  c W2 


If  we  put 
this  becomes 


log  r = &,  or  r = e^ 

dx 2 dy 2 6 \<^2  dd2) 


Hence  if,  as  before,  y2  denote  „ 

dx~  dy 


VI 


I 


W2  + do2)*  ^ [d$2  + d6a) 1 


(6). 

(7) , 

(8) . 


(9). 


This  equated  to  zero  gives 

d2\  d2i 
d$2  + d02 


A 


(10), 


if  v denote  any  solution  of 


d2v  d2v 

d$2+W2  = ° 


(11). 


We  shall  see,  when  occupied  with  the  electric  and  other  problems 
referred  to  above,  that  a general  solution  of  this  equation,  appro- 
priate for  our  present  problem  as  for  all  involving  the  expression 
of  arbitrary  functions  of  6 for  particular  values  of  3,  is 


v = 2 {(At. cos  id  + sin  i6) + (S^cos  iO  + ^sini^e  ^}...(12), 

where  Au  Bi}  are  constants.  That  this  is  a solution,  is 

of  course  verified  in  a moment  by  differentiation.  From  it  we 


STATICS. 


203 


655.]  

readily  find  (and  tlie  result  of  course  is  verified  also  by  diffe- 
rentiation), 

}=if0|(f  + 2)«-t« {Ai  cosid  + Bi  sin  ie)  «(t+2)^| 

+ 2 cosi(?  + 33/  sin  iff)  cos  0 4- 23x  sin  0 ) S-e^-f  v' 

(13), 

v being  any  solution  of  (11),  which  may  be  conveniently  taken 
as  given  by  (12)  with  accented  letters  A!,  etc.,  to  denote  four 
new  constants.  If  now  the  arbitrary  periodic  functions  of  6, 
with  2tt  for  period,  given  as  the  values  whether  of  displacement, 
or  shearing  force,  or  couple,  for  the  outer  and  inner  circular 
edges,  be  expressed  by  Fourier’s  theorem  [§  77  (14)]  in  simple 
harmonic  seines;  the  two  equations  [§  645  (5)]  for  each  edge, 
applied  separately  to  the  coefficients  of  cos  id  and  sin  id  in  the 
expressions  thus  obtained,  give  eight  equations  for  determining 
the  eight  constants  Aif  $Lti  Bt , 33.,  A/,  &/,  B!,  33/. 

656.  Although  the  problem  of  fulfilling  arbitrary  boundary 
conditions  has  not  yet  been  solved  for  rectangular  plates,  there 
is  one  remarkable  case  of  it  which  deserves  particular  notice ; 
not  only  as  interesting  in  itself,  and  important  in  practical 
application,  but  as  curiously  illustrating  one  of  the  most 
difficult  points 


Flat  circu- 
lar ring  the 
only  case 
hitherto 
solved. 


Rectangu- 
lar  plate, 
held  and 
loaded  by 
diagonal 
pairs  of 
corners. 


646,  648]  of  the 
general  theory.  A 
rectangular  plate 
acted  on  perpen- 
dicularly by  a 
balancing  system 
of  four  equal  pa- 
rallel forces  ap- 
plied at  its  four 
corners,  becomes  strained  to  a condition  of  uniform  anti- 
clastic  curvature  throughout,  with  the  sections  of  no-flexure 
paiallel  to  its  sides,  and  therefore  with  sections  of  equal  oppo- 
site maximum  curvature  in  the  normal  planes  inclined  to  the 
sides  at  45°.  This  follows  immediately  from  § 648,  if  we 

suppose  the  corners  rounded  off  ever  so  little,  and  the  forces 
diffused  over  them. 


204 


Rectangu- 
lar plate, 
held  and 
loaded  by 
diagonal 
pairs  of 
corners. 


Transition 
to  finite 
flexures  in- 
dicated. 


Transmis- 
sion of  force 
through  an 
elastic  solid. 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [656 

» 

Or,  in  each  of  an  infinite  number  of  normal  lines  in  tbe  edge 
AB,  let  a pair  of  opposite  forces  eacli  equal  to  \P  be  applied ; 
which  cannot  disturb  the  plate.  These,  with  halves  of  the  single 
forces  P in  the  dissimilar  directions  at  the  corners  A and  B,  con- 
stitute a diffused  couple  over  the  whole  edge  AB,  amounting  in 
moment  per  unit  of  length  to  \P,  round  axes  perpendicular 
to  the  plane  of  the  edge.  Similarly,  the  other  halves  of  the 
forces  P at  the  corners  A,  B,  with  halves  of  those  at  C and 
B and  introduced  balancing  forces,  constitute  diffused  couples 
over  the  edges  CA  and  DB ; and  the  remaining  halves  of  the 
corner  forces  at  C and  D,  with  introduced  balancing  forces,  con- 
stitute a diffused  couple  over  CD ; each  having  IP  for  the 
amount  of  moment  per  unit  length  of  the  edge  over  which  it  is 
diffused.  Their  directions  are  mutually  related  in  the  manner 
specified  in  § 638  (2),  and  thus  taken  all  together,  they  constitute 
an  anticlastic  stress  of  value  Q — \P-  Hence  (§  642)  the  result 
is  uniform  anticlastic  strain  amounting  to  \ Pjk,  and  having  its 
axes  inclined  at  45°  to  the  edges ; that  is  to  say  (§  639),  a flexure 
with  maximum  curvatures  on  the  two  sides  of  the  tangent 
plane  each  equal  to  4 Pjk,  and  in  normal  sections  in  the  positions 
stated. 

657.  Few  problems  of  physical  mathematics  are  more 
curious  than  that  presented  by  the  transition  from  this  solu- 
tion, founded  on  the  supposition  that  the  greatest  deflection 
is  but  a small  fraction  of  the  thickness  of  the  plate,  to  the 
solution  for  larger  flexures,  in  which  corner  portions  will  bend 
approximately  as  developable  surfaces  (cylindrical,  in  fact),  and 
a central  quadrilateral  part  will  remain  infinitely  nearly  plane; 
and  thence  to  the  extreme  case  of  an  infinitely  thin  perfectly 
flexible  rectangle  of  inextensible  fabric.  This  extreme  case  may 
be  easily  observed  and  experimented  on  by  taking  a carefully 
cut  rectangle  of  paper  (§  145),  supporting  it  by  flue  threads 
attached  to  two  opposite  corners,  and  kept  parallel,  while  two 
equal  weights  are  liung  by  threads  from  the  other  corners. 

658.  The  definitions  and  investigations  regarding  strain  of 
§§  154 — 190  constitute  a kinematical  introduction  to  the  theory 
of  elastic  solids.  We  must  now,  in  commencing  the  elementary 
dynamics  of  the  subject,  consider  the  forces  called  into  play 


STATICS. 


205 


658.]  

through  the  interior  of  a solid  when  brought  into  a condition  of 
strain.  We  adopt,  from  Rankine*  the  term  stress  to  designate  ^uRhan 
such  forces,  as  distinguished  from  strain  defined  (§  154)  to  ex- 
press the  merely  geometrical  idea  of  a change  of  volume  or 
figure. 

659.  When  through  any  space  in  a body  under  the  action  nomoKene- 

° J 1 . ous  stress. 

of  force,  the  mutual  force  between  the  portions  of  matter  on  the 
two  sides  of  any  plane  area  is  equal  and  parallel  to  the  mutual 
force  across  any  equal,  similar,  and  parallel  plane  area,  the  stress 
is  said  to  be  homogeneous  through  that  space.  In  other  words, 
the  stress  experienced  by  the  matter  is  homogeneous  through 
any  space  if  all  equal  similar  and  similarly  turned  portions  of 
matter  within  this  space  are  similarly  and  equally  influenced  by 
force. 


660.  To  be  able  to  find  the  distribution  of  force  over  the 
surface  of  any  portion  of  matter  homogeneously  stressed,  we 
must  know  the  direction,  and  the  amount  per  unit  area,  of  the 
force  across  a plane  area  cutting  through  it  in  any  direction. 
Now  if  we  know  this  for  any  three  planes,  in  three  different 
directions,  we  can  find  it  for  a plane  in  any  direction,  as  we  see 
in  a moment  by  considering  what  is  necessary  for  the  equili- 
brium of  a tetrahedron  of  the  substance.  The  resultant  force  on 
one  of  its  faces  must  be  equal  and  ojyposite  to  the  resultant  of 
the  forces  on  the  three  others,  which  is  known  if  these  faces  are 
parallel  to  the  three  planes  for  each  of  which  the  force  is  given. 

661.  Hence  the  stress,  in  a body  homogeneously  stressed,  is 
completely  specified  when  the  direction,  and  the  amount  per  unit 
area,  of  the  force  on  each  of  three  distinct  planes  is  given.  It  is, 
in  the  analytical  treatment  of  the  subject,  generally  convenient 
to  take  these  planes  of  reference  at  right  angles  to  one  another. 
But  we  should  immediately  fall  into  error  did  we  not  remark 
that  the  specification  here  indicated  consists  not  of  nine  but  in 
reality  only  of  six  independent  elements.  For  if  the  equili- 
brating forces  on  the  six  faces  of  a cube  be  each  resolved  into 
three  components  parallel  to  its  three  edges  OX,  OY,  OZ,  we 
have  in  all  18  forces;  of  which  each  pair  acting  perpendicularly 

* Cambridge  and  Dublin  Mathematical  Journal,  1850. 


Force  trans- 
mitted 
across  any 
surface  in 
elastic  solid. 


Specifica- 
tion of  a 
stress; 


by  six  inde- 
pendent 
elements. 


200 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[061 


Relations 
between 
pairs  of 
tangential 
tractions 
necessary 
for  equili- 
brium. 


on  a pair  of  opposite  faces,  being  equal  and  directly  opposed, 
balance  one  another.  The  twelve  tangential  components  that 


remain  constitute  three  pairs 


lei  to  0 Y,  are  equal  to  those 
and  that  the  forces  on  {xz), 
on  {zy),  parallel  to  OY. 


of  couples  having  their  axes  in  the 
direction  of  the  three  edges,  each 
of  which  must  separately  be  in 
equilibrium.  The  diagram  shows 
the  pair  of  equilibrating  couples 
having  OY  for  axis;  from  the 
consideration  of  which  we  infer 
that  the  forces  on  the  faces  {zy), 
parallel  to  OZ,  are  equal  to  the 
forces  on  the  faces  ( yx ),  parallel 
to  OX.  Similarly,  we  see  that 
the  forces  on  the  faces  {yx),  paral- 
of  the  faces  {xz),  parallel  to  OZ; 
parallel  to  OX,  are  equal  to  those 


Specifica- 
tion of  a 
stress;  by  six 
indepen- 
dent ele- 
ments; 
three  simple 
longitudinal 
stresses, 
and  three 
simple 
shearing 
stresses. 


662.  Thus,  any  three  rectangular  planes  of  reference  being- 
chosen,  we  may  take  six  elements  thus,  to  specify  a stress:  P,  Q, 
R the  normal  components  of  the  forces  on  these  planes;  and  S, 
T,  U the  tangential  components,  respectively  perpendicular  to 
OX,  of  the  forces  on  the  two  planes  meeting  in  OX,  perpendicu- 
lar to  OY,  of  the  forces  on  the  planes  meeting  in  OY,  and  per- 
pendicular to  0 Y,  of  the  forces  on  the  planes  meeting  in  0 F;  each 


of  the  six  forces  being  reckoned  per  unit  of  area.  A normal  com- 
ponent will  be  reckoned  as  positive  when  it  is  a traction  tending 
Simple  hm-  to  separate  the  portions  of  matter  on  the  two  sides  of  its  plane. 

and  shear-  P Q ft  are  sometimes  called  longitudinal  stresses,  sometimes 
mg,  stresses.  / c _ ° 

simple  normal  tractions,  and  S,  T,  U shearing  stresses. 


Force 
across  any 
surface  in 
terms  of 
rectangular 
specifica- 
tion of 
stress. 


From  these  data,  to  find  in  the  manner  explained  in  § 660,  the 
force  on  any  plane,  specified  by  l,  m,  n,  the  direction-cosines  of 
its  normal ; let  such  a plane  cut  OX,  0 Y,  OZ  in  the  three  points 
X,  Y,  Z.  Then,  if  the  area  XYZ  be  denoted  for  a moment  by 
A,  the  areas  YOZ,  ZOX,  XOY,  being  its  projections  on  the  three 
rectangular  planes,  will  be  respectively  equal  to  Al,  Am,  An. 
Hence,  for  the  equilibrium  of  the  tetrahedron  of  matter  bounded 
by  those  four  triangles,  we  have,  if  F,  G,  II  denote  the  com- 


662.] 


STATICS. 


207 


ponents  of  the  forco  experienced  by  the  first  of  them,  XYZ,  per  Force 

, , ftcross  any 

unit  of  its  area,  surface  in 

terras  of 

F . A = P.  I A + U.  rnA  + T . nA,  rectangular 

* specifica- 

and  the  two  symmetrical  equations  for  the  components  parallel  to  stress. 

OF  and  OZ.  Hence,  dividing  by  A,  we  conclude 


F = FI  + Urn  + Tn\ 

G = Ul  + Qm  + /Swl (1). 

11—  Tl  + Sm  + Rn\ 

These  expressions  stand  in  the  well-known  relation  to  the 
ellipsoid 

Fx2  + Qy2+  Rz2+  2 (Syz  + Tzx  + Uxy)  = 1 (2), 

according  to  which,  if  we  take 


x = Ir,  y = mr,  z = nr, 

and  if  A,  p,  v denote  the  direction-cosines  and  p the  length  of  the 
perpendicular  from  the  centre  to  the  tangent  plane  at  ( x , y,  z)  of 
the  ellipsoid,  we  have 

F=~,  G=^,  H=—. 
pr  pr  pr 

We  conclude  that 


663.  For  any  fully  specified  state  of  stress  in  a solid,  a stress- 
quadiic  suiface  may  always  be  determined,  which  shall  represent 

the  stress  graphically  in  the  following  manner: — 

To  find  the  direction,  and  the  amount  per  unit  area,  of  the 
force  acting  across  any  plane  in  the  solid,  draw  a radius  per- 
pendicular to  this  plane  from  the  centre  of  the  quadric  to  its 
surface.  The  required  force  will  be  equal  to  the  reciprocal  of 
the  product  of  the  length  of  this  radius  into  the  perpendicular 
from  the  centre  to  the  tangent  plane  at  the  extremity  of  the 
radius,  and  will  be  perpendicular  to  this  tangent  jfiane. 

664.  From  this  it  follows  that  for  any  stress  whatever  there  Principal 
are  three  determinate  planes  at  right  angles  to  one  another  such  “d 
that  the  force  acting  in  the  solid  across  each  of  them  is  precisely  8trC89' 
perpendicular  to  it.  These  planes  are  called  the  principal  or 
normal  planes  of  the  stress;  the  forces  upon  them,  per  unit  area, 

—its  principal  or  normal  tractions;  and  the  lines  perpendicular 


208 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[G64. 


Principal  ^ to  them, — its  principal  or  normal  axes,  or  simply  its  axes.  The 
axes  of  u,  three  principal  semi-diameters  of  the  quadric  surface  are  equal 

stress  a.  x. 

to  the  reciprocals  of  the  square  roots  of  the  principal  tractions. 
If,  however,  in  any  case  each  of  the  three  principal  tractions 
is  negative,  it  will  be  convenient  to  reckon  them  rather  as 
pressures;  the  reciprocals  of  the  square  roots  of  which  will  be 
the  semi-axes  of  a real  stress-ellipsoid  representing  the  distri- 
bution of  force  in  the  manner  explained  above,  with  pressure 
substituted  throughout  for  traction. 

Varieties  665.  When  the  three  principal  tractions  are  all  of  one  sign, 
quadric.  the  stress-quadric  is  an  ellipsoid;  the  cases  of  an  ellipsoid  of 
revolution  and  a sphere  being  included,  as  those  in  which  two, 
or  all  three,  are  equal.  When  one  of  the  three  is  negative  and 
the  two  others  positive,  the  surface  is  a hyperboloid  of  one  sheet. 
When  one  of  the  normal  tractions  is  positive  and  the  two  others 
negative,  the  surface  is  a hyperboloid  of  two  sheets. 


666.  When  one  of  the  three  principal  tractions  vanishes, 
while  the  other  two  are  finite,  the  stress-quadric  becomes  a 
cylinder,  circular,  elliptic,  or  hyperbolic,  according  as  the  other 
two  are  equal,  unequal,  of  one  sign,  or  of  contrary  signs.  When 
two  of  the  three  vanish,  the  quadric  becomes  two  planes;  and 
the  stress  in  this  case  is  (§  662)  called  a simple  longitudinal 
stress.  The  theory  of  principal  planes,  and  principal  or  normal 
tractions,  just  stated  (§  664),  is  then  equivalent  to  saying  that 
any  stress  whatever  may  be  regarded  as  made  up  of  three 
simple  longitudinal  stresses  in  three  rectangular  directions. 
The  geometrical  interpretations  are  obvious  in  all  these  cases. 

Composition  667.  The  composition  of  stresses  is  of  course  to  be  effected 
of  stresses.  ^ acppng  the  component  tractions  thus:— If  (PVQVBV  8V  Tv  UJ, 
(P0,  Q2,  P2,  S2,  T2,  U 2),  etc.,  denote,  according  to  § 662,  any 
given  set  of  stresses  acting  simultaneously  in  a substance,  their 
joint  effect  is  the  same  as  that  of  a single  resultant  stress  of 
which  the  specification  in  corresponding  terms  is  (tP,  SQ,  SB, 

SS,  ST,  SU). 

Laws  of  668.  Each  of  the  statements  that  have  now  been  made  (§§ 
stress  com-  659,  667)  regarding  stresses,  is  applicable  to  infinitely  small 
Pttred'  strains,  if  for  traction  perpendicular  to  any  plane,  reckoned  per 


STATIC  !S. 


209 


608.] 

unit  of  its  area,  we  substitute  elongation,  in  the  lines  of  the  Lows  of 
traction,  reckoned  per  unit  of  length;  and  for  half  the  tangential  stress  com- 
traction  parallel  to  any  direction,  shear  in  the  same  direction 
reckoned  in  the  manner  explained  in  § 175.  The  student  will 
find  it'  a useful  exercise  to  study  in  detail  this  transference  of 
each  one  of  those  statements,  and  to  justify  it  by  modifying  in 
the  proper  manner  the  results  of  §§  171,  172,  173,  174,  175, 

185,  to  adapt  them  to  infinitely  small  strains.  It  must  be  re- 
marked that  the  strain-quadric  thus  formed  according  to  the 
rule  of  § 663,  which  may  have  any  of  the  varieties  of  character 
mentioned  in  §§  665,  666,  is  not  the  same  as  the  strain-ellipsoid 
of  § 160,  which  is  always  essentially  an  ellipsoid,  and  which,  for 
an  infinitely  small  strain,  differs  infinitely  little  from  a sphere. 

The  comparison  of  § 172,  with  the  result  of  § 661  regarding 
tangential  tractions,  is  particularly  interesting  and  important. 

669.  The  following  schedule  of  the  meaning  of  the  elements 
constituting  the  corresponding  rectangular  specifications  of  a 
strain  and  stress  explained  in  preceding  sections,  will  be  found 
convenient: — 


Components 

nf  t.hp 

Planes;  of  which 
relative  motion,  or 

strain. 

stress. 

across  which  force 
is  reckoned. 

e 

P 

yz 

f 

Q 

zx 

<7 

R 

x y 

a 

S 

f/x 

(zx 

h 

T 

/~.y 

{xy 

c 

U 

fxz 

(y* 

Direction 
of  relative 
motion  or 
of  force. 

X 

V 


V 


x 

X 

V 


Rectangular 
elements  of 
strains  ami 
stresses. 


67(4  If  a unit  cube  of  matter,  given  under  any  stress  (P,  Q , Work  done 
P,  S,  P,  b))  be  subjected  further  to  such  infinitesimal  change  wthfiTa*’ 
of  this  stress  as  shall  produce  an  infinitely  small  simple  longi-  south’18 
tudinal  strain  e alone,  the  work  done  on  it  will  be  Pe\  since,  of 
VOL.  II.  i , 


Work  done 
b.v  a stress 
within  a 
varying 
solid. 


Compare 
§ 673,  (20). 


Work  done 
on  the  sur- 
face of  a 
varying 
solid. 


210  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [070. 

the  component  forces  P,  JJ,  T parallel  to  OX,  U and  T do  no 
work  in  virtue  of  this  strain.  Similarly  Qf , Rg  are  the  works 
done  if,  the  same  stress  acting,  infinitesimal  strains  / or  g are 
produced,  either  of  them  alone.  Again,  if  the  cube  experiences 
a simple  shear,  a,  whether  we  regard  it  (§  172)  as  a differential 
sliding  of  the  planes  yx,  parallel  to  y,  or  of  the  planes  zx, 
parallel  to  z,  we  see  that  the  work  done  is  Sa:  and  similarly, 
Tb  if  the  strain  is  simply  a shear  b,  parallel  to  OZ,  of  planes  zy, 
or  parallel  to  OX,  of  planes  xy:  and  Uc  if  the  strain  is  a shear  c, 
parallel  to  OX,  of  planes  xz,  or  parallel  to  OY,  of  planes  yz. 
Hence  the  whole  work  done  by  the  stress  (P,  Q,  Ii,  S,  T,  U)  on 
a unit  cube  taking  the  additional  infinitesimal  strain  (e,  f,  g, 
a,  b,  c ),  while  the  stress  varies  only  infinitesimally,  is 

Pe  + Qf+  Rg  + Sa  + Tb  + Uc (3). 

It  is  to  be  remarked  that,  inasmuch  as  the  action  called  a stress 
is  a system  of  forces  which  balance  one  another  if  the  portion 
of  matter  experiencing  it  is  rigid,  it  cannot  (§  5ol)  do  any  work 
when  the  matter  moves  in  any  way  without  change  of  shape: 
and  therefore  no  amount  of  translation  or  rotation  of  the  cube 
taking  place  along  with  the  strain  can  render  the  amount  of 
work  done  different  from  that  just  found. 

If  the  side  of  the  cube  be  of  any  length  p,  instead  of  unity, 
each  force  will  be  p2  times,  and  each  relative  displacement  p 
times;  and  therefore  the  work  done  p 3 times  the  respective 
amounts  reckoned  above.  Hence  a body  of  any  shape,  and 
of  cubic  content  0 , subjected  throughout  to  a uniform  stress 
(P,  Q,  R,  S,  T,  U)  while  taking  uniformly  throughout  an  ad- 
ditional strain  (e,f,  g,  a,  b,  c ),  experiences  an  amount  of  work 
equal  to 

(Pe  + Qf+Rg  + Sa  + Tb  + Uc)  C (I)- 

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  this  is  necessarily  equal  to  the  work 
done  on  the  bounding  surface  of  the  body  by  forces  applied  to  it 
from  without.  For  the  work  done  on  any  portion  of  matter 
within  the  body  is  simply  that  done  on  its  surface  by  the  matter 
touching  it  all  round,  as  no  force  acts  at  a distance  from  without 
on  the  interior  substance.  Hence  if  we  imagine  the  whole  body 
divided  into  any  number  of  parts,  each  of  any  shape,  the  sum 


STATICS. 


211 


670.] 

of  the  works  done  on  all  these  parts  is,  by  the  disappearance  of  Work  done 
equal  positive  and  negative  terms  expressing  the  portions  of  the  face  ofa 
work  done  on  each  part  by  the  contiguous  parts  on  all  its  sides, solid- 
and  spent  by  these  other  parts  in  this  action,  reduced  to  the 
integral  amount  of  work  done  by  force  from  without,  applied  all 
round  the  outer  surface. 

The  analytical  verification  of  this  is  instructive  with  regard  to 
the  syntax  of  the  mathematical  language  in  which  the  theory  of 
the  transmission  of  force  is  expressed.  Let  x,  y,  z be  the  co- 
ordinates of  any  point  within  the  body;  IF  the  whole  amount 
of  work  done  in  the  circumstances  specified  above  ; and  f/f  in- 
tegi ation  extended  throughout  the  space  occupied  by  the  body: 
so  that 


^ ~ Iff i^e  + Qf  + dig  + Sa  + Tb  + Uc)  dxclydz (5). 


If  now  we  denote  by  a,  (3,  y the  component  displacements  of  any 
point  of  the  matter  infinitely  near  the  point  (x,  y,  z),  experienced 
when  the  additional  strain  ( e , f g,  a , b,  c)  takes  place,  whether 
non-rotationally  (§  182)  and  with  some  point  of  the  body  fixed, 
or  with  any  motion  of  translation  whatever  and  any  infinitely 
small  rotation,  by  adapting  § 181  (5)  to  infinitely  small  strains 
according  to  our  present  notation  (§  669),  and  using  in  it 
§190  (e),  we  have 


da  d/3 

dx’  J~dy' 


9 = 


dy 

dz’ 


Strain-com- 
ponents in 
termsofdis- 
placement. 


dy  7 cLy  da 

dy’  dx+  dz' 


da  d/3 
dy  dx 


(6). 


With  these,  (5)  becomes 


Work  done 

through 

interior; 


Hence  by  integration 


W + UP  + Ti)dydz  + (Ua  + QP  + Sy)dzdx  + (Ta  + Sfi  + Ry)dxdy] (8), 

the  limits  of  the  integrations  being  so  taken  that,  if  da  denote 
an  element  of  the  bounding  surface,  / j integration  all  over  it,  and 
l,  m,  n the  direction-cosines  of  the  normal  at  any  point  of  it,  the 
expression  means  the  same  as 

W=HttPa+uP+Ty)l+1J7*+QI3  + Sy)m  + (Ta+Sp±Ry)n}d<r  ...(9); 

14—2 


212 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[G70. 


which,  with  the  terms  grouped  otherwise,  becomes 
TF=//{(PZ+  Urn  + Tn)  a + ( Ul+  Qm  + Sn)  / 3 + (Tl  + Sm + Rn)  y)  da...  (1 0). 

wkdoneh  The  second  member  of  this,  in  virtue  of  (1),  expresses  directly 
on  surface.  the  work  done  by  the  forces  applied  from  without  to  the  bounding 

surface. 


Differential  671.  If,  now,  we  suppose  the  body  to  yield  to  a stress  (P,  Q, 

equation  of  ’ , 11  J J , . , . 

work  done  JR  $ T,  U),  and  to  oppose  this  stress  only  with  its  innate  resist- 

stress  * * * / x.  x. 

ance  to  change  of  shape,  the  differential  equation  of  work  done 
will  [by  (4)  with  de,  df,  etc.,  substituted  for  e,f,  etc.]  be 

dw  = Pde  + Qdf-V  Rdg  + Sda  + Tdb  + Udc (11), 

if  w denote  the  whole  amount  of  work  done  per  unit  of  volume 
in  any  part  of  the  body  while  the  substance  in  this  part  ex- 
periences a strain  (e,  f g,  ci,  b,  c ) from  some  initial  state  re- 
Physicai ap- garded  as  a state  of  no  strain.  This  equation,  as  we  shall  see 
plication.  Jater^  unqer  Properties  of  Matter,  expresses  the  work  done  in 

a natural  fluid,  by  distorting  stress  (or  difference  of  pressure  in 
different  directions)  working  against  its  innate  viscosity ; and 
w is  then,  according  to  Joule’s  discovery,  the  dynamic  value  of 
the  heat  generated  in  the  process.  The  equation  may  also  be 
applied  to  express  the  work  done  in  straining  an  imperfectly 
elastic  solid,  or  an  elastic  solid  of  which  the  temperature  varies 
during  the  process.  In  all  such  applications  the  stress  will 
depend  partly  on  the  speed  of  the  straining  motion,  or  on  the 
varying  temperature,  and  not  at  all,  or  not  solely,  on  the  state 
of  strain  at  any  moment,  and  the  system  will  not  be  dynamically 
conservative. 


Perfectly  672.  Definition—  A perfectly  elastic  body  is  a body  which, 
de£cf^y  when  brought  to  any  one  state  of  strain,  requires  at  all  times 
dynamics,  the  same  stress  to  hold  it  in  this  state;  however  long  it  be 
kept  strained,  or  however  rapidly  its  state  be  altered  from  any 
other  strain,  or  from  no  strain,  to  the  strain  in  question.  Here, 
according  to  our  plan  (§§  443,  448)  for  Abstract  Dynamics,  we 
ignore  variation  of  temperature  in  the  body.  If,  however,  we.j 
add  a condition  of  absolutely  no  variation  of  temperature,  ori 
of  recurrence  to  one  specified  temperature  after  changes  of: 
strain,  we  have  a definition  of  that  property  of  perfect  elasticity. 


STATICS. 


213 


G72-] 


towards  which  highly  elastic  bodies  in  nature  approximate;  and  itscon- 
which  is  rigorously  fulfilled  by  all  fluids,  and  may  be  so  by  fulfilment 
some  real  solids,  as  homogeneous  crystals.  But  inasmuch  as 
the  elastic  reaction  of  every  kind  of  body  against  strain  varies 
with  varying  temperature,  and  (a  thermodynamic  consequence 
of  this,  as  we  shall  see  later)  any  increase  or  diminution  of 
strain  in  an  elastic  body  is  necessarily  accompanied  by  a 
change  Of  temperature;  even  a perfectly  elastic  body  could  not, 
in  passing  through  different  strains,  act  as  a rigorously  conser- 
vative system,  but,  on  the  contrary,  must  give  rise  to  dissipation 
ot  energy  in  consequence  of  the  conduction  or  radiation  of  heat 
induced  by  these  changes  of  temperature. 

But  by  making  the  changes  of  strain  quickly  enough  to  pre- 
vent any  sensible  equalization  of  temperature  by  conduction  or 
radiation  (as,  for  instance,  Stokes  has  shown,  is  done  in  sound 
of  musical  notes  travelling  through  air);  or  by  making  them 
slowly  enough  to  allow  the  temperature  to  be  maintained 
Sensibly  constant*  by  proper  appliances;  any  highly  elastic,  or 
perfectly  elastic  body  in  nature  may  be  got  to  act  very  nearly 
as  a conservative  system. 

673.  In  nature,  therefore,  the  integral  amount,  w,  of  work  Potential 
defined  as  above,  is  for  a perfectly  elastic  body,  independent  an  elastic 
(§  274)  of  the  series  of  configurations,  or  states  of  strain,  strained, 
through  which  it  may  have  been  brought  from  the  first  to 
the  second  of  the  specified  conditions,  provided  it  has  not 
been  allowed  to  change  sensibly  in  temperature  during  the 
process. 

Hie  analytical  statement  is  that  the  expression  (11)  for  cho 
must  be  the  differential  of  a function  of  e,  f g , a , b,  c,  regarded 
as  independent  variables  ; or,  which  means  the  same,  w is  a 
function  of  these  elements,  and 


8 = 


dw 
~de’ 
dw 
d a’ 


. dw 

Vs>df’ 

dio 

~db, 


R = 


dw  i 

dg' 


u _ c^w 
dc  ‘ 


•(12). 


On  the  Thermoelastic  and  Thermomagnetic  Properties 
(W.  Thomson).  Quarterly  Journal  of  Mathematics.  April,  18oJ  • 
and  Physical  Papers,  Art.  xlvui.  Part  vii. 


of  Matter” 
Mathematical 


214 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[073. 


Potential 
energy  of 
an  elastic 
solid  held 
strained. 


In  Appendix  C,  we  shall  return  to  the  comprehensive  analytical 
treatment  of  this  theory,  not  confining  it  to  infinitely  small  strains 
for  which  alone  the  notation  (e,  f ...),  as  defined  in  § 6G9,  is 


convenient.  In  the  meantime,  we  shall  only  say  that  when  the 
whole  amount  of  strain  is  infinitely  small,  and  the  stress-com- 


components  if  these  are  altered  all  in  any  one  ratio;  w must  be  a 
homogeneous  quadratic  function  of  the  six  variables  e,J\  g,  a,  b,  c, 
which,  if  we  denote  by  ( e , e),  (ff)...(e,f)...  constants  depend- 
ing on  the  quality  of  the  substance  and  on  the  directions  chosen 
for  the  axes  of  co-ordinates,  we  may  write  as  follows : — 


The  21  coefficients  ( e , e),  (/,/)... (J,  c),  in  this  expression  con- 
stitute the  21  “coefficients  of  elasticity,”  which  Green  first 
showed  to  be  proper  and  essential  for  a complete  theory  of  the 
dynamics  of  an  elastic  solid  subjected  to  infinitely  small  strains. 
The  only  condition  that  can  be  theoretically  imposed  upon  these 
coefficients  is  that  they  must  not  permit  w to  become  negative  for 
any  values,  positive  or  negative,  of  the  strain-components  e,f  ... . 
Under  Properties  of  Matter,  we  shall  see  that  an  untenable  theory 
(Boscovich’s),  falsely  worked  out  by  mathematicians,  has  led  to 
relations  among  the  coefficients  of  elasticity  which  experiment  has 
proved  to  be  false. 


g T,  U)  as  linear  functions  of  the  six  components  of  strain 
(e,  /,  (7,  a,  b,  c)  with  15  equalities  [namely  (e, /)  = {/,  e),  etc.] 
among  their  30  coefficients,  which  leave  only  21  of  them  inde- 


ponents are  therefore  all  altered  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  strain- 


{(e,  e)  e 2 + (/,/)/'+  (g,  g)  g2  + (a,  a)  a2+  (b,  b)  b2+  (c,  c)  c2 
+ 2 (e,f)ef- f 2(e,  g)eg  + 2 (e,  a)  ea  + 2 (e,  b)eb  + 2 (e,  c)ec 


+ 2 (/,  g)fg  + 2 ( f.  a)  faJr2(f.b)fb+2(  f, cl  fc 


+ 2 (a,  b)  ab  + 2 (a,  c ) ac 
+ 2 (b,  c)bc} 


Stress-com- 
ponents ex- 
pressed in 
terms  of 
strain. 


Eliminating  w from  (12)  by  (13)  we  have 
P=(e,e)e  + ( <?,/)/+  ( e , g)  g + {e,  a)  a + (e,  b)b  + (e,  c ) c -j 


Q = (ej)e+  (/,/)/+  (/,  9)9  + (/«)«  + Lf.W  + [M  c I (U)_ 


etc. 


etc. 


These  equations  express  the  six  components  of  stress  (P,  Q,  P, 


STATICS. 


215 


G 73.] 


pendent.  The  mere  principle  of  superposition  (which  we  have  Stress-com- 

. ponents  ex- 

used  above  in  establishing  the  quadratic  form  for  w ) might  pressed  in 
have  been  directly  applied  to  demonstrate  linear  formulae  for  the  strain, 
stress-components.  Thus  it  is  that  some  authors  have  been  led  to 
lay  down,  as  the  foundation  of  the  most  general  possible  theory 
of  elasticity,  six  equations  involving  36  coefficients  supposed 
to  be  independent.  But  it  is  only  by  the  principle  of  energy  that, 
as  first  discovered  by  Green,  the  fifteen  pairs  of  these  coefficients 
are  proved  to  be  equal. 


The  algebraic  transformation  of  equations  (14)  to  express  the  Strain- 

. . . ' components 

strain-components  singly,  by  linear  functions  of  the  stress-com- expressed 

ponents,  may  be  directly  effected  of  course  by  forming  the  proper  of  stress. 

determinants  from  the  36  coefficients,  and  taking  the  36  proper 

quotients.  From  a known  determinantal  theorem,  used  also 

above  [§  313  (d)\  it  follows  that  there  are  15  equalities  between 

pairs  of  these  36  quotients,  because  of  the  15  equalities  in  pairs 

of  the  coefficients  of  e,  f etc.,  in  (14).  Thus,  if  we  denote  by 

[An  [<?,  <?],  [P,  Q],  ...  [Q,  P]  ... 


the  set  of  36  determinantal  quotients  found  by  that  process  (being, 
therefore,  known  algebraic  functions  of  the  original  coefficients 
(e>  e)y  iff),  •••  etc.),  we  have 


x e = [P,P]P +[P,Q]Q+ [P, P]  R + [P, S] S+  [ P , T]  T+  [P,  U ] V 'j 
f=[Q,P]P+[Q,Q]Q+[Q,R]R+\Q,S]jS+[Q,r]T+[Q,U]U  [...(16); 

etc.  etc. 


and  these  new  coefficients  satisfy  15  equations 

[AG]  = [e,n  [A  E\  -■  [A  Al (17). 

By  what  we  proved  in  § 313  (d)  when  engaged  with  precisely 
the  same  algebraic  transformation,  we  see  that  [. P , P],  [Q,  Q], 

[P,  Q], ...  are  simply  the  coefficients  of  P\  Q\  ...,  2 PQ,  ...  in  the 
expression  for  2 w obtained  by  eliminating  e,  ...  from  (13),  so 
that 


w- 


W,,P'\P‘+[Q,Q}Q'+...  + i[r,Q-]PQ  + -2[P>E]P]U ...)  ...(U)- 

and 


~dw~ 

,/= 

~dw  ~ 

dP  j 

_dQ_ 

dio~ 

l. 

dw 

_dS 

, 0 = 

_dT 

~dw 

** 

jut 

J 

dw 

r 

> ! 

j 

(19); 


216 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[673. 


Strain- 
components 
expressed 
in  terms 
of  stress. 


Compare 
§ 670,  (8)  (4) 
(5). 


where  the  brackets  []  denote  the  partial  differential  coefiicients 
taken  on  the  supposition  that  w is  expressed  as  a function  of 
P,  Q , etc.,  as  in  (19);  to  distinguish  them  from  those  of  equations 
(12)  which  were  taken  on  the  supposition  that  w is  expressed 
as  a function  of  e,  f etc.,  as  in  (13).  We  have  also,  as  in 
§313  (cl), 

w = \ ( Pe  + Q/+  Pg  + Sa  + Tb+  Uc) (20); 

which  might  have  been  put  down  in  the  beginning,  as  it  simply 
expresses  that 


Average  074,  The  average  stress,  due  to  elasticity  of  the  solid,  when 

stress  _ ° ’ J 

changmgny  strained  from  its  natural  condition  to  that  of  strain  (e,f  g,  a,  b,  c) 
strain.  fs  (as  from  the  assumed  applicability  of  the  principle  of  super- 
position we  see  it  must  be)  just  half  the  stress  required  to  keep 
it  in  this  state  of  strain. 


Homogene- 

ousness 

defined. 


Molecular 

hypothesis 


assumes  a 
very  fine 
grained 
texture  in 
crystals, 
but  no 
ultimate 
homogene- 
ousness. 


675.  A body  is  called  homogeneous  when  any  two  equal, 
similar  parts  of  it,  with  corresponding  lines  parallel  and  turned 
towards  the  same  parts,  are  undistinguishable  from  one  another 
by  any  difference  in  quality.  The  perfect  fulfilment  of  this 
condition  without  any  limit  as  to  the  smallness  of  the  parts, 
though  conceivable,  is  not  generally  regarded  as  probable  for 
any  of  the  real  solids  or  fluids  known  to  us,  however  seemingly 
homogeneous.  It  is,  we  believe,  held  by  all  naturalists  that 
there  is  a molecular  structure,  according  to  which,  in  compound 
bodies  such  as  water,  ice,  rock-crystal,  etc.,  the  constituent 
substances  lie  side  by  side,  or  arranged  in  groups  of  finite 
dimensions,  and  even  in  bodies  called  simple  (i. e.,  not  known 
to  be  chemically  resolvable  into  other  substances)  theie  is  no 
ultimate  homogeneousness.  In  other  words,  the  prevailing 
belief  is  that  every  kind  of  matter  with  which  we  are  acquainted 
has  a more  or  less  coarse-grained  texture,  whether  having  visible 
molecules,  as  great  masses  of  solid  stone-  or  brick-building,  oi 
natural  granite  or  sandstone  rocks;  or,  molecules  too  small  to 
be  visible  or  directly  measureable  by  us  (but  not  infinitely  small)  * 
in  seemingly  homogeneous  metals,  or  continuous  crystals,  or 


- Probably  not  undiscoverably  small,  although  of  dimensions  not  yet  known 
to  us.  See  Appendix  F.  on  “ Size  of  Atoms.” 


STATICS. 


217 


075.] 


liquids,  or  gases.  We  must  of  course  return  to  this  subject 
under  Properties  of  Matter;  and  in  the  meantime  need  only 
say  that  the  definition  of  homogeneousness  may  be  applied  £omogenc 
practically  on  a very  large  scale  to  masses  of  building  01  coarse- 
grained conglomerate  rock,  or  on  a more  moderate  scale  to 
blocks  of  common  sandstone,  or  on  a very  small  scale  to  seem- 
ingly homogeneous  metals5f;  or  on  a scale  of  extreme,  undis- 
covered fineness,  to  vitreous  bodies,  continuous  crystals,  solidified 
gums,  as  India  rubber,  gum-arabic,  etc.,  and  fluids. 


676.  The  substance  of  a homogeneous  solid  is  called  iso- 
tropic  when  a spherical  portion  of  it,  tested  by  any  physical  j;™J”ratlces 
agency,  exhibits  no  difference  in  quality  however  it  is  turned,  defined. 
Or,  which  amounts  to  the  same,  a cubical  portion  cut  from  any 
position  in  an  isotropic  body  exhibits  the  same  qualities  rela- 
tively to  each  pair  of  parallel  faces.  Or  two  equal  and  similar 
portions  cut  from  any  positions  in  the  body,  not  subject  to  the 
condition  of  parallelism  (§  675),  are  undistinguish  able  from  one 
another.  A substance  which  is  not  isotropic,  but  exhibits  dif- 
ferences of  quality  in  different  directions,  is  called  eolotropic. 


677.  An  individual  body,  or  the  substance  of  a homogeneous  isotropy 

solid,  may  be  isotropic  in  one  quality  or  class  of  qualities,  but  tropy^of_ 

eolotropic  in  others.  sets  of 

r properties. 

Thus  in  abstract  dynamics  a rigid  body,  or  a group  of  bodies 
rigidly  connected,  contained  within  and  rigidly  attached  to  a 
rigid  spherical  surface,  is  kinetically  symmetrical  (§  285)  if  its 
centre  of  inertia  is  at  the  centre  of  the  sphere,  and  if  its  moments 
of  inertia  are  equal  round  all  diameters.  It  is  also  isotropic 
relatively  to  gravitation  if  it  is  centrobaric  (§  534),  so  that  the 
centre  of  a figure  is  not  merely  a centre  of  inertia,  but  a true 
centre  of  gravity.  Or  a transparent  substance  may  transmit 
light  at  different  velocities  in  different  directions  through  it 
(that  is,  be  doubly  refracting ),  and  yet  a cube  of  it  may  (and 
generally  does  in  natural  crystals)  absorb  the  same  part  of  a 
beam  of  white  light  transmitted  across  it  perpendicularly  to 


* Which,  however,  we  know,  as  recently  proved  by  Dcville  and  Van  Troost, 
are  porous  enough  at  high  temperatures  to  allow  very  free  percolation  of  gases. 


218 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[(>77. 


any  of  its  three  pairs  of  faces.  Or  (as  a crystal  which  exhibits 
dichroism)  it  may  be  eolotropic  relatively  to  the  latter,  or  to 
either  optic  quality,  and  yet  it  may  conduct  heat  equally  in  all 
directions. 


Umftation  ^78.  The  remarks  of  § 075  relative  to  homogeneousness 
andho3’  in  the  aggregate,  and  the  supposed  ultimately  heterogeneous 
of  roio-sllLSS  ^cxtuie  ef  all  substances  however  seemingly  homogeneous, 
aZag‘°inhe  indicate  corresponding  limitations  and  non-rigorous  practical 
g5teaoTr°"  interpretations  of  isotropy. 

molecules. 

SflffidS?  679\  To  be  elastically  isotropic,  we  see  first  that  a spherical 
isotropy-  °l  cub*c£d  Portion  of  any  solid,  if  subjected  to  uniform  normal 
pressure  (positive  or  negative)  all  round,  must,  in  yielding, 
experience  no  deformation  : and  therefore  must  be  equally  com- 
pressed (or  dilated)  in  all  directions.  But,  further,  a cube  cut 
from  any  position  in  it,  and  acted  on  by  tangential  or  shearing 
stress  (§  662)  in  planes  parallel  to  two  pairs  of  its  sides,  must 
experience  simple  deformation,  or  shear  (§  171).  in  the  same 
direction,  unaccompanied  by  condensation  or  dilatation*  and 
the  same  in  amount  for  all  the  three  ways  in  which  a stress 
may  be  thus  applied  to  any  one  cube,  and  for  different  cubes 
taken  from  any  different  positions  in  the  solid. 

resistance01  680>  Hence  the  elastic  quality  of  a perfectly  elastic,  liomo- 
ItmTuln-Z  geneous>  isotropic  solid  is  fully  defined  by  two  elements;— its 
distortion0  resistance  to  compression,  and  its  resistance  to  distortion.  The 
amount  of  uniform  pressure  in  all  directions,  per  unit  area  of 
its  surface,  required  to  produce  a stated  very  small  compression, 
measures  the  first  of  these,  and  the  amount  of  the  shearing 
stress  required  to  produce  a stated  amount  of  shear  measures 


* It  must  be  remembered  that  the  changes  of  figure  and  volume  we  are  con- 
cerned with  are  so  small  that  the  principle  of  superposition  is  applicable;  so 
that  if  any  shearing  stress  produced  a condensation,  an  opposite  shearing 
stress  would  produce  a dilatation,  which  is  a violation  of  the  isotropic  condition. 
But  it  is  possible  that  a shearing  stress  may  produce,  in  a truly  isotropic  solid, 
condensation  or  dilatation  in  proportion  to  the  square  of  its  value : and  it  is 
probable  that  such  effects  may  be  sensible  in  India  rubber,  or  cork,  or  other 
bodies  susceptible  of  great  deformations  or  compressions,  with  persistent  elas- 
ticity. 


219 


080.]  STATICS. 

the  second.  The  numerical  measure  of  the  first  is  the  com- 
pressing pressure  divided  by  the  diminution  of  the  bulk  of 
a portion  of  the  substance  which,  when  uncompressed,  occupies 
the  unit  volume.  It  is  sometimes  called  the  elasticity  of  Bulk- 

i 7 7/  7 ; modulus  or 

volume , or  the  resistance  to  compression,  or  the  buUc-moaulus  modulus  of 

_ . , com  pres- 

of  elasticity  or  the  modulus  of  compression.  Its  reciprocal,  or  sion. 
the  amount  of  compression  on  unit  of  volume  divided  by  the 
compressing  pressure,  or,  as  we  may  conveniently  say,  the  com- 
pression per  unit  of  volume,  per  unit  of  compressing  pressure, 
is  commonly  called  the  compressibility.  The  second,  or  resist-  Compros- 
ance  to  change  of  shape,  is  measured  by  the  tangential  stress 
(reckoned  as  in  § 662)  divided  by  the  amount  of  the  distortion  Rigidity,  or 

v ° J . elasticity 

or  shear  (§  175)  which  it  produces,  and  is  called  the  modulus 
of  rigidity , or  for  brevity  rigidity  of  the  substance,  or  its 
elasticity  of  figure. 

681.  From  § 169  it  follows  that  a strain  compounded  of  a 
simple  extension  in  one  set  of  parallels,  and  a simple  contrac- 
tion of  ecpial  amount  in  any  other  set  perpendicular  to  those, 

is  the  same  as  a simple  shear  in  either  of  the  two  sets  of  Discrepant 
planes  cutting  the  two  sets  of  parallels  at  45°.  And  the  of  shear  and 
numerical  measure  (§175)  of  this  shear,  or  simple  distortion,  streYs^from 
is  equal  to  double  the  amount  of  the  elongation  or  contraction  longitudinal 
(each  measured,  of  course,  per  unit  of  length).  Similarly,  we  stresses  re- 
See  (§  668)  that  a longitudinal  traction  (or  negative  pressure)  involved, 
parallel  to  one  line,  and  an  equal  longitudinal  positive  pressure 
parallel  to  any  line  at  right  angles  to  it,  is  equivalent  to 
a shearing  stress  of  tangential  tractions  (§  661)  parallel  to 
the  planes  which  cut  those  lines  at  45°.  And  the  numerical 
measure  of  this  shearing  stress,  being  (§  662)  the  amount  of 
the  tangential  traction  in  either  set  of  planes,  is  equal  to  the 
amount  of  the  positive  or  negative  normal  pressure,  not 
doubled. 

682.  Since  then  any  stress  whatever  may  be  made  up  of  strain  pro- 
simple longitudinal  stresses,  it  follows  that,  to  find  the  relation  a siiyrle^ 
between  any  stress  and  the  strain  produced  by  it,  we  have  only  stress.udini11 
to  find  the  strain  produced  by  a single  longitudinal  stress, 

which  we  may  do  at  once  thus: — A simple  longitudinal  stress, 


220 


Strain  pro- 
duced by 
a single 
longitudinal 
stress. 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [082. 

P,  is  equivalent  to  a uniform 
dilating  tension  |P  in  all  di- 
rections, compounded  with  two 
shearing  stresses,  each  equal  to 
^P,  and  having  a common  axis 
in  the  line  of  the  given  lonm- 

o o 

tudinal  stress,  and  their  other 
two  axes  any  two  lines  at  right 
angles  to  one  another  and  to  it. 
The  diagram,  drawn  in  a plane 
through  one  of  these  latter  lines, 
and  the  former,  sufficiently  in- 
dicates the  synthesis ; the  only 
forces  not  shown  being  those  perpendicular  to  its  plane. 


ULJ! 


Hence  if  n denote  the  rigidity,  and  k the  bulk-modulus 
[being  the  same  as  the  reciprocal  of  the  compressibility 
(§  680)],  the  effect  will  be  an  equal  dilatation  in  all  directions, 
amounting,  per  unit  of  volume,  to 


compounded  with  two  equal  shears,  each  amounting  to 


H 

n 


and  having  (§  679)  their  axes  in  the  directions  just  stated  as 
those  of  the  shearing  stresses. 

683.  The  dilatation  and  two  shears  thus  determined  may 
be  conveniently  reduced  to  simple  longitudinal  strains  by  still 
following  the  indications  of  § 681,  thus: 

The  two  shears  together  constitute  an  elongation  amounting 

o o o 

to  ^ P/n  in  the  direction  of  the  given  force,  P,  and  equal  contrac- 
tion amounting  to  £ P/n  in  all  directions  perpendicular  to  it. 
And  the  cubic  dilatation  \Pjk  implies  a linear  dilatation,  equal 
in  all  directions,  amounting  to  i P/k.  On  the  whole,  therefore, 
we  have 


STATICS. 


221 


G83J 


linear  elongation  = P + yj\J  , in  the  direction  of 
the  applied  stress,  and 

linear  contraction  = P 9^)  » *n  directions 

perpendicular  to  the  applied  stress. 


Hence 

Youhk’s 

modulus 

(§680) 

9 nk 
3 k + n' 


684.  Hence  when  the  ends  of  a column,  bar,  or  wire,  of 
isotropic  material,  are  acted  on  by  equal  and  opposite  forces, 

Qjji 2 72- 

it  experiences  a lateral  linear  contraction,  equal  to  9 + . of  ®^10^on_ 

' traction  to 

the  longitudinal  dilatation,  each  reckoned  as  usual  per  unit  ^ongitudina1 
of  linear  measure.  One  specimen  of  the  fallacious  mathe- 
matics above  referred  to  (§  673),  is  a celebrated  conclusion  of 
Navier’s  and  Poisson’s  that  this  ratio  is  which  requires 
the  rigidity  to  be  § of  the  bulk -modulus,  for  all  solids : 
and  which  was  first  shown  to  be  false  by  Stokes*  from 
many  obvious  observations,  proving  enormous  discrepancies 
from  it  in  many  well-known  bodies,  and  rendering  it  most  im- 
probable that  there  is  any  approach  to  a constancy  of  ratio 
between  rigidity  and  bulk-modulus  in  any  class  of  solids. 

Thus  clear  elastic  jellies,  and  India  rubber,  present  familiar 
specimens  of  isotropic  homogeneous  solids,  which,  while  differ- 
ing very  much  from  one  another  in  rigidity  (“  stiffness  ”),  are 
probably  all  of  very  nearly  the  same  compressibility  as  water. 

This  being  3^-^  per  pound  per  square  inch ; the  bulk- 
modulus,  measured  by  its  reciprocal,  or,  as  we  may  read  it, 

“ 308000  lbs.  per  square  inch,”  is  obviously  many  hundred 
times  the  absolute  amount  of  the  rigidity  of  the  stififest  of  those 
substances.  A column  of  any  of  them,  therefore,  when  pressed 
together  or  pulled  out,  within  its  limits  of  elasticity,  by  balanc-  different  for 
ing  forces  applied  to  its  ends  (or  an  India-rubber  band  when  substancrs 
pulled  out),  experiences  no  sensible  change  of  volume,  though  jefiy  too*1 
very  sensible  change  of  length.  Hence  the  proportionate  ex_fortork- 
tension  or  contraction  of  any  transverse  diameter  must  be 
sensibly  equal  to  \ the  longitudinal  contraction  or  extension : 


* On  the  Friction  of  Fluids  in  Motion,  and  the  Equilibrium  and  Motion  of 
Elastic  Solids. — Tram.  Camb.  Phil.  Jour.,  April,  1815.  See  also  Camb.  and  Dub. 
Math.  Jour.,  March,  1848. 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


different  for 
different 
substances 
from  4 for 
jelly  to  0 
for  cork. 


Supposition 
of  4 for  ideal 
perfect 
solid, 

groundless. 


[G84. 

and  for  all  ordinary  stresses,  such  substances  may  be  practically 
regarded  as  incompressible  elastic  solids.  Stokes  gave  reasons 
for  believing  that  metals  also  have  in  general  greater  resist- 
ance to  compression,  in  proportion  to  their  rigidities,  than 
according  to  the  fallacious  theory,  although  for  them  the  dis- 
crepancy is  very  much  less  than  for  the  gelatinous  bodies.  This 
ptobable  conclusion  was  soon  experimentally  demonstrated  by 
Wertheim,  who  found  the  ratio  of  lateral  to  longitudinal  change 
of  linear  dimensions,  in  columns  acted  on  solely  by  longitudinal 
force,  to  be  about  A for  glass  and  brass  ] and  by  Kirch hoff,  who, 
by  a very  well-devised  experimental  method,  found  '387  as  the 
value  of  that  ratio  for  brass,  and  '294  for  iron.  For  copper  we 
find  that  it  probably  lies  between  ‘226  and  '441,  by  recent 
experiments*  of  our  own,  measuring  the  torsional  and  longi- 
tudinal rigidities  (§§  596,  599,  686)  of  a copper  wire. 

685.  All  these  results  indicate  rigidity  less  in  proportion  to 
the  bulk-modulus  than  according  to  Navier’s  and  Poisson’s 
theory.  And  it  has  been  supposed  by  many  naturalists,  who 
have  seen  the  necessity  of  abandoning  that  theory  as  inapplic- 
able  to  ordinary  solids,  that  it  may  be  regarded  as  the  proper 
theory  for  an  ideal  'perfect  solid,  and  as  indicating  an  amount  of 
rigidity  not  quite  reached  in  any  real  substance,  but  approached 
to  in  some  of  the  most  rigid  of  natural  solids  (as,  for  instance, 
iron).  But  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  hold  a piece  of  cork  in  the 
hand  without  perceiving  the  fallaciousness  of  this  last  attempt 
to  maintain  a theory  which  never  had  any  good  foundation. 
By  careful  measurements  on  columns  of  cork  of  various  forms 
(among  them,  cylindrical  pieces  cut  in  the  ordinary  way  for 
bottles)  before  and  after  compressing  them  longitudinally  in  a 
Bramah’s  press,  we  have  found  that  the  change  of  lateral 
dimensions  is  insensible  both  with  small  longitudinal  contrac- 
tions and  return  dilatations,  within  the  limits  of  elasticity,  and 
with  such  enormous  longitudinal  contractions  as  to  £ or  a of 
the  original  length.  It  is  thus  proved  decisively  that  cork  is 
much  more  rigid,  while  metals,  glass,  and  gelatinous  bodies  are 

* On  the  Elasticity  and  Viscosity  of  Metals  (W.  Thomson).  Proc.  R S., 
May,  1805.  See  Art.  ‘ Elasticity,’  Encyc.  Britan. 


STATICS. 


22:5 


G85.] 


all  less  rigid,  in  proportion  to  bulk-modulus  than  the  supposed 
“perfect  solid;”  and  the  utter  worthlessness  of  the  theory  is 
ex  pe  ri  m e ntal ly  d em  onstrated . 


686.  The  modulus  of  elasticity  of  a bar,  wire,  fibre,  thin  Toxin?’ 
filament,  band,  or  cord  of  any  material  (of  which  the  substance  lined, 
need  not  be  isotropic,  nor  even  homogeneous  within  one  normal 
sectiou),  as  a bar  of  glass  or  wood,  a metal  wire,  a natural  fibre, 
an  India-rubber  band,  or  a common  thread,  cord,  or  tajie,  is 
a term  introduced  by  Dr  Thomas  Young*  to  designate  what 
we  also  sometimes  call  its  longitudinal  rigidity:  that  is,  the  Same  as 
quotient  obtained  by  dividing  the  simple  longitudinal  force  rigidity 
required  to  produce  any  infinitesimal  elongation  or  contraction 
by  the  amount  of  this  elongation  or  contraction  reckoned  as 
usual  per  unit  of  length. 


* Extract  from  Encyel.  Brit.  Art.  ‘Elasticity,’ § 42.  “Young’s  Modulus,”  or 
Modulus  of  Simple  Longitudinal  Stress. — Thomas  Young  called  the  modulus  of 
elasticity  of  an  elastic  solid  the  amount  of  the  end-pull  or  end-thrust  required  to 
produce  any  infinitesimal  elongation  or  contraction  of  a wire,  or  bar,  or  column 
of  the  substance  multiplied  by  the  ratio  of  its  length  to  the  elongation  or  con- 
traction. In  this  definition  the  definite  article  is  clearly  misapplied.  There  are, 
as  we  have  seen,  two  moduluses  of  elasticity  for  an  isotropic  solid, — one  measuring 
elasticity  of  bulk,  the  other  measuring  elasticity  of  shape.  An  interesting  aud 
instructive  illustration  of  the  confusion  of  ideas  so  often  rising  in  physical  science 
from  faulty  logic  is  to  be  found  in  “An  Account  of  an  Experiment  on  the  Elas- 
ticity of  Ice:  By  Benjamin  Bevan,  Esq.,  in  a letter  to  Dr  Thomas  Young,  Foreign 
Sec.  B.  S.”  and  in  Young’s  “Note”  upon  it,  both  published  in  the  Transactions 
of  the  Royal  Society  for  1826.  Bevan  gives  an  interesting  account  of  a well- 
designed  and  well-executed  experiment  on  the  flexure  of  a bar,  3 ‘97  inches  thick, 
10  inches  broad,  and  100  inches  long,  of  ice  on  a pond  near  Leighton  Buzzard 
(the  bar  remaining  attached  by  one  end  to  the  rest  of  the  ice,  but  being  cut  free 
by  a saw  along  its  sides  and  across  its  other  end),  by  which  he  obtained  a fairly 
accurate  determination  of  “the  modulus  of  ice”  (his  result  was  21,000,000  feet); 
and  says  that  he  repeated  the  experiment  in  various  ways  on  ice  bars  of  various 
dimensions,  some  remaining  attached  by  one  end,  others  completely  detached, 
and  found  results  agreeing  with  the  first  as  nearly  “as  the  admeasurement  of 
the  thickness  could  be  ascertained.”  He  then  proceeds  to  compare  “the  modulus 
of  ice”  which  he  had  thus  found  with  “the  modulus  of  water,”  which  he  quotes 
from  Young’s  Lectures  as  deduced  from  Canton’s  experiments  on  the  compressi- 
bility of  water.  Young  in  his  “Note”  does  not  point  out  that  the  two  moduluses 
were  essentially  different,  and  that  the  modulus  of  his  definition,  the  modulus  de- 
terminable from  the  flexure  of  a bar,  is  essentially  zero  for  every  fluid.  We  now 
call  “Young’s  modulus”  the  particular  modulus  of  elasticity  defined  as  above  by 
Young,  aud  so  avoid  all  confusion. 


224 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Weight- 
modulus 
and  length 
of  modulus. 


Velocity  of 
transmis- 
sion of  a 
simple 
longitudinal 
stress 
through  a 
rod. 


Specific 
Young’s 
modulus  of 
an  isotropic 
body. 


In  terms  of 
the  absolute 
unit;  or  of 
the  force  of 
gravity  on 
the  unit  of 
mass  in  any 
particular 
locality. 


[087. 

687.  Instead  of  reckoning  Young’s  modulus  in  units  of 
weight,  it  is  sometimes  convenient  to  express  it  in  terms  of  the 
weight  of  the  unit  length  of  the  rod,  wire,  or  thread.  The 
modulus  thus  reckoned,  or,  as  it  is  called  by  some  writers,  the 
length  of  the  modulus,  is  of  course  found  by  dividing  the  weight- 
modulus  by  the  weight  of  the  unit  length.  It  is  useful  in  many 
applications  of  the  theory  of  elasticity ; as,  for  instance,  in  this 
result,  which  will  be  proved  later : — the  velocity  of  transmission 
of  longitudinal  vibrations  (as  of  sound)  along  a bar  or  cord,  is 
equal  to  the  velocity  acquired  by  a body  in  falling  from  a 
height  equal  to  half  the  length  of  the  modulus*.  For  other 
examples  see  § 791,  a,  below. 

688.  The  specific  Young  s modulus  of  elasticity  of  an  isotropic 
substance , or,  as  it  is  most  often  called,  simply  the  Young's  modu- 
lus of  the  substance , is  the  Young’s  modulus  of  a bar  of  it  having 
some  definitely  specified  sectional  area.  If  this  be  such  that  the 
weight  of  unit  length  is  unity,  the  Young’s  modulus  of  the  sub- 
stance will  be  the  same  as  the  length  of  the  modulus  of  any  bar 
of  it : a system  of  reckoning  which,  as  we  have  seen,  has  some 
advantages  in  application.  It  is,  however,  more  usual  to  choose 
a common  unit  of  area  as  the  sectional  area  of  the  bar  referred 
to  in  the  definition.  There  must  also  be  a definite  under- 
standing as  to  the  unit  in  terms  of  which  the  foice  is  measuied, 
which  may  be  either  the  absolute  unit  (§  223) : or  the  gravi- 
tation unit  for  a specified  locality  ; that  is  (§  226),  the  weight 
in  that  locality  of  the  unit  of  mass.  Experimenters  hitherto 
have  stated  their  results  in  terms  of  the  gravitation  unit,  each 
for  his  own  locality;  the  accuracy  hitherto  attained  being 
scarcely  in  any  cases  sufficient  to  require  corrections  for  the 

* It  is  to  be  understood  that  the  vibrations  in  question  are  so  much  spread 
out  through  the  length  of  the  body,  that  inertia  does  not  sensibly  influence  the 
transverse  contractions  and  dilatations  which  (unless  the  substance  have  in  this 
respect  the  peculiar  character  presented  by  cork,  § 684)  take  place  along  with 
them.  Also,  under  thermodynamics,  we  shall  see  that  changes  of  temperature 
produced  by  the  varying  stresses  cause  changes  of  temperature  which,  m ordinary 
solids  render  the  velocity  of  transmission  of  longitudinal  vibrations  sensibly 
greater  than  that  calculated  by  the  rule  stated  in  the  text,  if  we  use  the  static 
modulus  as  understood  from  the  definition  there  given;  and  we  shall  learn  to 
take  into  account  the  thermal  effect  by  using  a definite  static  modulus,  or  kinetic 
modulus,  according  to  the  circumstances  of  any  case  that  may  occur. 


STATICS. 


225 


688.] 


different  forces  of  gravity  in  the  different  places  of  observation,  in  terms  of 

i tIle  absolute 

Corresponding  statements  apply  to  the  modulus  ot  rigidity,  unit;  or  of 

__  f i ,,  i , „ . i i -ii  the  force  of 

loungs  word  “Modulus  is  also  used  conveniently  enough pravity on 

, . . J n the  unit  of 

in  the  expression  “Modulus  of  Rupture,  which  is  almost  a mass  in  any 

P A particular 

synonym  for  “Tenacity.”  (See  table  of  Moduluses  and  Strengths,  locality, 

article  “ Elasticity,”  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  new  edition.)  It 
means  the  greatest  pull  that  can  be  applied  to  a wire,  or 
bar,  or  rod  of  the  substance  without  breaking  it.  It  may  be 
reckoned  either  in  units  of  force  per  unit  of  area,  of  the  cross 
section ; or  it  may  be  reckoned  in  terms  of  the  length  which 
the  bar  must  have  to  be  equal  in  weight  to  the  breaking  force, 
and  when  so  reckoned  it  is  called  the  “Length-Modulus  of 
Rupture.” 

689.  The  most  useful  and  generally  convenient  specifica- 
tion of  the  modulus  of  elasticity  of  a substance  is  in  grammes- 
weiglit  per  square  centimetre.  This  has  only  to  be  divided  by 
the  specific  gravity  of  the  substance  to  give  the  length  of  the 
modulus.  British  measures,  however,  being  still  unhappily 
sometimes  used  in  practical  and  even  in  high  scientific  state- 
ments, we  may  have  occasion  to  refer  to  reckonings  of  the 
modulus  in  pounds  per  square  inch  or  per  square  foot,  or  to 
length  of  the  modulus  in  feet. 


690.  The  reckoning  most  commonly  adopted  in  British 
treatises  on  mechanics  and  practical  statements  is  pounds  per 
square  inch.  The  modulus  thus  stated  must  be  divided  by 
the  weight  of  12  cubic  inches  of  the  solid,  or  by  the  product 
of  its  specific  gravity  into  -4337*,  to  find  the  length  of  the 
modulus,  in  feet. 


This  decimal  being  the  weight  in  lbs.  of  12  cubic  inches  of  water.  The  one 
great  advantage  of  the  French  metrical  system  is,  that  the  mass  of  the  unit 
volume  (1  cubic  centimetre)  of  water  at  its  temperature  of  maximum  density 
(3°-945)  is  unity  (1  gramme)  to  a sufficient  degree  of  approximation  for  almost 
all  practical  purposes.  Thus,  according  to  this  system,  the  density  of  a body 
and  its  specific  gravity  mean  one  and  the  same  thing ; whereas  on  the  British 
no-system  the  density  is  expressed  by  a number  found  by  multiplying  the  specific 
gravity  by  one  number  or  another,  according  to  the  choice  of  a cubic  inch,  cubic 
foot,  cubic  yard,  or  cubic  mile  that  is  made  for  the  unit  of  volume;  and  the  grain, 
scruple,  gunmaker’s  drachm,  apothecary’s  drachm,  ounce  Troy,  ounce  avoirdu- 
pois, pound  Troy,  pound  avoirdupois,  stone  (Imperial,  Ayrshire,  Lanarkshire, 
VOL.  II.  ! e 


226  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [690. 

To  reduce  from  pounds  per  square  inch  to  grammes  per 
square  centimetre,  multiply  by  70'31,  or  divide  by  •014223. 
French  engineers  generally  state  their  results  in  kilogrammes 
per  square  millimetre,  and  so  bring  them  to  more  convenient 
numbers,  being  T0  of  the  inconveniently  large  numbers  ex- 
pressing moduluses  in  grammes  weight  per  square  centimetre. 

Metrical  691.  The  same  statements  as  to  units,  reducing  factors,  and 

denomma-  ...  . ° 

tionsof  nominal  designations,  are  applicable  to  the  bulk-modulus  of 

pf  elasticity  any  elastic  solid  or  fluid,  and  to  the  rigidity  (8  680)  of  an 
m general.  J 7 n j \o  / 

isotropic  body ; or,  in  general,  to  any  one  of  the  21  modu- 
luses in  the  expressions  [§  673.  (14)]  for  stresses  in  terms  of 
strains,  or  to  the  reciprocal  of  any  one  of  the  21  moduluses  in 
the  expressions  [§  673.  (16)]  for  strains  in  terms  of  stresses,  as 
well  as  to  the  modulus  defined  by  Young. 

Practical  691  a.  The  convenience,  for  residents  on  the  Earth,  of 

rules  for 

velocities  of  the  length-reckoning  of  moduluses  is  illustrated  by  the  theo- 
waves ; ° ° , 

rems  stated  at  the  end  of  § 687,  and  others  analogous  to  it  as 
follows : — 

Distortionai  (1)  The  velocity  of  propagation  of  a wave  of  distortion  in  an 
change  of  isotropic  homogeneous  solid  is  equal  to  the  velocity  acquired  by 
a body  in  falling  through  a height  equal  to  half  the  length- 
modulus  of  rigidity. 

Compres-  (2)  The  velocity  of  the  other  kind  of  wave  possible  in  an 
elastic  isotropic  homogeneous  solid,  that  is  to  say  a wave  analogous  to 

that  of  sound,  is  equal  to  the  velocity  acquired  by  a body  falling 
through  a height  equal  to  half  the  length-modulus  for  simple 
longitudinal  strain  (compare  § 686);  just  as  the  Youngs  rnodu- 

Dumbartonsliire),  stone  for  hay,  stone  for  corn,  quarter  (of  a hundredweight), 
quarter  (of  corn),  hundredweight,  or  ton,  that  is  chosen  for  unit  of  mass.  It  is  a 
remarkable  phenomenon,  belonging  rather  to  moral  and  social  than  to  physical 
science,  that  a people  tending  naturally  to  be  regulated  by  common  sense  should 
voluntarily  condemn  themselves,  as  the  British  have  so  long  done,  to  unnecessary 
hard  labour  in  every  action  of  common  business  or  scientific  work  related  to 
measurement;  from  which  all  the  other  nations  of  Europe  have  emancipated 
themselves.  We  have  been  informed,  through  the  kindness  of  the  late  Pro- 
fessor W.  H.  Miller,  of  Cambridge,  that  he  concludes,  from  a.very  trustworthy 
comparison  of  standards  by  Kupffer,  of  St  Petersburgh,  that  the  weight  of  a cubic 
decimetre  of  water  at  temperature  of  maximum  density  is  1000-013  grammes. 


STATICS. 


227 


C91  a.] 

lus  is  reckoned  for  simple  stress.  The  modulus  for  simple 
longitudinal  strain  may  be  found  by  enclosing  a rod  or  bar  of 
the  substance  in  an  infinitely  rigid,  perfectly  smooth  and  fric- 
tionless tube  fitting  it  perfectly  all  round,  and  then  dealing  with 
it  as  the  rod  with  its  sides  all  free  is  dealt  with  for  finding  the 
Young’s  modulus.  Of  course  it  is  understood  that  the  ideal 
tube,  which  gives  positive  normal  pressure  when  the  two  ends 
of  the  elastic  rod  within  it  are  pressed  together,  must  be  sup- 
posed to  give  the  negative  normal  pressure,  or  the  normal 
traction,  required  to  prevent  lateral  shrinkage,  when  the 
two  ends  of  the  wire  are  pulled  asunder.  (Compare  § 684 
above.) 

(3)  The  velocity  of  sound  in  a liquid  is  the  velocity  a body  Compres. 
would  acquire  in  falling  through  a height  equal  to  half  the  Squid  5m 
length-modulus  of  compression. 

(4)  The  Newtonian  velocity  of  sound  (that  is  to  say,  the  compres. 
velocity  which  sound  would  have  in  air  if  the  pressure  in  the  gas™1  m 
course  of  the  vibration  varied  simply  according  to  Boyle’s  law 
without  correction  for  the  heat  of  condensation,  and  the  cold  of 
rarefaction)  is  equal  to  the  velocity  a body  would  acquire  in 
falling  through  half  the  height  of  the  homogeneous  atmosphere 

for  the  actual  temperature  of  the  air  whatever  it  may  be.  (“  The 
Height  of  the  Homogeneous  Atmosphere  ” is  a short  expression 
commonly  used  to  designate  the  depth  that  an  ideal  incompres- 
sible liquid  of  the  same  density  as  air  must  have  to  give  by  its 
weight  the  same  pressure  at  the  bottom  as  the  actual  pressure 
of  the  air  at  the  supposed  temperature  and  density.) 

(5)  The  velocity  of  a long  wave*  in  water  of  uniform  depth,  gravita. 
supposed  incompressible,  is  the  velocity  a body  would  acquire  in  liquid;1” 
falling  through  a height  equal  to  half  the  depth. 

(6)  The  velocity  of  propagation  of  a transverse  pulse  in  a transversal 
stretched  chord  is  equal  to  the  velocity  acquired  by  a body  SSd0' 
falling  through  a height  equal  to  half  the  length  of  a quantity  conL 

of  cord  amounting  in  weight  to  the  stretching  force. 

* A “Long  wave”  is  a technical  expression  in  the  theory  of  waves  in  water  used 

to  denote  a wave  of  which  the  length  is  a largo  multiple  120  or  30  or  more)  of 
the  depth.  . ' 


15—2 


Digression 
on  Resili- 
ence, from 
Art.  Elas- 
ticity 
Mncyc. 
Brit. 


228  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [G91  b. 

691  b.  “ Resilience  ” is  a very  useful  word,  introduced  about 
forty  years  ago  (when  the  doctrine  of  energy  was  beginning  to 
become  practically  appreciated)  by  Lewis  Gordon,  first  professor 
of  engineering  in  the  university  of  Glasgow,  to  denote  the  quan- 
tity of  work  that  a spring  (or  elastic  body)  gives  back  when 
strained  to  some  stated  limit  and  then  allowed  to  return  to  the 
condition  in  which  it  rests  when  free  from  stress.  The  word 
“ resilience  ” used  without  special  qualifications  may  be  under- 
stood as  meaning  extreme  resilience,  or  the  work  given  back  by 
the  spring  after  being  strained  to  the  extreme  limit  within 
which  it  can  be  strained  again  and  again  without  breaking  or 
taking  a permanent  set.  In  all  cases  for  which  Hooke’s  law 
of  simple  proportionality  between  stress  and  strain  holds,  the 
resilience  is  obviously  equal  to  the  work  done  by  a constant 
force  of  half  the  amount  of  the  extreme  force  acting  through 
a space  equal  to  the  extreme  deflection. 

691  c.  When  force  is  reckoned  in  “ gravitation  measure,” 
resilience  per  unit  of  the  spring’s  mass  is  simply  the  height 
that  the  spring  itself,  or  an  equal  weight,  could  be  lifted  against 
gravity  by  an  amount  of  work  equal  to  that  given  back  by  the 
spring  returning  from  the  stressed  condition. 

691  d.  Let  the  elastic  body  be  a long  homogeneous  cylinder 
or  prism  with  flat  ends  (a  bar  as  we  may  call  it  for  brevity), 
and  let  the  stress  for  which  its  resilience  is  reckoned  be  positive 
normal  pressures  on  its  ends.  The  resilience  per  unit  mass  is 
equal  to  the  greatest  height  from  which  the  bar  can  fall  with 
its  length  vertical,  and  impinge  against  a perfectly  hard  friction- 
less horizontal  plane  without  suffering  stress  beyond  its  limits 
of  elasticity.  For  in  this  case  (as  in  the  case  of  the  direct  im- 
pact of  two  equal  and  similar  bars  meeting  with  equal  and  oppo- 
site velocities,  discussed  above,  §§  303,  304),  the  kinetic  energy 
of  the  translational  motion  preceding  the  impact  is,  during  the 
first  half  of  the  collision,  wholly  converted  into  potential  energy 
of  elastic  force,  which  during  the  second  half  of  the  collision  is 
wholly  reconverted  into  kinetic  energy  of  translational  motion 
in  the  reverse  direction.  During  the  whole  time  of  the  collision 
the  stopped  end  of  the  bar  experiences  a constant  pressure,  and 
at  the  middle  of  the  collision  the  whole  substance  of  the  bar 


STATICS. 


229 


691  d.] 

is  for  an  instant  at  rest  in  the  same  state  of  compression  as  it 
would  have  permanently  if  in  equilibrium  under  the  influence 
of  that  pressure  and  an  equal  and  opposite  pressure  on  the 
other  end.  From  the  beginning  to  the  middle  of  the  collision 
the  compression  advances  at  a uniform  rate  through  the  bar 
from  the  stopped  end  to  the  free  end.  Every  particle  of  the 
bar  which  the  compression  has  not  reached  continues  moving 
uniformly  with  the  velocity  of  the  whole  before  the  collision 
until  the  compression  reaches  it,  when  it  instantaneously  comes 
to  rest.  The  part  of  the  bar  which  at  any  instant  is  all  that  is 
compressed  remains  at  rest  till  the  corresponding  instant  in  the 
second  half  of  the  collision. 

691  e.  From  our  preceding  view  of  a bar  impinging  against 
an  ideal  perfectly  rigid  plane,  we  see  at  once  all  that  takes 
place  in  the  real  case  of  any  rigorously  direct  longitudinal 
collision  between  two  equal  and  similar  elastic  bars  with  flat 
ends.  In  this  case  the  whole  of  the  kinetic  energy  which  the 
bodies  had  before  collision  reappears  as  purely  translational 
kinetic  energy  after  collision.  The  same  would  be  approxi- 
mately true  of  any  two  bars,  provided  the  times  taken  by  a 
pulse  of  simple  longitudinal  stress  to  run  through  their  lengths 
are  equal.  Thus  if  the  two  bars  be  of  the  same  substance,  or 
of  different  substances  having  the  same  value  for  Young’s 
modulus,  the  lengths  must  be  equal,  but  the  diameters  may  be 
unequal.  Or  if  the  Young’s  modulus  be  different  in  the  two 
bars,  their  lengths  must  be  inversely  as  the  square  root  of  its 
values.  To  all  such  cases  the  laws  of  “ collision  between  two 
perfectly  elastic  bodies,”  whether  of  equal  or  unequal  masses,  as 
given  in  elementary  dynamical  treatises,  are  applicable.  But 
in  every  other  case  part  of  the  translational  energy  which  the 
bodies  have  before  collision  is  left  in  the  shape  of  vibrations 
after  collision,  and  the  translational  energy  after  collision  is 
accordingly  less  than  before  collision.  The  losses  of  energy 
observed  in  common  elementary  dynamical  experiments  on 
collision  between  solid  globes  of  the  same  substance  are  partly 
due  to  this  cause.  If  they  were  wholly  due  to  it  they  would 
be  independent  of  the  substance,  when  two  globes  of  the  same 
i substance  are  used.  They  would  bear  the  same  proportion  to 


Digression 
on  Resili- 
ence, from 
Art.  Elas- 
ticity 
Encyc. 
Brit. 


230 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[691  e. 


Digression 
on  Resili- 
ence, from 
Art.  Elas- 
ticity 
JSncyc. 
Brit. 


the  whole  energy  in  every  case  of  collision  between  two  equal 
globes,  or  again,  in  every  case  of  collision  between  two  globes 
of  any  stated  proportion  of  diameters,  provided  in  each  case 
the  two  which  collide  are  of  the  same  substance ; but  the 
proportion  of  translational  energy  converted  into  vibrations 
would  not  be  the  same  for  two  equal  globes  as  for  two  unequal 
globes.  Hence  when  differences  of  proportionate  losses  of  energy 
are  found  in  experiments  on  different  substances,  as  in  Newton’s 
on  globes  of  glass,  iron,  or  compressed  wool,  this  must  be  due 
to  imperfect  elasticity  of  the  material.  It  is  to  be  expected 
that  careful  experiments  upon  hard  well-polished  globes  striking 
one  another  with  such  gentle  forces  as  not  to  produce  even  at 
the  point  of  contact  any  stress  approaching  to  the  limit  of  elas- 
ticity, will  be  found  to  give  results  in  which  the  observed  loss 
of  translational  energy  can  be  almost  wholly  accounted  for  by 
vibrations  remaining  in  the  globes  after  collision. 


691  /.  Examples  of  Resilience. — Example  1. — In  respect  to 
simple  longitudinal  pull,  the  extreme  resilience  of  steel  piano- 
forte wire  of  No.  22  Birmingham  wire  gauge,  of  density  7727, 
weighing  034  grammes  per  centimetre  (calculated  by  multi- 
plying the  breaking  weight  of  106  kilogrammes  into  half  the 
elongation  produced  by  it,  namely  is  6163  metre-grammes 
(gravitation  measure)  per  ten  metres  of  the  wire.  Or,  what- 
ever the  length  of  the  wire,  its  resilience  is  equal  to  the 
work  required  to  lift  its  weight  through  172  metres. 

Example  2. — The  torsional  resilience  of  the  same  wire,  twisted 
in  either  direction  as  far  as  it  can  be  without  giving  it  any 
notable  permanent  set,  was  found  to  be  equal  to  the  work 
required  to  lift  its  weight  through  1-3  metres. 

Example  3. — The  extreme  resilience  of  a vulcanized  india- 
rubber  band  weighing  123  grammes  was  found  to  be  equal  to 
the  work  required  to  lift  its  weight  through  1200  metres.  This 
was  found  by  stretching  it  by  gradations  of  weights  up  to  the 
breaking  weight,  representing  the  results  by  aid  of  a curve,  and 
measuring  its  area  to  find  the  integral  work  given  back  by  the 
spring  after  being  stretched  by  a weight  just  short  of  the  break- 
ing weight. 


STATICS. 


231 


692.] 

692.  In  88  681,  682  we  examined  the  effect  of  a simple  stress  re- 
longitudinal  stress,  in  producing  elongation  in  its  own  direc-  maantam 
tion,  and  contraction  in  lines  perpendicular  to  it.  With  stresses  ]^nUdiDal 
substituted  for  strains,  and  strains  for  stresses,  we  may  apply 
the  same  process  to  investigate  the  longitudinal  and  lateral 
tractions  required  to  produce  a simple  longitudinal  strain  (that 
is,  an  elongation  in  one  direction,  with  no  change  of  dimensions 
perpendicular  to  it)  in  a rod  or  solid  of  any  shape. 

Thus  a simple  longitudinal  strain  e is  equivalent  to  a cubic 
dilatation  e without  change  of  figure  (or  linear  dilatation  \e 
equal  in  all  directions),  and  two  shears  consisting  each  of  dila- 
tation in  the  given  direction,  and  contraction  \e  in  each  of 
two  directions  perpendicular  to  it  and  to  one  another.  To 
produce  the  cubic  dilatation,  e,  alone  requires  (§  680)  a normal 
traction  he  equal  in  all  directions.  And,  to  produce  either  of 
the  shears  simply,  since  the  measure  (§  175)  of  each  is  §e, 
requires  a shearing  stress  equal  to  n x §e,  which  consists  of 
tangential  tractions  each  equal  to  this  amount,  positive  (or 
drawing  outwards)  in  the  line  of  the  given  elongation,  and 
negative  (or  pressing  inwards)  in  the  perpendicular  direction. 

Thus  we  have  in  all 


normal  traction  = (k  + §n)e,  in  the  direction  of  the 
given  strain,  and 

normal  traction  = {k  — | n)e,  in  every  direction  per- 
pendicular to  the  given  strain. 


693.  If  now  we  suppose  any  possible  infinitely  small  strain  stress- 
(e,  f,  9,  a,  h,  c),  according  to  the  specification  of  § 669,  to  be  fnTexmsof8 
given  to  a body,  the  stress  (P,  Q,  E,  S,  T,  U)  required  to  iSopfcf 
maintain  it  will  be  expressed  by  the  following  formuhe,  ob- b°dy' 
tained  by  successive  applications  of  § 692  (4)  to  the  com- 
ponents e,f,  g separately,  and  of  § 680  to  a,  b,  c : — 


S = na,  T = rib,  U = nc, 
P=®e+W(f+g), 

Q = ®f+W(g+e), 
R=®g  + W{e+f), 

where  <a  = 4 + |«, 

n = i(a-as) 


(5). 


232 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[694. 


694.  Similarly,  by  § 680  and  § 682  (3),  we  have 


where 

and 


a = -S,b  = -T,  c = -U, 

n n n 


Me  — [ P — cr  ( Q + P)}, 
Mf={Q-<r  {R  + P)}, 
Mg  = {R-a(P  + Q)}, 


M = 


9 nlc 

3/c  + n ’ 


3k  — 2n  _ j M 
2(3 k + n)  z n 


(6), 


as  the  formulae  expressing  the  strain  (e,  f,  g,  a,  b,  c ) in  terms  of 
the  stress  (P,  Q,  R,  SrT,  U ).  They  are  of  course  merely  the 
algebraic  inversions  of  (5) ; and  (§  673)  they  might  have  been 
found  by  solving  these  for  e,f,  g,  a,  b,  c,  regarded  as  the  un- 
known quantities.  M is  here  introduced  to  denote  Young’s 
modulus  (§  683). 

Equation  of  695.  To  express  the  equation  of  energy  for  an  isotropic 
the  same,  substance,  we  may  take  the  general  formula,  [§  673  (20)], 

w = \ [Re  + Q.f  + Rg  +Sa  + Tb+  Uc ) j 

and  eliminate  from  it  P,  Q,  etc.,  by  (5)  of  § 693,  or,  again,  e,f 
etc.,  by  (6)  of  § 694,  we  thus  find 
2 w — (Jc  + -fn)  (e2  +/2  + (f)  + 2 (ft  - f n)  ( fg  + ge  + ef)  + n ( a 2 + b2  + c2) 

= MS + si)  + «! + e,)  - Ki + ^) wi! + ^ + M + s (S! + r' + 1711 


Funda- 
mental 
problems 
of  mathe- 
matical 
theory. 


696.  The  mathematical  theory  of  the  equilibrium  of  an 
elastic  solid  presents  the  following  general  problems  : — 

A solid  of  any  given  shape , token  undisturbed,  is  acted  on  in 
its  substance  by  force  distributed  through  it  in  any  given  manner, 
and  displacements  are  arbitrarily  produced,  or  forces  arbitrarily 
applied , over  its  bounding  surface.  It  is  required  to  find  the 
displacement  of  every  point  of  its  substance. 

This  problem  has  been  thoroughly  solved  for  a shell  of 
homogeneous  isotropic  substance  bounded  by  surfaces  which, 
when  undisturbed,  are  spherical  and  concentric  (§  735) ; but 
not  hitherto  for  a body  of  any  other  shape.  Ihe  limitations 


STATICS. 


233 


696.] 


under  which  solutions  have  been  obtained  for  othei  cases  (thin 
plates,  and  rods),  leading,  as  we  have  seen,  to  important 
practical  results,  have  been  stated  above  (§§  588,  632).  To 
demonstrate  the  laws  (§§  591,  633)  which  were  taken  in  an- 
ticipation will  also  be  one  of  our  applications  of  the  geneial 
equations  for  interior  equilibrium  of  an  elastic  solid,  which  we 
now  proceed  to  investigate. 


697.  Any  portion  in  the  interior  of  an  elastic  solid  may  be  ^T^Uons 
regarded  as  becoming  perfectly  rigid  (§  564)  without  disturb-  equilibrium, 
ing  the  equilibrium  either  of  itself  or  of  the  matter  round  it. 

Hence  the  traction  exerted  by  the  matter  all  round  it,  regarded 
as  a distribution  of  force  applied  to  its  surface,  must,  with  the 
applied  forces  acting  on  the  substance  of  the  portion  considered, 
fulfil  the  conditions  of  equilibrium  of  forces  acting  on  a rigid 
body.  This  statement,  applied  to  an  infinitely  small  rectangular 
parallelepiped  of  the  body,  gives  the  general  differential  equa- 
tions of  internal  equilibrium  of  an  elastic  solid.  It  is  to  be 
remarked  that  three  equations  suffice  ; the  conditions  of  equili-  expressed 
brium  for  the  couples  being  secured  by  the  relation  established  equations, 
above  (§  661)  among  the  six  pairs  of  tangential  component 
tractions  on  the  six  faces  of  the  figure. 


Let  (x,  y , z)  be  any  point  within  the  solid,  and  See,  &y,  Sz  edges 
respectively  parallel  to  the  rectangular  axes  of  reference,  of  an 
infinitely  small  parallelepiped  of  the  solid  having  that  point  for 
its  centre. 


If  P , Q,  P,  S,  T,  U denote  (§  662)  the  stress  at  ( x , y,  z),  the 
average  amounts  of  the  component  tractions  (see  table,  § 669)  on 
the  faces  of  the  parallelepiped  will  be 


on  the  two  faces  SySz 


*(**£•**) 

1 

parallel  to  OX, 

) SyS*, 

11 

„ or, 

\ SySz, 

11 

„ oz. 

Taking  the  symmetrical  expressions  for  the  tractions  on  the  two 
other  pairs  of  faces,  and  summing  for  all  the  faces  all  the  com- 
ponents parallel  to  the  three  axes  separately,  we  have 


234 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[6D7. 


General 
equations  of 
interior 
equilibrium. 


'dP 

dU 

dT\ 

| SxSy&z, 

dx 

+ dy 

+ dz) 

parallel  to  OX, 

dU 

dQ 

dS\ 

SxSySz, 

dx 

dy 

+ fa) 

» » OY, 

dT 

dS 

dR\ 

) SxSySz, 

dx 

+ dy 

+ ~fa) 

5 , 5)  OZ. 

Let  now  X,  I , Z denote  the  components  of  the  applied  force 
on  the  substance  at  (x,  y,  z),  reckoned  per  unit  of  volume;  so  that 
XSxSyS z,  YSxSySz,  ZSxSySz  will  be  their  amounts  on  the  small 
portion  in  question.  Adding  these  to  the  corresponding  com- 
ponents just  found  for  the  tractions,  equating  to  zero,  and  omitting 
the  factor  SxSySz,  we  have 


dP  dU  dT  v „ 

—j—  H — j f-  — j h X—  0 

dx  dy  dz 

o 

dx  dy  dz 

dT  dS  dR  „ 

~~T~  H — + -j — V Z = 0 

dx  dy  dz 


•(2); 


which  are  the  general  equations  of  internal  stress  required  for 
equilibrium. 


If  for  P,  Q,  R,  S,  T,  U we  substitute  the  linear  functions  of 
ej  f 9}  a;  c i-n  terms  of  which  they  are  expressed  by  (14)  of 
§ 673,  we  have  the  equations  of  internal  strain.  And  if  we 
eliminate  e,f  g,  a,  b,  c by  (6)  of  § 670  we  have,  for  (a,  (3,  y)  the 
components  of  the  displacement  of  any  interior  point  in  terms  of 
(x,  y,  z)  its  undisplaced  position  in  the  solid,  three  linear  partial 
differential  equations  of  the  second  degree,  which  are  the  equa- 
tions of  internal  equilibrium  in  their  ultimate  form.  It  is  to  be 
remarked  that,  by  supposing  the  coefficients  (e,  e ),  ( e , f ),  etc., 
to  be  not  constant,  but  given  functions  of  (x,  y,  z),  we  avoid 
limiting  the  investigation  to  a homogenous  body. 


Being  suffi- 
cient, they 
imply  that 
the  forces 
on  any  part 
supposed 
rigid  fulfil 
the  six  equa- 
tions of 
equilibrium 
in  a rigid 
body. 


698.  These  equations  being  sufficient  as  well  as  necessary 
for  the  equilibrium  of  the  body,  they  must  secure  that  the  con- 
dition of  § 697  is  fulfilled  for  any  and  every  finite  portion  of 
it.  This  is  easily  verified. 

Lot  fff  denote  integration  throughout  any  particular  part  of 


STATICS. 


235 


698.] 


the  solid,  do  an  element  of  the  surface  bounding  this  part,  and 
[|  |]  integration  over  the  whole  of  this  surface.  We  have 


jjjxdxdydz  = -///(s  + ^ + i) 


Hence,  integrating  each  term  once,  attending  to  the  limits  as  in 
Appendix  A.,  and  denoting  by  I,  m,  n the  direction-cosines  of 
the  normal  through  da, 

fffXdxdydz  = - [//{Pdydz  + Udzdx  + Tdxdy)\  = - [ff(Pl  + Um  + Tn)d<x], 


and  thei-efore  [§  662  (1)] 

JjJXdxdydz  + [jjFda]  = 0 (3). 


Again  we  have 


Now,  integrating  by  parts,  etc.,  as  in  Appendix  A.,  we  have 
dS 


and 


Hence 


jjjy  — dxdydz  --  [/ jySmda]  - ff  jSdxdydz , 
jjj Z <lL  dxdVdz  = [// zSvda\  -jjj S dxdydz. 


fff(,S-Q  dxdVdz  = [//( ySm  - zSn)da\. 


Using  this  in  the  preceding  expression,  integrating  the  other 
terms  each  once  simply  as  before,  and  using  § 662  (1),  we  find 


fJKyZ  -ssY)  dxdydz  + [// ( yll  - zG)  do]  ^ 0 (4). 


The  six  equations  of  equilibrium  being  (3),  (4),  and  the  sym- 
metrical equations  relative  to  y and  z,  are  thus  proved. 


For  an  isotropic  solid,  the  equations  (2)  become  of  course  much 
simpler.  Thus,  using  (5)  of  § 693,  eliminating  e,  f g,  a,  b,  c 
by  (6)  of  § 670,  grouping  conveniently  the  terms  which  result, 
and  putting 


Verification 
of  equations 
of  equili- 
brium for 
any  part 
supposed 
rigid. 


Simplified 
equations 
for  isotropic 
solid. 


m = (k  + ^n) 


(5), 


236 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[698. 


St  Venant’s 
application 
to  torsion 
problems. 


Torsion  pro- 
blem stated. 


we  find 


cl 

(cla 

d^ 

dy\ 

/d2  a 

d2a 

d2a\ 

m-r- 

clx 

\dx 

dy 

fa) 

+ n 

\dx 2 + 

<%*  + 

fa2) 

+ 

X = 

0 

d. 

'da 

dp 

dy\ 

+ n | 

rd2p 

d’fl 

d2p\ 

0 

dy\ 

fix  + 

dy 

dz) 

\dx2  + 

~J~2  + 

dy 

dz2) 

+ 

7 = 

* -(6), 

d 

(cla 

dp 

dy\ 

+ n 

(d2y 

d2y 

d2y\ 

0 

- 

m j - 

dz 

[dx 

dy  ^ 

dz  j 

\dx2  + 

dP) 

+ 

or,  as  we  may  write  them  shortly, 


+ mdy  + nv*P+  Y=0>  mdz  + nv2y  + z=0...(7), 


if  we  put 


and 


da  dp  dy_ 
dx  dy  dz 

(8), 

cl2  cf  cl2 

dx2  + dy2  + dz2  V 

(9), 

so  that  8 shall  denote  the  amount  ot  dilatation  in  volume  ex- 
perienced by  the  substance;  and  v"  the  same  symbol  of  operation 
as  formerly  [Appendix  A.  and  B.,  and  §§  491,  492,  499,  etc.]. 


699.  One  of  the  most  beautiful  applications  of  the  general 
equations  of  internal  equilibrium  of  an  elastic  solid  hitherto 
made  is  that  of  M.  de  St  Yenant  to  “the  torsion  of  prisms.*” 
To  one  end  of  a long  straight  prismatic  rod,  wire,  or  solid  or 
hollow  cylinder  of  any  form,  a given  couple  is  applied  in  a plane 
perpendicular  to  the  length,  while  the  other  end  is  held  fast:  it' 
is  required  to  find  the  degree  of  twist  (§  120)  produced,  and 
the  distribution  of  strain  and  stress  throughout  the  prism.  The 
conditions  to  he  satisfied  here  are  that  the  resultant  action  be- 
tween the  substance  on  the  two  sides  of  any  normal  section  is 
a couple  in  the  normal  plane,  equal  to  the  given  couple.  Our 
work  for  solving  the  problem  will  be  much  simplified  by  first 
establishing  the  following  preliminary  propositions: — 


* Memoires  des  Savants  Etrangers.  1855.  “De  la  Torsion  des  Prismes,  avec 
des  consid6rations  sur  leur  Flexion,”  etc. 


STATICS. 


237 


700.]  

700.  Let  a solid  (whether  aeolotropic  or  isotropic)  be  so  Lemma, 
acted  on  by  force  applied  from  without  to  its  boundary,  that 
throughout  its  interior  there  is  no  normal  traction  on  any 
plane  parallel  or  perpendicular  to  a given  plane,  XOY , which 
implies,  of  course,  that  there  is  no  shearing  stress  with  axes 
in  or  parallel  to  this  plane,  and  that  the  whole  stress  at  any 
point  of  the  solid  is  a simple  shearing  stress  of  tangential 
forces  in  some  direction  in  the  plane  parallel  to  XOY,  and  in 
the  plane  perpendicular  to  this  direction.  Then — 


(1.)  The  interior  shearing  stress  must  be  equal,  and  simi- 
larly directed,  in  all  parts  of  the  solid  lying  in  any  line  perpen- 
dicular to  the  plane  XOY. 

(2.)  It  being  premised  that  the  traction  at  every  point  of 
any  surface  perpendicular  to  the  plane  XOY  is,  by  hypothesis, 
a distribution  of  force  in  lines  perpendicular  to  this  plane;  the 
integral  amount  of  it  on  any  closed  prismatic  or  cylindrical 
surface  perpendicular  to  XOY,  and  bounded  by  planes  parallel 
to  it,  is  zero. 

(3.)  The  matter  within  the  prismatic  surface  and  terminal 
planes  of  (2.)  being  supposed  for  a moment  (§  564)  to  be 
rigid,  the  distribution  of  tractions  referred  to  in  (2.)  con- 
stitutes a couple  whose 
moment,  divided  by  the 
distance  between  those 
terminal  planes,  is  equal 
to  the  resultant  force  of 
the  tractions  on  the  area 
of  either,  and  whose  plane 
is  parallel  to  the  lines 
of  these  resultant  forces. 

In  other  words,  the  mo-  C 
ment  of  the  distribution  of  forces  over  the  prismatic  surface 
referred  to  in  (2.)  round  any  line  (OF  or  OX)  in  the  plane  XOY, 
is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  components  (T  or  S),  perpendicular 
to  the  same  line,  of  the  traction  in  either  of  the  terminal  planes 
multiplied  by  the  distance  between  these  planes. 


238 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Lemma. 


[700. 

To  prove  (1.)  consider  for  a moment  as  rigid  (§  564)  an 
infinitesimal  prism,  AB  (of  sectional  area  co),  perpendicular  to 
^ XOY,  and  having  plane  ends,  A,  B,  parallel 

>^co  to  it.  There  being  no  forces  on  its  sides  (or 
cylindrical  boundary)  perpendicular  to  its 
length,  its  equilibrium  so  far  as  motion  in 
the  direction  of  any  line  {OX),  perpendi- 
cular to  its  length,  requires  (§  551,  i.)  that 
the  components  of  the  tractions  on  its  ends 
be  equal  and  in  opposite  directions.  Hence, 

LI  in  the  notation  of  § 662,  the  shearing 

■B  stress  components,  T,  must  be  equal  at  A 

and  B-,  and  so  must  the  stress  components  S,  for  the  same 
reason. 


To  prove  (2.)  and  (3.)  we  have  only  to  remark  that  they  are 
required,  according  to  § 551,  I.  and  II.,  for  the  equilibrium  of 
the  rigid  prism  referred  to  in  (3.). 


Or,  analytically,  by  the  general  equations  (2)  of  § 697,  since 
X = 0,  Y—  0,  Z=0,  P — 0,  Q — 0,  = U—  0,  by  hypothesis; 

we  have 

dS=o (1), 


dz  ’ 


dz 


and 


dT  dS  _ o 
dx  dy 


.(2). 


Of  these  (1.)  prove  that  S and  T are  functions  of  x and  ^’without 
z,  or,  in  words,  (1.)  And  if  ff  denote  integration  over  the  whole 
of  any  closed  area  of  XOY,  we  have 


//(f+f)^=U(^+W 


of  which  the  second  member,  when  the  limits  of  the  effected  and 
indicated  integrations  are  properly  assigned,  is  found  to  he  the 
same  as 

/(^sin  4>  + S cos  <£)  ds, 

where  / denotes  integration  over  the  whole  bounding  curve,  ds 

* The  brackets  [ ],  as  here  used,  denote  integrals  assigned  properly  for  the 
bounding  curve. 


700.] 


STATICS. 


239 


an  element  of  its  length,  and  <£  the  inclination  of  els  to  AO.  Lemma. 
But,  by  (1)  § 662,  with  l = sin  </>,  m=  cos  </>,  n — 0,  we  have 

II — T sin  cf)  + S cos  (f> (3), 

if  H denote  the  traction  (parallel  to  OZ ),  reckoned  as  usual  per 
unit  of  area,  experienced  by  the  bounding  prismatic  surface. 

Hence 

//(f+f)"y=/s* 


and  therefore,  because  of  (2), 

5 lids  = 0 (5), 

which  is  (2.)  in  symbols.  Again  we  have,  by  integration  by  parts, 


and  substitution,  (2),  of  ^ for  — ^y-, 

cty  cix 


JJTdxdy  = [/  Txdyf  - jjx  (~  dxdy 
= [jTxdy]*  + ffx~  dxdy  = [JTxdy]*+  [ fSxdx ]* 

= Jx  (T  sin  $ + S cos  $)  ds  = f xHds  (6), 

which  proves  (3.) 


701.  For  a solid  or  hollow  circular  cylinder,  the  solution  of 
§ 699  (given  first,  we  believe,  by  Coulomb)  obviously  is  that 
each  circular  normal  section  remains  unchanged  in  its  own 
i dimensions,  figure,  and  internal  arrangement  (so  that  every 
? straight  line  of  its  particles  remains  a straight  line  of  un- 
; changed  length),  but  is  turned  round  the  axis  of  the  cylinder 
: through  such  an  angle  as  to  give  a uniform  rate  of  twist  (§  120) 
jj  equal  to  the  applied  couple  divided  by  the  product  of  the 
moment  of  inertia  of  the  circular  area  (whether  annular  or 
i complete  to  the  centre)  into  the  rigidity  of  the  substance. 

For,  if  we  suppose  the  distribution  of  strain  thus  specified  to  Torsional 
be  actually  produced,  by  whatever  application  of  stress  is  neces-  circular  °f 
saiy,  we  have,  in  every  part  of  the  substance,  a simple  shear  ci’linder- 
parallel  to  the  normal  section,  and  perpendicular  to  the  radius 
through  it.  The  elastic  reaction  against  this  requires  to  balance 

The  brackets  [ ],  as  here  used,  denote  integrals  assigned  properly  for  the 
i bounding  curve. 


Prism  of 
any  shape 
constrained 
to  a simple 
twist, 


requires 
tractions  on 
its  sides. 


Traction  on 
sides  of 
prism  con- 
strained to 
a simple 
twist. 


240  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [701. 

it  (§§  G79,  G82),  a simple  distorting  stress  consisting  of  forces  in 
the  normal  section,  directed  as  the  shear,  and  others  in  planes 
through  the  axis,  and  directed  parallel  to  the  axis.  The  amount 
of  the  shear  is,  for  parts  of  the  substance  at  distance  r from  the 
axis,  equal  obviously  to  t r,  if  r be  the  rate  of  twist.  Hence  the 
amount  of  the  tangential  force  in  either  set  of  planes  is  nrr  per 
unit  of  area,  if  n be  the  rigidity  of  the  substance.  Hence  there 
is  no  force  between  parts  of  the  substance  lying  on  the  two  sides 
of  any  element  of  any  circular  cylinder  coaxal  with  the  bounding 
cylinder  or  cylinders;  and  consequently  no  force  is  required  on 
the  cylindrical  boundary  to  maintain  the  supposed  state  of  strain. 
And  the  mutual  action  between  the  parts  of  the  substance  on  the 
two  sides  of  any  normal  plane  section  consists  of  force  in  this 
plane,  directed  perpendicular  to  the  radius  through  each  point, 
and  amounting  to  mr  per  unit  of  area.  The  moment  of  tbis  dis- 
tribution of  force  round  the  axis  of  the  cylinder  is  (if  da  denote 
an  element  of  the  area)  m Jfdor2,  or  the  product  of  nr  into  the 
moment  of  inertia  of  the  area  round  the  perpendicular  to  its  plane 
through  its  centre,  which  is  therefore  equal  to  the  moment  of  the 
couple  applied  at  either  end. 

702.  Similarly,  we  see  that  if  a cylinder  or  prism  of  any 
shape  be  compelled  to  take  exactly  the  state  of  strain  above 
specified  (§701)  with  the  line  through  the  centres  of  inertia  of 
the  normal  sections,  taken  instead  of  the  axis  of  the  cylinder, 
the  mutual  action  between  the  parts  of  it  on  the  two  sides  of 
any  normal  section  will  be  a couple  of  which  the  moment  will 
be  expressed  by  the  same  formula,  that  is,  the  product  of  the 
rigidity,  into  the  rate  of  twist,  into  the  moment  of  inertia  of 
the  section  round  its  centre  of  inertia. 

The  only  additional  remark  required  to  prove  this  is,  that  if 
the  forces  in  the  normal  section  be  resolved  in  any  two  rect- 
angular directions,  OX,  OY,  the  sums  of  the  components,  being 
respectively  nrjjxdc t and  nr  j J yda , each  vanish  by  the  piopeity 
(§  230)  of  the  centre  of  inertia. 

703.  But  for  any  other  shape  of  prism  than  a solid  or 
symmetrical  hollow  circular  cylinder,  the  supposed  state  of 
strain  will  require,  besides  the  terminal  opposed  couples,  foice; 
parallel  to  the  length  of  the  prism,  distributed  over  the  pris- 


STATICS. 


241 


70S.] 


matic  boundary,  in  proportion  to  the  distance  along  the  tangent,  Traction  on 
from  each  point  of  the  surface,  to  the  point  in  which  this  line  prism  con- 
is  cut  by  a perpendicular  to  it  from  the  centre  of  inertia  of  the  ^™pl0 
normal  section.  To  prove  this  let  a normal  section  of  the 
prism  be  represented  in  the  annexed  diagram.  Let  PK,  re- 
presenting the  shear  at  any  point,  P,  close  to  the  prismatic 
boundary,  be  resolved  into  PN  and  PT  respectively  along  the 

normal  and  tangent. 

The  whole  shear,  PK, 
being  equal  to  t r,  its 
component,  PN,  is 
equal  to  rr  sin  co  or 
t . PE.  The  corre- 
sponding component 
of  the  required  stress 
is  nr. PE,  and  involves 
(§661)  equal  forces  in 
the  plane  of  the  dia- 
gram, and  in  the  plane  through  TP  perpendicular  to  it,  each 
amounting  to  m . PE  per  unit  of  area. 


An  application  of  force  equal  and  opposite  to  the  distribu- 
tion thus  found  over  the  prismatic  boundary,  would  of  course 
alone  produce  in  the  prism,  otherwise  free,  a state  of  strain 
which,  compounded  with  that  supposed  above,  would  give  the 
state  of  strain  actually  produced  by  the  sole  application  of 
balancing  couples  to  the  two  ends.  The  result,  it  is  easily  st  Venant’s 
seen  (and  it  will  be  proved  below),  consists  of  an  increased  togfve'the 
twist,  together  with  a warping  of  naturally  plane  normal  duced  E™’ 
sections,  by  infinitesimal  displacements  perpendicular  to  them-  g couples 
selves,  into  certain  surfaces  of  anticlastic  curvature,  with  equal  the  ends1.0 
opposite  curvatures  in  the  principal  sections  (§  130)  through 
every  point.  This  theory  is  due  to  St  Yenant,  who  not  only 
pointed  out  the  falsity  of  the  supposition  admitted  by  several 
previous  writers,  that  Coulomb’s  law  holds  for  other  forms  of 
prism  than  the  solid  or  hollow  circular  cylinder,  but  discovered 
fully  the  nature  of  the  requisite  correction,  reduced  the  deter- 
mination of  it  to  a problem  of  pure  mathematics,  worked  out 
the  solution  for  a great  variety  of  important  and  curious  cases, 

VOL.  II.  1(3 


242 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[703. 


compared  the  results  with  observation  in  a manner  satisfactory 
and  interesting  to  the  naturalist,  and  gave  conclusions  of  great 
value  to  the  practical  engineer. 

Hydro-  704.  We  take  advantage  of  the  identity  of  mathematical 

analogue  conditions  in  St  Yenant’s  torsion  problem,  and  a hydrokinetic 

to  torsion  o i * 

problem,  problem  first  solved  a few  years  earlier  by  Stokes*,  to  give 
the  following  statement,  which  will  be  found  very  useful  in 
estimating  deficiencies  in  torsional  rigidity  below  the  amount 
calculated  from  the  fallacious  extension  of  Coulomb’s  law : — 

705.  Conceive  a liquid  of  density  n completely  filling  a 
closed  infinitely  light  prismatic  box  of  the  same  shape  within 
as  the  given  elastic  prism  and  of  length  unity,  and  let  a couple 
be  applied  to  the  box  in  a plane  perpendicular  to  its  length. 
The  effective  moment  of  inertia  of  the  liquid *f*  will  be  equal  to 
the  correction  by  which  the  torsional  rigidity  of  the  elastic 
prism  calculated  by  the  false  extension  of  Coulomb’s  law  must 
be  diminished  to  give  the  true  torsional  rigidity. 

Further,  the  actual  shear  of  the  solid,  in  any  infinitely  thin 
plate  of  it  between  two  normal  sections,  will  at  each  point  be, 
when  reckoned  as  a differential  sliding  (§  1/2)  parallel  to  their 
planes,  equal  to  and  in  the  same  direction  as  the  velocity  of  the 
liquid  relatively  to  the  containing  box. 

Solution  of  706.  To  prove  these  propositions  and  investigate  the  mathe- 
probiem.  matical  equations  of  the  problem,  we  first  show  that  the  con- 
ditions of  the  case  (§  699)  are  verified  by  a state  of  strain 
compounded  of  (1)  a simple  twist  round  the  line  through  the 
centres  of  inertia,  and  (2)  a distorting  of  each  normal  section 
by  infinitesimal  displacements  perpendicular  to  its  plane : then 
find  the  interior  and  surface  equations  to  determine  this  warp- 
ing : and  lastly,  calculate  the  actual  moment  of  the  couple  to 
which  the  mutual  action  between  the  matter  on  the  two  sides 
of  any  normal  section  is  equivalent. 

Taking  OX,  OY  in  any  normal  section  through  0 any  con- 
venient point  (not  necessarily  its  centre  of  inertia),  and  OZ  per- 

* “On  some  cases  of  Fluid  Motion.” — Camb.  Phil.  Trans.  1843;  or  Mathe- 
matical and  Physical  Papers,  Stokes,  Yol.  i.,  page  17. 

f That  is,  the  moment  of  inertia  of  a rigid  solid  which,  as  will  be  proved  in 
Yol.  ii.,  may  be  fixed  within  the  box,  if  the  liquid  be  removed,  to  make  its 
motions  the  same  as  they  are  with  the  liquid  in  it. 


TOG.] 


STATICS. 


243 


pendicular  to  them,  let  x + a,  y + ft,  z + y be  the  co-ordinates  of 
the  position  to  which  a point  (x,  y , z)  of  the  unstrained  solid  is 
displaced,  in  virtue  of  the  compound  strain  just  described.  Thus 
y will  be  a function  of  x and  y , without  z;  and,  if  the  twist 
(1)  be  denoted  by  t according  to  the  simple  twist  reckoning  of 
§ 120,  we  shall  have 

x + a = x cos  (tz)  - y sin  ( tz ),  y + ft  = c c sin  ( tz ) + y cos  ( tz ) ... (7). 
Hence,  for  infinitely  small  values  of  z, 

a = — ryz,  ft  = rxz (8). 

Adhering  to  the  notation  of  §§  670,  693,  only  changing  to  Saxon 
letters,  we  have 


t=0,  i = 0,  5=0,  a = rx  + — , & = - ry  + C~~ , c - 0 

dy  J dx  ’ 


•(9). 

Hence  [§  693  (5)] 

P=0,Q  = 0,S=0,S=n(rx  + ^,T=n(-ry  + ^\,  U=  0...(10). 

And  with  the  notation  of  § 698,  (8)  and  (9), 

S = 0,  \!2a  = 0,  v2^  = 0 (11). 

Hence  if  also  C^-X  + chX  - o n 9^ 

da?  dy*  

the  equations  of  internal  equilibrium  [§  698  (6)]  are  all  satisfied. 

For  the  surface  traction,  with  the  notation  of  §§  662,  700,  we 

have,  by  § 662  (1), 

F-  0,  G-  0,  II  = T sin  </>  + S cos  (13); 

or  eliminating  T and  S by  (10),  and  introducing  dyjdp  to  denote 
the  rate  of  variation  of  y in  the  direction  perpendicidar  to  the 
prismatic  surface,  and  q (PE  of  § 703)  the  distance  from  the 
point  of  the  surface  for  which  II  is  expressed,  to  the  intersection 
of  the  tangent  plane  with  a perpendicular  from  0 , 

H-n  {(ij  cos  ^ + d\~T(y  sin  <j,-x  cos  <}> 

To  find  the  mutual  action  between  the  matter*  on  the  two 
sides  of  a normal  section,  we  first  remark  that,  inasmuch  as  each 
of  the  two  parts  of  the  compound  strain  considered  (the  twist 

and  the  warping)  separately  fulfils  the  conditions  of  § 700,  we 
must  have 

JJTdxdy  = fxllds,  and  / jSdxdy  = jyllda (15). 

1G— 2 


Equations 
of  strain, 
stress,  and 
internal 
equilibrium. 


Surface 
traction  to 
bo  made 
zero. 


...(14). 


Couple  re- 
sultant of 
traction  in 
normal 
section. 


244 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[700. 


Hence  when  the  prescribed  surface  condition  II  = 0 is  fulfilled, 

we  have  / J Tdxdy  = 0,  J JSdxdy  = 0 (16), 

and  there  remains  only  a couple 


N=Jj(Sx- Ty)dxdy  = nr  ff  ( x 2 + y2)  dxdy  - nff  (y^T  x dxdlJ  •••(17)> 

in  the  plane  of  the  normal  section.  That  condition,  by  (14), 
gives 


Hydro- 
kinetic  ap- 
plication of 
torsional 
equation. 


= or  y,cos^)  + y/sin(/)  = T(7/sin  <£-cccos</>)  ...(18), 
dp  tt  v am. 

for  every  point  of  the  prismatic  surface. 

We  shall  see  in  Yol.  ii.  that  (12)  and  (18)  are  differential  ', 
equations  which  determine  a function,  y,  of  x,  y,  such  that  dyjdx 
and  dyjdy  are  the  components  of  the  velocity  of  a perfect  liquid 
initially  at  rest  in  a prismatic  box  as  described  in  § 705,  and  set 
in  motion  by  communicating  to  the  box  an  angular  velocity,  t, 
in  the  direction  reckoned  negative  round  OZ : and  that  the 
time-integral  (§  297)  of  the  continuous  couple  by  which  this  is 
done,  however  suddenly  or  gradually,  is 

nU{x%~d1£)d*d!/’ 


which  is  the  excess  of  m[ f (xz  + y2)  dxdy  over  Y.  Also,  a and 
l)  in  (9)  are  the  components,  parallel  to  OX  and  01 , of  the 
velocity  of  the  liquid  relatively  to  the  box,  since  - ry  and  tx  are 
the  components  of  the  velocity  of  a point  (x,  y)  rotating  in  the 
positive  direction  round  OZ  with  the  angular  velocity  t.  Hence 
the  propositions  (§  705)  to  be  proved. 


707.  M.  de  St  Yenant  finds  solutions  of  these  equations  in 
two  ways  (A.)  Taking  any  solution  whatever  of  (12),  he  finds ^ 
a series  of  curves  for  each  of  which  (18)  is  satisfied,  and  any> 


St  Venant’s 
invention  of 
solvable 
cases. 


one  of  which,  therefore,  may  be  taken  as  the  boundary  of  a 
prism  to  which  that  solution  shall  be  applicable . and  (B.)  By 
the  purely  analytical  method  of  Fourier,  he  solves  (1-^),  subject 
to  the  surface  equation  (18),  for  the  particular  case  of  a rect-: 

angular  prism. 

(A.)  For  this  M.  de  St  Yenant  finds  a general  integral  oi 
the  boundary  condition,  viewed  as  a differential  equation  in 
terms  of  the  two  variables  y,  thus  Multiplying  (18)  by  ds, 
and  replacing  sin  (fids  and  cos  cf>ds  by  their  values  dy  and 


707.] 


STATICS. 


245 


we  have 


dy  - ~ clx  — hr  cl  (x2  + Vs)  = 0. 
ax  cly 


.(19). 


In  this  the  first  two  terms  constitute  a complete  difFerential  of  a 
function  of  x and  y,  independent  variables ; because  y satisfies 
(12).  Thus,  denoting  this  function  by  u,  we  have 
cly  du  , dy  du 

dx=fy’  and  dy~~dx ' 

and  ( 1 9)  becomes  du  - \tcI  ( x 2 + y2)  = 0, 

which  requires  that  u - £r  {x2  + y2)  = C (21), 

for  every  point  in  the  boundary.  It  is  to  be  remarked  that, 
because 

cl  cly  cl  dy 
(Lx  dy  dy  dx  ’ 

we  have,  from  (20),  — , + = 0 (22)  ; 

or  u also,  as  y,  fulfils  the  equation  ^ 2u  = 0.  A.  function, 
algebraically  homogeneous  as  to  ®,  y,  which  satisfies  this  equation 
is  [Appendix  B.  (a)]  a spherical  harmonic  independent  of  z. 
Hence  a homogeneous  solution  of  integral  degree  i can  only  be 
the  part  of  Appendix  B.  (39)  not  containing  z.  This  is 

OF  + Crf, 

where  [Appendix  B.  (26)] 

$ = x + vy,  and  rj-x  — vy, 
v standing  for  J - 1 ; 

change  the  constants  so  that  the  constants  may  be  real, 

A {(x  + vy){+  (x  - vy)'}  - vB  {(a;  + vy){  ~(x-  vy )'} (23), 

or,  in  terms  of  polar  co-ordinates, 

2r*  (^1  cos  id  + B sin  id) (24).  * 

Using  this  solution  for  the  case  i = 2 and  (without  loss  of 
generality)  putting  B = 0,  we  have 

u = 2A  ( x2 -y 2) (25); 

whence  by  (20)  y = -4 Axy (26); 

and  the  equation  (21)  of  the  series  of  bounding  curves  to  which 
this  solution  is  applicable  is 


a2  b2 


St  Venant’s 
invention  of 
solvable 
cases. 


(27), 


246 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[707. 


Solution  for 

elliptic 

cylinder. 


St  Venant’s 
invention  of 
solvable 
cases. 


Solution 
for  equilate- 
ral triangle. 


if  we  put,  for  brevity, 


-C 
— 2/1 


= a 


-C 

J,t  + 2/1 


which  give 

so  that  (26)  becomes 


4/1  = ■ 


a 


2 - Ir 


a2  + b 2 ’ 


a 


b 2 


7 


= — T 


a2  + U 


xy. 


(28). 


Using  this  in  (17)  we  have 

nr  {//  (x2  + y2)  dxdy  - ff  ~ V*)  dxdV), 

or,  if  I,  J denote  the  moments  of  inertia  of  the  area  of  the 
normal  section,  round  the  axes  of  x and  y respectively, 

N = ut{j+I-  (J-l) ! (29) ; 


.(30). 




or,  lastly,  as  we  have  for  the  elliptic  area  (27), 

I — \ivab  . b2,  J = ^rrcib  . co2, 

JT=«r(/+7){l  -(^)  } = »r^| 

Another  very  simple  but  most  interesting  case  investigated 
by  M.  de  St  Venant,  is  that  arrived  at  by  taking  a harmonic  of 
the  third  degree  for  u.  Thus,  introducing  a factor  \ r/a  for 
the  sake  of  homogeneity  and  subsequent  convenience,  we  have 

| - (x3  - 3 y2x)  - |t  (x2  + yz)=G, 


or  in  polar  co-ordinates, 

\ — r3  cos  36  — |-t r2  = C, 


a 


.(31), 


as  an  equation  giving,  by  different  values  of  C,  a series  of 
bounding  lines,  for  which 


y = T - (y3  - 3 x2y)  - - | ^ r3  sin  36 (32) 

is  the  solution  of  (12),  subject  to  (18).  For  the  particular  value 

Co  o 

= - ifj  Q>  T 

(31)  gives  three  straight  lines,  the  sides  of  an  equilateral 
triangle  having  a for  perpendicular  from  an  angle  to  the  opposite 


STATICS. 


247 


707.] 


side,  and  placed  relatively  to  x and  y,  as  shown  in  the  diagram  Solution 
(§  708,  below).  Thus  we  have  the  complete  solution  of  the  fai  triangle, 
torsion  problem  for  a prism  whose  normal  section  is  an  equi- 
lateral  triangle.  Equation  (17)  worked  out  for  this  area,  with 
(32)  for  y,  gives 


N = n (K  - -|/i ) r. 

But  (K  being  the  proper  moment  of  inertia  of  the  triangle,  and 
A its  area) 


K 


V3 


a 


= ^a9A  = 


J_  A°- 

3 J3A  3 


and  thus,  for  the  torsional  rigidity,  we  have  the  several  ex- 
pressions 

A"  3 „ 1 4 1 2 . 1 1 nA 4 

7 = ***  = 1V3  = 15  naA  = 5J3  nA  = 45  ~K~ (33)- 


Similarly,  taking  for  u a harmonic  of  the  fourth  degree  and  Tor  curvi- 

^ linear 

adjusting  the  constants  to  his  wants,  St  Yenant  finds  the  squares, 
equation, 

x2  + if  - a ( x 4 - bx2y2  + y4)  = 1 - a 
or  rs  - ar 4 cos  40  = 1 - a 


to  give,  for  different  values  of  a,  a series  of  curvilinear  squares 
(see  diagram  of  § 708  (3),  below),  all  having  rounded  corners, 
except  two  similar  though  differently  turned  curvilinear  squares 
with  concave  sides  and  acute  angles  corresponding  to  a = '5, 
and  a = — \ (J2  - 1)  • for  each  of  which  the  torsion  problem  is 
algebraically  solved. 


And  by  taking  u the  sum  of  two  harmonics,  of  the  fourth  and  For  star 

eighth  degrees  respectively,  and  properly  adjusting  the  constants,  rounded 
he  finds  points. 


*2+1f_4H  to  s'-GaY+y* 


'TtT'TT 


or 


, 12  10 
+ TO-  • TT 


xB-  28afy,  + 70a?Y-  28 a?y°+  if ' 


_ 1 3 0 

~ 1 ~ tit  ■ 


1 0 
1T 


...(35), 


4 8 10 

TF  • IT 


^ COS  40 + lf  < ™.l-cOs80=l-£«.  10 


as  the  equation  of  the  curve  shown  in  § 709,  diagram  (4),  for 
which  therefore  the  torsion  problem  is  solved. 


(B.)  The  integration  (21)  of  the  boundary  equation,  introduced  reducUon  '8 
by  St  Yenant  for  use  in  his  synthesis,  (A.)  is  also  very  useful  in  problem*8 


248 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[707. 


St  Venant’s 
reduction 
to  Green’s 
problem. 


Solution  for 
rectangular 
prism, 


the  analytical  investigation,  although  he  has  not  so  applied  it. 
First,  we  may  remark,  that  the  determination  of  u for  a given 
form  of  prism  is  a particular  case  of  “Green’s  problem”  proved 
possible  and  determinate  in  Appendix  A.  (e);  being  to  find  u , a 
function  of  x,  y which  shall  satisfy  the  equation 

d2u  d2u 
dx2+  dy2=°’ 

for  every  point  of  the  area  bounded  a certain  given  closed  circuit, 
subject  to  the  condition, 

u = |-t  (x2  + y2) (36) 


for  every  point  of  the  boundary. 


When  u is  found,  equations  (20)  and  (17)  with  (10)  complete 
the  solution  of  the  torsion  problem. 

For  the  case  of  a rectangular  prism,  the  solution  is  much 
facilitated  by  taking 


u 


— v + A (x2  - y~)  + B, 


which  gives 


d2v  d2v 
dx2  + dy2  ’ 


.(37). 


and  for  boundary  condition, 

v=(lT-A)x2+(\T+A)y2-B. 

If  the  rectangle  be  not  square,  let  its  longer  sides  be  parallel  to 
OX ; and  let  a , b be  the  lengths  of  each  of  the  longer  and  each 
of  the  shorter  sides  respectively.  Take,  now, 

A = Jt,  and  A = ^t62 (38). 

The  boundary  condition  becomes 

v = 0 when  y — ± 

an<^  v — — r (^62  — y2)  when  x = ± 


.(39). 


found  by 
Fourier's 
analysis. 


To  solve  the  problem  by  Fourier’s  method  (compare  with  the 
more  difficult  problem  of  § 655),  the  requisite  expansion  of 
^b2  - y2  is  clearly* 


* Obtainable,  as  a matter  of  course,  from  Fourier’s  general  theorem,  but  most 
easily  by  two  successive  integrations  of  the  common  formula 
|7r=cos  0-  l cos  30  + i cos  50  -etc. 


707.] 


STATICS. 


249 


COS  7]  — 


1 

33 


cos  3rj  + r^cos  5rj  — etc. 
0 


where,  for  brevity  rj  = my/b . 

And,  for  the  same  cause,  putting  £ = tt xjb 

we  have,  for  the  form  of  solution, 


(41) 


v = 


— 5> 


{'<2m  «-|*m,t  + *a+1 e+(2<+I,i} cos  (2i+  ^ (42>’ 


which  satisfies  (37),  and  gives  v — 0 for  y = ± \b.  The 
residual  boundary  condition  gives,  for  determining  A2i+1 
aod  3m+v 


r J - (2i+l)na/2b  p +(2i+l)»ra/2&-| 

L 2i+l  6 2i+l  6 J 

ri  +(2i+l)ira/2&  r,  -(2i+l)7ra/2&“]  _ 1 ) 

L 2i+Ie  2i+l€  J-  7l*a  (2i  + l)3 


l (43). 


These  two  equations  give  a common  value  for  the  two  unknown 
quantities  A 2f+1 , B 2<+1 ; with  which  (42)  becomes 


V = — T 


« (-1) 
^(2i+  l)3 


i 


e-(M+l)£+  c+(2i+l){ 

c-(2i+l)7ra/26  + e+(2i+l)7ra/26  cos(2^+  1)7/. ..(44). 


From  this  we  find,  by  (37),  (38),  and  (20), 
'2\3  (—  1)*  *+  (2i+1)£_  (2f+l)£ 


-=-TX’?/  + T^-j  6 c + (2i+l)ra/2&  + e-(2<+lj7ra/26  sm(2l  + 1)t?...(45) 


and  (17)  gives,  for  the  torsional  rigidity, 


2 ^ _ e“(2i+l)7ra/& 

(2i  + l)5  J + e-(.2i+l)iralb 


If  we  had  proceeded  in  all  respects  as  above,  only  taking  A = - It 
instead  of  A = |r,  in  (37),  we  should  have  obtained  expres- 
sions for  y and  N/t,  seemingly  very  different,  but  necessarily 
giving  the  same  values.  These  other  expressions  may  be  written 
down  immediately  by  making  the  interchange  x,  y,  a,  b for  y,  x, 
b , a in  (45)  and  (46),  and  changing  the  sign  of  each  term  of  (45). 
They  obviously  converge  less  rapidly  than  (45)  and  (46)  if,  as 
we  have  supposed,  a > b,  and  it  is  on  this  account  that  we  pro- 
ceeded as  above  rather  than  in  the  other  way.  The  comparison 
of  the  results  gives  astonishing  theorems  of  pure  mathematics, 


250 


ABSTllACT  DYNAMICS. 


[707. 


Extension 
to  a class  of 
curvilinear 
rectangles. 


Lame’s 
transforma- 
tion to  plane 
isothermal 
co-ordi- 
nates. 


such  as  rarely  fall  to  the  lot  of  those  mathematicians  who  confine 
themselves  to  pure  analysis  or  geometry,  instead  of  allowing  them- 
selves to  be  led  into  the  rich  and  beautiful  fields  of  mathematical  J 
truth  which  lie  in  the  way  of  physical  research. 

A relation  discovered  by  Stokes*  and  Lamef  independently 
[which  we  have  already  used  in  equations  (20),  (22)]  taken  in 
connexion  with  Lame’s  method  of  curvilinear  co-ordinates]:,  allows 
us  to  extend  the  Fourier  analytical  method  to  a large  class  of 
curvilinear  rectangles,  including  the  rectlinear  rectangle  as  a 
particular  case,  thus : — 


Let  | be  a function  of  x,  y satisfying  the  equation 


dx2  dif 


•(47), 


Theorem  of 
Stokes  and 
Lam6. 


and,  as  this  shows  that  ~ dy  ~ dx  is  a complete  differential, 
let 

V=l(  fxdy~%dx) (48);  j 

or,  which  means  the  same, 


dy  _ d£  dy  _ d£ 

dy  dx  ’ an<"  dx  dy 


.(49). 


This  other  function  rj  also,  as  we  see  from  (49),  satisfies  the 
equation 


d2V  dry  _ 
dx  dy 


(50). 


And,  also  because  of  (49),  two  intersecting  curves,  whose  equa- 
tions are 


i-A,  r]  = B 


(51), 


cut  one  another  at  right  angles.  Let  now,  A and  B being 
supposed  given,  x and  y be  determined  by  these  two  equations,  j 
The  point  whose  co-ordinates  are  x,  y may  also  be  regarded  as  ; 
specified  by  (A,  B),  or  by  the  values  of  £,  rj,  which  give  curves 

* On  the  Steady  Motion  of  Incompressible  Fluids.  Caiiib.  Phil.  Trans., 
1842 ; or  Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers,  Stokes,  Yol.  i.,  page  1. 

t Memoire  sur  les  lois  de  l’equilibre  du  fluide  etlierd.  Journal  de  VEcolc 
Poly  technique,  1834. 

X See  Thomson  on  the  Equations  of  the  Motion  of  Heat  referred  to  Curvi- 
linear co-ordinates.  Camb.  Math.  Journal,  1845 ; or  Kepriut  of  Mathematical 
and  Physical  Papers,  Art.  ix. 


STATICS. 


251 


07.] 


intersecting  in  (x,  y).  Thus  (£,  y)  with  any  particular  values  Theoren^of 
assigned  to  £ and  y,  specifies  a point  in  a plane.  Common  Lamo. 
rectilinear  co-ordinates  are  clearly  a particular  case  (rectilinear 
orthogonal  co-ordinates)  of  the  system  of  curvilinear  orthogonal 
co-ordinates  thus  defined.  Let  now  u,  any  function  of  x,  y,  be 
transformed  into  terms  of  £,  y.  We  have,  by  differentiation, 


d3u  d?U  _ cl'u  fdj^  dj2\  9 d\h  /cl£  cly dy\ 

dxa  + djf  ~ de  \dx*  + dy2)  * d£dy  \dx  dx  dy  dy) 

d2u  /dy3  drf\  du  /d2^  d2£\  clu/dsy  day\  . . 

+ dy*  \d?  + dy3)  + dt  W + dy3)  + dy  \dx* + djf)'mm{P  h 

which  is  reduced  by  (49)  and  (50)  to 


d*u  d*u  _ /d2u  d*u\  /d£2  d£*\ 

dx*  + dy*  = \de  + dy2)  \M  + dy2) 


Hence  the  equation 
transforms  into 
Also  the  relations 


d*u  d*u 
dxa  + dya=° 

d*u  d2u 

de  + dv"=°'" 

du  dy  du  _ dy 
dy  dx  ’ dx  dy 


transform,  in  virtue  of  (49),  into 


du  dy  die  dy 

dy  d£  ’ d£  dy 


(54). 


(55). 


Hence  the  general  problem  of  finding  u and  y has  precisely  the  Solution  for 
same  statement  in  terms  of  £,  y,  as  that  given  above,  (22),  (36),  pkno^o-01 
and  (20),  in  terms  of  x,  y,  with  this  exception,  that  we  have  not llieriIials- 
u—\t  (£2  + y3),  but  if  f (£,  y)  denote  the  function  of  £,  y into 
which  x*  + y*  transforms, 

u = y)  for  every  point  of  the  boundary (56). 

The  solution  for  the  curvilinear  rectangle 


£=a  y = (3  } 

£=0  y-0  j 


(57) 


is,  on  Fourier’s  plan, 


S sin  ^(A/^  + A/r  + Ssm^(Sie"tv+£/r"t,f)...(58), 

a p 


where  Ai}  A / are  to  be  determined  by  two  equations,  obtained 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[707. 


ZoZ 


Solution  for 
rectangle  of 
plane  iso- 
tliermals. 


Example. 
Rectangle 
bounded  by 
two  con- 
centric arcs 
and  two 
radii. 


thus: — Equate  the  coefficient  of  sin  when  77  = 0 and  when 
V = ft  respectively  to  the  coefficients  of  sin  iwfl a in  the  expansions 
of  /(£,  0)  and/(£,  (3)  in  series  of  the  form 


P sin  ^ +P,  sin  M + P sin  M + etc. 


a 


a 


.(59) 


by  Fourier’s  theorem,  § 77.  Similarly,  Bit  B-,  are  determined 
from  the  expansions  of/(0,  77)  and /(a,  77),  in  series  of  the  form 

Q1  sin  ^ + Q2  sin  ^ + <?3  sin  + etc (60). 

Of  one  extremely  simple  example,  very  interesting  in  theory 
and  valuable  for  practical  mechanics,  we  shall  indicate  the 
details. 


Let 


£=i°gy 


Xs  + if 

a? 


.(61). 


This  clearly  satisfies  (47);  and  it  gives,  by  (48), 

,-i  2/ 


rj  = tan" 


x 


.(62). 


The  solution  may  be  expressed  on  the  same  plan  as  in  (37)... 
(45)  by  a series  of  sines  of  multiples  of  tt 77/a,  if  we  take* 

, e2^  cos  (/?  — 277) 


u = v + |t£T 


cos  /3 


which,  with  (54),  gives  ~2  + ^ = 0 

and  leaves,  as  boundary  conditions  in  the  solution  for  v, 

« = |i  - C°3c(fs^2’,)}  »hen  f=  0,  j 

^iT^{l-C°3^s~2,)}  when  f=«, 
and  v — 0 when  77  = 0,  and  when  77  = 7 6. 


.(63), 

.(64), 


,(65). 


The  last  condition  shows  that  the  B.  and  B'  part  of  (58)  is  proper 
for  expressing  v,  and  the  first  two  determine  Bi  and  B[  as 
usual. 

* It  should  be  noticed  that  this  solution  fails  for  the  case  of  /3  = A(2i  + l)  7 r. 


707.] 


STATICS. 


253 


Or  when  it  is  best  to  have  the  result  in  series  of  sines  of 
multiples  of  -jt £/a,  we  may  take 

-?“-l 


U = W + ^ T(L~  ^1  + . 


tV 


which,  with  (54).  "ives  — • + 0. 

v ' ° dx*  dy 

and  leaves,  as  boundary  conditions  in  the  solution  for  tv , 

/ ?a  -j  . 

= \tcc  -j  ^ — 1 — 4 1 when  rj  = 0, 


•(GO), 

(67), 


and 


c j wjucii  7/  = u,  and  when  r)  = (3, 
w-  0 when  $=  0,  and  when  4 = a. 


>....(68). 


The  last  shows  that  the  A.  and  A'  part  of  (58)  is  proper  for  w , 


and  the  two  first  determine  A.,  Ar 


s 

708.  St  Yenant’s  treatise  abounds  in  beautiful  and  instruc- 
tive graphical  illustrations  of  his  results,  from  which  we  select 
the  following : — 

(1)  Elliptic  cylinder. — The  plain  and  dotted  curvilinear  arcs 
are  “contour  lines”  (coupes  topographiques ) of  the  section  as 


warped  by  torsion;  that  is  to  say,  lines  in  which  it  is  cut  by 
a series  of  parallel  planes,  each  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  or 
lines  for  which  7 (§  706)  has  different  constant  values.  These 
lines  are  [§  707  (28)]  equilateral  hyperbolas  in  this  case.  The 


Rectangle 
bounded  by 
two  con- 
centric arcs 
and  two 
radii. 


Contour 
lines  of  nor- 
mal section 
of  elliptic 
cylinder,  as 
warped  by 
torsion: 
equilateral 
hyperbolas. 


254 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Contour 
lines  of  nor- 
mal section 
of  triangu- 
lar prism,  as 
warped  by 
torsion. 


Diagram  of 
St  Yenant’s 
curvilinear 
squares  for 
which  tor- 
sion prob- 
lem is 
solvable. 


[708. 


arrows  indicate  the  direction  of  rotation  in  the  part  of  the 
prism  above  the  plane  of  the  diagram. 


(2)  Equilateral  triangular 
'prism.  — The  contour  lines 
are  shown  as  in  case  (1) ; 
the  dotted  curves  being  those 
where  the  warped  section 
falls  below  the  plane  of  the 
diagram,  the  direction  of 
rotation  of  the  part  of  the 
prism  above  the  plane  be- 
ing indicated  by  the  bent 
arrow. 


that  the  values  a = 0'5  and  a = — £(V 2-1)  give  similar  but 
not  equal  curvilinear  squares  (hollow  sides  and  acute  angles), 
one  of  them  turned  through  half  a right  angle  relatively  to  the 
other.  Everything  in  the  diagram  outside  the  larger  of  these 


(3)  This  diagram  shows  the  series  of  lines  represented  by 
(34)  of  § 707,  with  the  indicated  values  for  a.  It  is  remarkable 


j 708.] 


STATICS. 


255 


squares  is  to  bo  cut  away  as  irrelevant  to  the  physical  problem  ; 
the  series  of  closed  curves  remaining  exhibits  figures  of  prisms, 
for  any  one  of  which  the  torsion  problem  is  solved  algebraically, 
i These  figures  vary  continuously  from  a circle,  inwards  to  one 
I of  the  acute-angled  squares,  and  outwards  to  the  other:  each, 

^except  these  extremes,  being  a continuous  closed  curve  witli 
no  angles.  The  curves  for  a = 0‘4  and  a =—0  2 approach  re- 
markably near  to  the  rectilinear  squares,  partially  indicated  in 
the  diagram  by  dotted  lines. 

(4)  This  diagram  shows  the  contour  lines,  in  all  respects  Contour 
as  in  the  cases  (1)  and  (2),  for  the  case  of  a prism  having  for  Venant’sSt 

quatre 
points  ar- 
rondis.” 


\\ 

ru 

\ ///  • / i 

% /•"  / in 

\ //lit 

\ /,.*  / • i 

/ / / / 

/ / \ 

~ 

/ >.  \ 

j / %\ 

1 

\ \i(f7 

v-. 

t ection  the  figure  indicated.  The  portions  of  curve  outside 
he  continuous  closed  curve  are  merely  indications  of  rnathe- 
Inatical  extensions  irrelevant  to  the  physical  problem. 


Contour 
lines  of  nor- 
mal section 
of  square 
prism,  as 
warped  by 
torsion. 


Elliptic 
square,  and 
flat  rect- 
angular bars 
twisted. 


256  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [70S. 

(5)  This  shows  as,  in  the  other  cases,  the  contour  lines  for 
the  warped  section  of  a square  prism  under  torsion. 


(6),  (7),  (8).  These  are  shaded  drawings,  showing  the  ap- 
pearances presented  by  elliptic,  square,  and  flat  rectangular 


bars  under  exaggerated  torsion,  as  may  be  realized  with  such 
a substance  as  India  rubber. 


709] 


STATICS. 


257 


709.  Inasmuch  as  the  moment  of  inertia  of  a plane  area 
about  an  axis  through  its  centre  of  inertia  perpendicular  to  its 
plane  is  obviously  equal  to  the  sum  of  its  moments  of  inertia 
round  any  two  axes  through  the  same  point,  at  right  angles  to 
one  another  in  its  plane,  the  fallacious  extension  of  Coulomb’s 
law,  referred  to  in  § 703,  would  make  the  torsional  rigidity  of  a 
bar  of  any  section  equal  to  n/M  (§  694)  multiplied  into  the  sum 
of  its  flexural  rigidities  (see  below,  § 715)  in  any  two  planes  at 
right  angles  to  one  another  through  its  length.  The  true  theory, 
as  we  have  seen  (§§  705,  706),  always  gives  a torsional  rigidity 
less  than  this.  How  great  the  deficiency  may  be  expected  to 
be  in  cases  in  which  the  figure  of  the  section  jDresents  project- 
ing angles,  or  considerable  prominences  (which  may  be  imagined 
from  the  hydrokinetic  analogy  we  have  given  in  § 7051,  has 
been  pointed  out  by  M.  de  St  Yenant,  with  the  important 
practical  application,  that  strengthening  ribs,  or  projections 
(see,  for  instance,  the  fourth  annexed  diagram),  such  as  are 
introduced  in  engineering  to  give  stiffness  to  beams,  have  the 
reverse  of  a good  effect  when  torsional  rigidity  or  strength  is  an 
object,  although  they  are  truly  of  great  value  in  increasing  the 
flexuial  rigidity,  and  giving  strength  to  bear  ordinary  strains, 
which  are  always  more  or  less  flexural.  With  remarkable 
ingenuity  and  mathematical  skill  he  has  drawn  beautiful  illus- 
trations of  this  important  practical  principle  from  his  algebraic 
and  transcendental  solutions  [§707  (32),  (34),  (35),  (45)].  Thus 


Torsional 
rigidity  less 
in  propor- 
tion to  sum 
of  principal 
flexural 
rigidities 
than  ac- 
cording to 
false  exten- 
sion (§  708) 
of  Cou- 
lomb’s law. 


Ratios  of 
torsional 
rigidities 
to  those  of 
solid  circu- 
lar rods. 


(1) 

Rectilinear 

square. 


c <2> 

Square  with  curved 
corners  and  hollow 
sides;  being  curve, 
a = 0‘4,  of  § 708  (8). 


o <*> 

Square  with  acute 
angles  and  hollow 
sides. 


Star  with  four 
rounded  points, 
being  a curve  of 
the  eighth  degree, 
[§  707  (35) J. 


„ (5) 

Equilateral 
triangle. 


•81346. 

•88326. 


•8186. 

•8666. 


for  an  equilateral  triangle,  and  for  the  rectilinear  and  three 
curvilinear  squares  shown  in  the  annexed  diagram,  he  finds  for 

VOL.  II.  u 


258 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[709. 


(a)  of  same 
moment  of 
inertia, 


(6)  of  same 
quantity  of 
material. 


the  torsional  rigidities  the  values  stated.  The  number  im- 
mediately below  the  diagram  indicates  in  each  case  the  frac- 
tion which  the  true  torsional  rigidity  is  of  the  old  fallacious 
estimate  (§  703) ; the  latter  being  the  product  of  the  rigidity 
of  the  substance  into  the  moment  of  inertia  of  the  cross  section 
round  an  axis  perpendicular  to  its  plane  through  its  centre  of 
inertia.  The  second  number  indicates  in  each  case  the  fraction 
which  the  torsional  rigidity  is  of  that  of  a solid  circular  cylinder 
of  the  same  sectional  area. 


Places  of  710.  M.  de  St  Yenant  also  calls  attention  to  a conclusion 
distortion  from  his  solutions  which  to  many  may  be  startling,  that  in  his 
prisms.  simpler  cases  the  places  of  greatest  distortion  are  those  points 
of  the  boundary  which  are  nearest  to  the  axis  of  the  twisted 
prism  in  each  case,  and  the  places  of  least  distortion  those 
farthest  from  it.  Thus  in  the  elliptic  cylinder  the  substance  is 
most  strained  at  the  ends  of  the  smaller  principal  diameter,  and 
least  at  the  ends  of  the  greater.  In  the  equilateral  triangular 
and  square  prisms  there  are  longitudinal  lines  of  maximum  strain 
through  the  middle  of  the  sides.  In  the  oblong  rectangular 
prism  there  are  two  lines  of  greater  maximum  strain  through i 
the  middles  of  the  broader  pair  of  sides,  and  two  lines  of  less- 
maximum  strain  through  the  middles  of  the  narrow  sides.  The 
strain  is,  as  we  may  judge  from  (§705)  the  hydrokinetic  ana- 
logy, excessively  small,  but  not  evanescent,  in  the  projecting  ribs- 
of  a prism  of  the  figure  shown  in  (4)  § 709.  It  is  quite  evanes- 
Soiid  of  any  cent  infinitely  near  the  angle,  in  the  triangular  and  rectangular 
havmg  prisms,  and  in  each  other  case  as  (3)  of  § ^09,  in  which  theie 
pyramidal  jg  ^ finite  angle,  whether  acute  or  obtuse,  projecting  outwards, 
angiesj  This  reminds  us  of  a general  remark  we  have  to  make,  although 

stress.  consideration  of  space  may  oblige  us  to  leave  it  without  formal 

proof.  A solid  of  any  elastic  substance,  isotropic  or  aeolotropic, 
bounded  by  any  surfaces  presenting  projecting  edges  or  angles, 
or  re-entrant  angles  or  edges,  however  obtuse,  cannot  experience 
any  finite  stress  or  strain  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a projecting 
strain  at  angle  (trihedral,  polyhedral,  or  conical);  in  the  neighbourhood 
£$£ing  of  an  edge,  can  only  experience  simple  longitudinal  stress, 
evanescent.  ^ to  ^ nei ghbouring  part  of  the  edge;  and  generally 


710.] 


STATICS. 


259 


experiences  infinite  stress  and  strain  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
a re-entrant  edge  or  angle ; when  influenced  by  any  distribu-  At  re-en- 
tion  of  force,  exclusive  of  surface  tractions  infinitely  near  the  infinite^16* 
angles  or  edges  in  question.  An  important  application  of  the  Liability  to 
last  part  of  this  statement  is  the  practical  rule,  well  known  in  ceedinSgpr°* 
mechanics,  that  every  re-entering  edge  or  angle  ought  to  be  entrant' 
rounded  to  prevent  risk  of  rupture,  in  solid  pieces  designed  to  any  pikcJs 
bear  stress.  An  illustration  of  these  principles  is  afforded  by  concave 
the  concluding  example  of  § 707 ; in  which  we  have  the  com-  Cu* 
plete  mathematical  solution  of  the  torsion  problem  for  prisms  cases  of 
of  fan-shaped  sections,  such  as  the  annexed  figures.  In  the 
cases  corresponding  to  a = 0,  we  see,  without  working  out  the  torsTontro- 
solution,  that  the  distortion  dy/rdv  vanishes  when  r = 0,  if  /3  is  been  solved. 
< t r ; becomes  infinite  when  r = 0,  if  /3  is  > tt  ; but  is  finite 
and  determinate  if  /3  = 7r. 


The  solution  indicated  above  determining  v to  satisfy  (64)  Distortion 
and  (Go)  of  § 707,  if  translated  into  polar  co-ordinates  r,  -rj,  such  central 

that  x = r cos  77,  and  y = r sin  rj,  with  7 t//3  = v,  becomes  merely  sector  (4), 

this — - infinite  at 

central 

v = 2 Wv  + Bir-*)  sin  ivy*  (69), 

where  Bu  B-  are  to  be  determined  by  the  equations  (65)  of  thither1 
§ 707,  with  r = a and  r = a!  instead  of  £=0  and  £=a,  and  a'2  angles‘ 
instead  of  aV“  (a  and  d denoting  the  radii  of  the  concave  and 
convex  cylindrical  surfaces  respectively).  When  a-  0,  these 
give  Bi=  0;  and  therefore 

zero’  or  equal  to  B}  cos  rj,  or  infinite, 

according  as  v > 1,  = 1,  or  < 1 ; whence  also  follow  similar  results 


17—2 


260 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[711. 


Problem  of  711.  To  prove  the  law  of  flexure  (§§  591,592),  and  to 
llexure.  investigate  the  flexural  rigidity  (§  596)  of  a bar  or  wire  of 
isotropic  substance,  we  shall  first  conceive  the  bar  to  be  bent 
into  a circular  arc,  and  investigate  the  application  of  force 
necessary  to  do  so,  subject  to  the  following  conditions: — 

(1)  All  lines  of  it  parallel  to  its  length  become  circular  arcs 
in  or  parallel  to  the  plane  ZOX , with  their  centres  in  one  line 
perpendicular  to  this  plane  j OZ  and  all  lines  parallel  to  it 
through  OF  being  bent  without  change  of  length. 

(2)  All  normal  sections  remain  plane,  and  perpendicular 
to  those  longitudinal  lines,  so  that  their  planes  come  to  pass 
through  that  line  of  centres. 

(3)  No  part  of  any  normal  section  experiences  deformation. 


dition  of  no 


distortion 
in  normal 
sections. 


Forced  con- 


n 

K 


A section  DOE 
of  the  beam  be- 
ing chosen  for 
plane  of  refer- 
ence, XOY , let 
F,  (x,y,z)  be  any 
point  of  the  un- 
bent, and  F, . 
(x',y',z')  the  same 
point  of  the  bent, 
beam  ; each  seen 


O 


E 


B 


the  diagram : and 
let  p be  the  radius  - 
of  the  arc  OX',  !j 
into  which  the  1 


line  OX  of  the  straight  beam  is  bent.  We  have 


But,  according  to  the  fundamental  limitation  (§  588),  x is  at 
most  infinitely  small  in  comparison  with  p : and  through  any 
length  of  the  bar  not  exceeding  its  greatest  transverse  dimen- 


STATICS. 


2G1 


711.] 


sion,  z is  so  also.  Hence  we  neglect  higher  powers  of  x/p  and 
z/p  than  the  second  in  the  preceding  expressions ; and  putting 


x'  - x = a,  y'  - y = /3,  z'  - z = y, 

xz 
p 

These,  substituted  in  § G93  (5)  and  § 697  (2),  give 


we  have 


a=$~,  (3  = 0,  y = 
P 


S=0,  T=  0,  U = 0, 

X = Y =0,  Z=0 


..(1). 

Surface 

traction 

..(2). 

( P , Q),  re- 
quired to 

prevent 
distortion 
in  normal 
section. 

..(3). 

The  interpretation  of  this  result  is  interesting  in  itself,  but,  not 
requiring  it  for  our  present  purpose,  we  leave  it  as  an  exercise 
to  the  student. 


712.  The  problem  of  simple  flexure  supposes  that  no  force 
is  applied  from  without  either  as  traction  on  the  sides  of  the 
bar,  oi  as  force  acting  at  a distance  on  its  interior  substance, 
but  that,  by  opposing  couples  properly  applied  to  its  ends, 
it  is  kept  in  a circular  form,  with  strain  and  stress  uniform 
throughout  its  length. 

To  the  a,  (3,  y of  last  section  let  corrections 

«'  = **(«•-*•),  (3!  = Kxy,  r'  = 0, 
be  added.  This  will  give,  by  § 693  (5), 

F = Q'=  2mKx,  R'  = 2 (m  - n)  Kx,  S'  = 0,  T' = 0,  U' = 0, 
and  by  § 698  (2) 

X' =-  2mK,  Y'  = 0,  Z'  = 0, 

to  be  added  to  the  P,  Q...X,  Y,  Z.  Hence  if  we  take 


Correction 
to  do  away 
with  lateral 
traction, 
and  bodily 


K = 1 — - ? 
2 mp 


II  VJJ 

the  surface  tractions  on  the  sides  of  the  bar  and  the  bodily 
forces  are  reduced  to  nothing  j so  that  if  now 


1 ( 8 m-n 

TPr  +~2^r 


we  have  [§  670  (6)  and  § 693  (6)] 


„ 2v  I r>  l m-n  1 

{x  +y))’ 


St  Venant’ 
solution  of 
flexure  pro 
blem. 


m-n  or 
e=~ X = -X,  f= 


Ipm 


m — n a 1 

: x = - x,  n = - x, 

2pm  p J p 


a=b=d= 0 


■•(2), 


262 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[712. 


St  Venant’s 
solution  of 
flexure  pro- 
blem. 


Flexure  of  a 
bar. 


Line 
through 
centres  of 
inertia  of 
normal 
sections 
remains  un- 
changed in 
length. 


Flexure 
through 
finite  angle 
in  one 
plane : 


must  be  in 
either  of  two 
principal 
planes,  if 
produced 
simply  by 
balancing 
couples  on 
the  two 
ends. 


and  [§  693  (5),  § 694  (6)] 


P=  0,  Q = 0,  R = 

m p 
X = 0,  7=0,  Z = 0 


1 

1 (3)- 

I 


To  complete  the  fulfilment  of  the  conditions,  it  is  only  necessary 
that  the  traction  across  each  normal  section  be  reducible  to  a 
couple.  Hence 

ff  Rdxdy  = 0, 

or,  by  (3), 


f fxdxdy  = 0 ; 


that  is  to  say, 


713.  In  order  that  no  force,  but  only  a bending  couple, 
may  be  transmitted  along  the  rod,  the  centre  of  inertia  of  the 
normal  section  must  be  in  0 Y,  that  line  of  it  in  which  it  is 
cut  by  the  surface  separating  longitudinally  stretched  from 
longitudinally  shortened  parts  of  the  substance. 

714.  In  our  analytical  expressions  only  an  infinitely  short 
part  of  the  beam  has  been  considered;  and  it  has  not  been 
necessary  to  inquire  whether  the  axis  of  the  couple  called  into 
play  is  or  is  not  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  flexure.  But 
when  so  great  a length  of  the  beam  is  concerned,  that  the 
change  of  direction  (§  5)  from  one  end  to  the  other  is  finite, 
the  couples  on  the  ends  could  not  be  directly  opposed  unless 
their  axes  were  both  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  flexure, 
inasmuch  as  each  axis  is  in  the  proper  normal  section  of  the 
rod.  For  finite  flexure  in  a circular  arc,  without  lateral  con- 
straint, we  must  therefore  have 

JJRydxdy  = 0 ; whence,  by  (3),  JJxydxdy  = 0 : 

that  is  to  say,  the  plane  of  flexure  must  be  perpendicular  to  one 
of  the  two  principal  axes  of  inertia  of  the  normal  section  in 
its  own  plane.  This  being  the  case,  the  moment  of  the  whole 
couple  acting  across  each  normal  section  is  equal  to  the  product 
of  the  curvature,  into  the  Young  s modulus,  into  the  moment 
of  inertia  of  the  area  of  the  normal  section  round  its  principal 
axis  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  flexure. 


714.] 


STATICS. 


263 


For  we  have  [§712  (3)] 

M 

J J Rxdxdy  — ff x2dxdy (4). 

715.  Hence  in  a rod  of  isotropic  substance  the  principal  Principal 
axes  of  flexure  (§  599)  coincide  with  the  principal  axes  of  inertia  rigidities 
of  the  area  of  the  normal  section ; and  the  corresponding 
flexural  rigidities  [§  596]  are  the  moments  of  inertia  of  this 

area  round  these  axes  multiplied  by  Young’s  modulus. 

716.  The  interpretation  of  the  results  [§  712  (2),  (3)]  to 
which  the  analytical  investigation  has  led  us  is  simply  that  if 
we  imagine  the  whole  rod  divided,  parallel  to  its  length,  into 
infinitesimal  filaments  (prisms  when  the  rod  is  straight),  each 
of  these  shrinks  or  swells  laterally  with  sensibly  the  same 
freedom  as  if  it  were  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  substance, 
and  becomes  elongated  or  shortened  in  a straight  line  to  the 
same  extent  as  it  is  really  elongated  or  shortened  in  the  circular 
arc  which  it  becomes  in  the  bent  rod.  The  distortion  of  the 
cross  section  by  which  these  changes  of  lateral  dimensions  are 
necessarily  accompanied  is  illustrated  in  the  annexed  diagram, 


Geometrical 
interpreta- 
tion of  dis- 
tortion in 
normal 
plane. 


II 


264 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[716. 


Anticlastic 
and  conical 
curvatures 
produced  in 
the  four 
sides  of  a 
rectangular 
prism  by 
flexure  in  a 
principal 
plane. 


in  which  either  the  whole  normal  section  of  a rectangular  beam, 
or  a rectangular  area  in  the  normal  section  of  a beam  of  any 
figure,  is  represented  in  its  strained  and  unstrained  figures, 
with  the  central  point  0 common  to  the  two.  The  flexure 
is  in  planes  perpendicular  to  YOYl}  and  concave  upwards  (or 
towards  X );  G the  centre  of  curvature,  being  in  the  direction 
indicated,  but  too  far  to  be  included  in  the  diagram.  The 
straight  sides  AC,  BI),  and  all  straight  lines  parallel  to  them, 
of  the  unstrained  rectangular  area  become  concentric  arcs 
of  circles  concave  in  the  opposite  direction,  their  centre  of 
curvature,  H,  being  for  rods  of  gelatinous  substance,  or  of  glass 
or  metal,  from  2 to  4 times  as  far  from  0 on  one  side  as  G 
is  on  the  other.  Thus  the  originally  plane  sides  AC,  BD 
of  a rectangular  bar  become  anticlastic  surfaces,  of  curvatures 
1/p  and  — a/p,  in  the  two  principal  sections.  A flat  rectangular, 
or  a square,  rod  of  India  rubber  [for  which  a amounts  (§  684) 
to  very  nearly  and  which  is  susceptible  of  very  great  amounts 
of  strain  without  utter  loss  of  corresponding  elastic  action], 
exhibits  this  phenomenon  remarkably  well. 


Experi- 

mental 

illustration. 


Uncalcu- 
lated effects 
of  ordinary 
bendings  of 
a thin  flat 
spring. 


717.  The  conditional  limitation  (§  588),  that  the  curvature  is 
to  be  very  small  in  comparison  with  that  of  a circle  of  radius 
equal  to  the  greatest  diameter  of  the  normal  section  (not  ob- 
viously necessary,  and  indeed  not  generally  known  to  be  neces- 
sary, we  believe,  when  the  greatest  diameter  is  perpendicular 
to  the  plane  of  curvature),  now  receives  its  full  explanation. 
For  unless  the  breadth,  AC,  of  the  bar  (or  diameter  perpen- 
dicular to  the  plane  of  flexure)  be  very  small  in  comparison 
with  the  mean  proportional  between  the  radius,  OH,  and  the 
thickness,  AB,  the  distances  from  OY  to  the  corners  A',  C' 
would  fall  short  of  the  half  thickness,  OH,  and  the  distances 
to  B' , B'  would  exceed  it  by  differences  comparable  with  its 
own  amount.  This  would  give  rise  to  sensibly  less  and  greater 
shortenings  and  stretchings  in  the  filaments  towards  the  corners 
than  those  expressed  in  our  formulae  [§  712  (2)],  and  so  vitiate 
the  solution.  Unhappily  mathematicians  have  not  hitherto 
succeeded  in  solving,  possibly  not  even  tried  to  solve,  the 
beautiful  problem  thus  presented  by  the  flexure  of  a broad 
very  thin  band  (such  as  a watch  spring)  into  a circle  of  radius 


STATICS. 


265 


’17.] 


comparable  with  a third  proportional  to  its  thickness  and  its 
breadth.  See  § 657. 


718.  But,  provided  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  flexure  Hmce 

is  not  only  a large  multiple  of  the  greatest  diameter,  but  also  fo^ stricter 
of  a third  proportional  to  the  diameters  in  and  perpendicular 
to  the  plane  of  flexure ; then  however  great  may  be  the  ratio  thanks 688.^ 
of  the  greatest  diameter  to  the  least,  the  preceding  solution  is 
applicable ; and  it  is  remarkable  that  the  necessary  distortion 
of  the  normal  section  (illustrated  in  the  diagram  of  § 716)  t°r(£9dth> 
does  not  sensibly  impede  the  free  lateral  contractions  and 
expansions  in  the  filaments,  even  in  the  case  of  a broad  thin 
lamina  (whether  of  precisely  rectangular  section,  or  of  unequal 
thicknesses  in  different  parts). 

719.  Considering  now  a uniform  thin  broad  lamina  bent  Transition 
in  the  manner  supposed  in  the  preceding  solution,  we  have  of  a plate, 
precisely  the  case  of  a plate  under  the  influence  of  a simple 
bending  stress  (§  638).  If  the  breadth  be  a,  and  the  thickness 

b,  the  moment  of  inertia  of  the  cross  section  is  T^62 . ab,  and  Flexure  of  a 
therefore  the  flexural  rigidity  is  A- Mab 3,  or  -ArMb3  if  the  breadth  single  bend- 

^ ^ ^ i.  & ing  stress* 

be  unity.  Hence  a couple  K (§  637)  would  bend  it  to  the  curva-  by  simui-’ 
ture  12KIMb*  length-wise  (or  across  its  length),  and  (§  716)  bending 
would  produce  the  curvature  12crK/Mb3  breadth- wise  (or  two  planes 

L . ....  at  right 

across  the  breadth),  but  with  concavity  turned  m the  contrary  angles  to 

..  ..  \ one  another. 

direction.  Precisely  the  same  solution  applies  to  the  effect  oi 
a bending  stress,  consisting  of  balancing  couples  ap plied  to 
the  two  edges,  to  bend  it  across  the  dimension  which  hitherto 
we  have  been  calling  its  breadth.  And  by  the  principle  of 
superposition  we  may  simultaneously  apply  a pair  of  balancing 
couples  to  each  pair  of  parallel  sides  of  a rectangular  plate, 
without  altering  by  either  balancing  system  the  effect  of  the 
other ; so  that  the  whole  effect  will  be  the  geometrical  result- 
ant of  the  two  effects  calculated  separately.  Thus,  a square 
plate  of  thickness  b,  and  with  each  side  of  length  unity,  being 
given,  let  pairs  of  balancing  couples  K on  one  pair  of  opposite 
sides,  and  A on  the  other  pair,  be  applied,  each  tending  to  pro- 
duce concavity  in  the  same  direction  when  positive.  If  tc  and 


2 66 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[719. 


X denote  the  whole  curvatures  produced  in  the  planes  of  these 
couples,  we  shall  have 


* ~ -faMb’ (K  °'A) W> 

and  x = TvMs(A“‘rK) (2)- 


cyiiiidricai  ^20.  To  find  what  the  couples  must  be  to  produce  simply 
curvature:  cylindrical  curvature,  k,  let  X=  0.  We  have 


A = crK 


and 


Mb 3 


K. 


l-o-'- 

curvatureal  Or  to  Pr°duce  spherical  curvature,  let  k = X.  This  gives 

Mb3 


.(3). 


K = A 


1 2 


1 - 


K. 


(4). 


in  anti-  Or  lastly,  to  produce  anticlastic  curvature,  equal  in  the  two 
curvature,  directions,  let  k — — X.  This  gives 


K = — A = 


, Mb3 

*tt^* 


(•5) 


Hence,  comparing  with  § 641  (10)  and  § 642  (16),  we  have,  for 
A the  cylindrical  rigidity,  and  for  f)  and  ft  the  synclastic  and 
anticlastic  rigidities  of  a uniform  plate  of  isotropic  material, 


A , MV 

TH-<r5’ 


Flexural 
rigidities 
of  a plate: 

sHr or  ® 694  and  § 698  ^ 

anticlastic. 


...(6). 


f)  = 


3 nkb3  n (3 m — n ) b3 


2 (3&  + 4 n)  6 (m  + n) 


, ft  = Inb3 


The  coefficient  A which  appears  in  the  equation  of  equilibrium 
of  a plate  urged  by  any  forces  [§  644  (6)  and  §§  649... 652], 
and  c,  which  appears  in  its  boundary  conditions,  are  [§642  (16)] 
given  in  terms  of  1)  and  ft  thus  simply  : — 

H = £(!)  + ft),  c=  *(*“*) 


(V). 


STATICS. 


267 


m.] 


721.  It  is  interesting  and  instructive  to  investigate  the  Same  result 
anticlastic  flexure  of  a plate  by  viewing  it  as  an  extreme  case  ^^pfate 
of  torsion.  Consider  first  a flat  bar  of  rectangular  section  at 
uniformly  twisted  by  the  proper  application  of  tangential  trac- 
tions  [§  706  (10)]  on  its  ends.  Let  now  its  breadth  be  com-  rectangular 
parable  with  its  length ; equal,  for  instance,  to  its  length.  We  prism- 
thus  have  a square  plate  twisted  by  opposing  couples  applied 
in  the  planes  of  two  opposite  edges,  and  so  distributed  over 
these  areas  as  to  cause  uniform  action  in  all  sections  parallel 
to  them  when  the  other  two  edges  are  left  quite  free.  If,  lastly, 
we  suppose  the  thickness,  b,  infinitely  small  in  comparison  with 
the  breadth,  a,  in  (46)  of  § 707,  we  have 

A = ^ nrab 3 (8). 


The  twist  t per  unit  of  length  gives  ar  in  the  length  a,  which 
[§  640  (4)]  is  equivalent  to  an  anticlastic  curvature  tv  (according 
to  the  notation  of  § 639),  equal  to  t.  And  the  balancing  couple 
A applied  in  only  one  pair  of  opposite  sides  of  the  square  is,  as 
we  see  by  § 656,  equivalent  to  an  anticlastic  stress  (according 
to  the  notation  of  § 637)  II  = |A/a.  Hence,  for  the  anti- 
clastic rigidity,  according  to  §642  (13),  we  have 


fc=  - =i  — = inb3 

tv  - ra  6 


(9), 


which  agrees  with  the  value  (6)  otherwise  found  in  § 720,  by 
the  composition  of  flexures. 


It  is  most  important  to  remark — (1)  That  one-half  of  the  Analysis  of 
part  mab 3 in  the  value  of  N given  by  the  formula  (46)  of  normal 
§ 707,  is  derived  from  a and  /3  as  given  by  (8)  of  § 706,  and  the  twisted 
term  — rxy  of  y by  (45) ; — and  (2)  That  if  we  denote  by  y prism.gular 
the  transcendental  series  completing  the  expression  (45)  for  y, 

it  is  the  term  nfjx  ~~  dxdy  of  § 706  (17),  that  makes  up  the 

ay 

other  half  of  the  part  of  A in  question,  and  that  it  does  so  as 
follows,  according  to  the  process  of  integrating  by  parts,  in  which 
it  is  to  be  remembered  that  to  change  the  sign  of  either  x or  y, 
simply  changes  the  sign  of  y : — 

[W  dy'  T , C\ a rta  rta  fx 

LLx^^=.UxGdx=al  °dx~2 1 */„ 


2G8 


Analysis  of 

traction  in 

normal 

section  of 

twisted 

rectangular 

prism. 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 
rib  dy' 

where  G = n J -J-dy  = 2nyv=^b 


[721. 


= 2 m 


9\3 


622 


1 


£(2i'+1)  n-x/t  _ ^-(2i+l)irxlb 


(2t  + l)3  € (2i+l)ira/26  + £-(2t+l)  7ra/26 

Thus  in  77  we  have  a term 

1 


(ii). 


1 6rm« 

a I GT&e  = — j—  63]§ 

/o  (2t  + 1; 


1 - 


£(2i+l)7ra/26  £-(2i+l)/ra/26 


}’ 


or,  because  [as  we  see,  by  integrating  (40)  with  reference  to  y , 
and  ptitting  y = J6], 

1 + 34  + 5~4  + et°‘  = * (I77)4? 


rha 

a / trcfa:  = \nrabz 

Jo 


16?lT 

— s-  a632 

7 T 


(27  4-  l)4  £€(2*'+1)ira/!j&  + e~(2i+l)jra/2&J 


(12). 

The  transcendental  series  constituting  the  second  term  of  this, 
together  with 


ha 

2 I dx 
'o  JO 


Gdx  — n JJ  y <~-  dxdy 


n 


Composi- 
tion of 
action  in 
normal  sec- 
tion of  a 
long  rect- 
angular 
lamina 
under  tor- 
sion. 


makes  up  the  transcendental  series  which  appears  in  the  ex- 
pression (46)  for  77.  This,  when  ajb  is  infinite,  vanishes  in 
comparison  with  the  first  term  of  (46),  as  we  have  seen  above  • 
§721  (8).  But  in  examining,  as  now,  the  composition  of  the 
expression,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that,  when  a/6  is  infinite,  y 
vanishes  except  for  values  of  x differing  infinitely  little  from 
± |-a,  and  therefore  we  see  at  once  that  in  this  case, 

f & f dyLdd^i/)=M  j^dx  [ib  r»e 

J ~ha  J-hb  \ dy  dxj  J0  J_ib  dy  J0 
by  which,  in  connexion  with  what  precedes,  we  see  that 

722.  One  half  of  the  couple  on  each  of  the  edges,  by  which 
these  conditions  are  fulfilled,  consists  of  two  tangential  tractions 
distributed  over  areas  of  the  edge  infinitely  near  its  ends  acting 
perpendicularly  to  the  plate  towards  opposite  parts.  The  other 
half  consists  of  forces  parallel  to  the  length  of  the  edges,  uni- 
formly distributed  through  the  length,  and  varying  across  it  in 
simple  proportion  to  the  distance,  positive  or  negative,  from  its 
middle  line. 


STATICS. 


269 


723.]  

723.  If  now  we  remove  the  former  half,  and  apply  instead, 
over  the  edges  ( BB ',  A A')  hitherto  free,  a uniform  distribution 
of  couple  equal  and  similar  to  the  latter  half,  and  in  the  proper 
directions  to  keep  up  the  y 

same  twist  through  the 
plate,  we  have  the  proper  4 
edge  tractions  to  fulfil 
Poisson’s  three  boundary  _ 
conditions  (§  645)  for  the 
case  in  question ; that  is 
to  say,  we  have  such  a 
distribution  of  tractions 
on  the  four  edges  of  a square  plate  as  produces  anticlastic 
stress  (§  638)  uniform  not  only  through  all  of  the  plate  at 
distances  from  the  edges  great  in  comparison  with  the  thick- 
ness, but  throughout  the  plate  up  to  the  very  edges.  The  state 
of  strain  and  stress  through  the  plate  is  represented  by  the 
following  formulae  [as  we  may  gather  from  §§  706  and  707  (8), 
(45),  (9),  (10),  (17),  and  § 722,  or,  as  we  see  directly,  by  the 
verification  which  the  operations  now  indicated  present]  : — 


Uniform 
distribution 
of  couple 
applied  to 
its  edges  to 
render  the 
stress  uni- 
form from 
the  edges 
inwards. 


U = — ryz,  (3  = TXZ,  7 = — TXy 
E = f = g = 0,  fl  = 0,  b=  — 2 xy,  C = 0 
P = Q=R  = 0,  s=  0,  T = — 2nry,  £7=0 

rha  fib 

— L = N = —j  I Tydydx=  ^nralA 

J - \(lJ  - hb 


..(13), 


Algebraic 
solution 
expressing 
displace- 
ment, 
strain,  and 
stress, 
through  a 
plate  bent 
to  uniform 
anticlastic 
curvature. 


where  L and  N denote  the  moments  (with  signs  reckoned  as 
in  § 551)  of  the  whole  amounts  of  couple,  applied  to  the  two 
edges  perpendicular  to  OX  and  OZ  respectively,  in  the  planes 
of  these  edges. 

By  turning  the  axes  OX,  OZ  through  45°  in  their  own  plane, 
we  fall  back  on  the  formula  of  flexure  as  in  § 719,  for  the 
particular  case  of  equal  flexures  in  the  two  opposite  directions. 

724.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  superimpose  on  the  state  of 
strain  investigated  in  § 721,  another  produced  by  applying  on 


270 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[724. 


Thin  rect- 
angular 
plate  sub- 
jected to 
the  edgc- 
traction  of 
§ 647. 


the  pair  of  edges  which  it  leaves  free,  precisely  the  same 
entire  distribution  of  couple  as  that  described  in  § 722,  but 
in  the  direction  opposite  to  the  twist  which  the  former  gave 
to  the  plate  (so  that  now  it  is  not  —L,  but  L that  is  equal 

to  N),  we  have  the  square 
plate  precisely  in  the  con- 
dition described  in  § 647, 
except  infinitely  near  its 
corners.  To  find  the  ex- 
pressions for  the  com- 
ponents of  displacement, 
strain,  and  stress,  in  this 
case,  we  must  add  to  the 
expressions  for  a,  /3,  7 in  (8)  of  § 706,  and  (45)  of  § 707,  values 
obtained  by  changing  the  sign  of  each  of  these  expressions, 
and  interchanging  x for  z,  and  a for  7.  The  consequent  values 
of  C,  f,  g,  a,  1),  t,  P,  Q,  P,  S,  T,  U,  are  of  course  obtained  in  the 
same  way,  but  need  not  be  written  down,  as  they  can  be  seen 
in  a moment  from  a,  /3,  7.  Lastly,  the  strain  thus  superimposed 
would,  if  existing  alone,  leave  the  edges  parallel  to  x free  from 
traction,  just  as  the  first  supposed  strain  [§  706  (8)]  leaves  the 
edges  parallel  to  z free  ; and  thus,  without  fresh  integration, 
we  see  that  N has  still  the  value  (46),  and  is  the  result  of 
the  distribution  of  tractions  described  in  § 722.  The  parts  of 
the  component  displacements  represented  by  products  of  co- 
ordinates disappear,  and  only  transcendental  series,  as  follows 
remain : — 


7T 


c +(2i+l)irzlb  _ £-( 2i+l)nz/b  j 

(2i  4-  l)3  c + (2i+l)",a/26  e-(2m)^Sin  ^ ” 1 + ^ 5 


( - iy 


y = +-I  b*2  ( ^ 


+ ['2i+l)nxlb  -(2  i+l)n.vlb 


> (i4). 


— e 


7T3  (2 i + l)3  €+i.2i+l)nal2b  + e-(2i+l)7rcr, 


8in(2t+l) 


Try 


725.  When  a/b  is  infinite,  e+^l^nal2b  becomes  infinitely 
great,  and  e~(2f'f'1),ra/26  infinitely  small.  If  then  we  put 

\a  — z = z,  and  \a  — x = x, 
the  preceding  expressions  become 


725.] 


STATICS. 


271 


a = - ~ b2S  e-(2<+l )"*lb  sin  (2»  + 1)  ^ 

7T3  (2t+l)3  v ' b 

for  points  not  infinitely  near  the  edge  A'B' ; 

y=  + ~ b*2  -i-~  e-(2i+i)nxib  sin  (2 i + 1)  W 

7 r ( 2t+iy  ' ' b 

for  points  not  infinitely  near  the  edge  ^1^4" ; 

a = 0,  y = 0,  for  all  points  not  infinitely  near  an  edge ; 

and  (3  = 0 throughout. 

Lastly,  L=N=  *nraba, 

of  each  of  which  one-half  is  constituted  by  tractions 
uniformly  distributed  along  the  corresponding  edge, 
and  proportional  to  distances  from  the  middle  line  ; 
and  the  other  by  tractions  infinitely  near  the  corners 
and  perpendicular  to  the  plate. 


Thin  rect- 
angular 

plate  sub- 
jected to 
the  edge- 
traction  of 
§ 647. 


726.  It  is  clear  that  if  the  corners  were  rounded  off,  or  the  Transition 
plate  were  of  any  shape  without  corners,  that  is  to  say,  with  no  withSft 
part  of  its  edge  where  the  radius  of  curvature  is  not  very  great  j?ectedrtoUb 
in  comparison  with  the  thickness,  the  effect  of  applying  a dis-  tiorfofTw. 
tnbution  of  couple  all  round  its  edge  in  the  manner  defined  in 
§ 647  would  be  expressed  by  either  of  these  last  formulae  for 
a and  7.  Thus  the  whole  displacement  of  the  substance  will  be 
parallel  to  the  edge  for  all  points  infinitely  near  it ; will  vanish 
for  all  other  points  of  the  plate;  and  will  be  equal  to  the  pre- 
ceding expression  (15)  for  7 if  x denote  simply  distance  from 
the  nearest  point  of  the  edge  of  the  plate,'  and  y,  as  in  all  these 
formulae,  distance  from  the  middle  surface. 


727.  We  may  conclude  that  if  a uniform  plate,  bounded  by 
an  edge  everywhere  perpendicular  to  its  sides,  and  of  thickness 
a small  fraction  of  the  smallest  radius  of  curvature  of  the  edge 
at  any  point,  be  subjected  to  the  action  described  in  § 647, 
with  the  more  particular  condition  that  the  distribution  of  tan- 
gential traction  is  [as  asserted  in  § 634  (3)  for  any  normal 
section  remote  from  the  boundary  of  a bent  plate]  in  simple 
proportion  to  the  distance,  positive  or  negative,  from  the  middle 
line  of  the  edge;  the  interior  strain  and  stress  will  be  as 
specified  by  the  following  statement  and  formulae  : 


272 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[727. 


Origin  Let  0 be  any  point  in  one  corner  of  the  edge : and  let  OX  be 

middle  perpendicular  to  the  edge  inwards,  and  OF  perpendicular  to  the 
sideo/piate6  plane  of  the  plate.  The  displacement  of  any  particle  P,  (oc,  y),  at 


Displace- 
ment of 
substance 
produced 
by  edge- 
traction  of 
§ 647. 


any  distance  from  0 not 
a considerable  multiple 
of  the  thickness,  b,  will 
be  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  YOX,  and  (de- 
noted by  7)  will  be 
given  by  the  formula — 


7 rx 
b 


Try 

cos  -7^  + 


b ' 33 


3nx 

IT  cos 


37 ry 


cos 


^ + etc.)  (16), 


where  11  denotes  the  amount  of  the  couple  per  unit  length  of 
the  edge,  and  n the  rigidity  (§  680)  of  the  substance.  But  the 
simplest  and  easiest  way  of  arriving  at  this  result  is  to  solve 
directly  by  Fourier’s  analytical  method  the  following  problem, 
a case  of  one  of  the  general  problems  of  § 696: — 

Case  of  §647  728.  A uniform  plane  plate  of  thickness  b,  extending  to  in- 

entfyim'  finity  on  one  side  of  a straight  edge  (or  plane  perpendicular  to 
vestigated.  g-qes)  peing  given, 

It  is  required  to  find  the  displacement,  strain,  and  stress, 
produced  by  tangential  traction  parallel  to  the  edge  applied 
uniformly  along  the  edge,  according  to  a given  arbitrary  func- 
tion, <j)  (y),  of  position  on  its  breadth. 

Taking  co-ordinates  as  in  § 727,  we  have  to  solve  equations 
(2)  of  § 697,  with  X = 0,  F=  0,  Z=  0,  for  all  points  of  space 
for  which  x is  positive,  and  y between  0 and  b,  subject  to  the 
boundary  conditions, 


See  § 661,  or 
§ 662  (1);  also 
§ 693  (5),  and 
§ 670  (6). 


P=0,  Q = 0,  P = 0,  8 = 0,  T= 0,  77=0,  when  ?/  = 0 or  b: 
P= 0,  <2  = 0,  Ji  = 0,  S = 0,  77=0,  T=<f>(y),  when  .r=0: 
and  a = 0,  j3  = 0,  7=0,  when  x = <x>. 


(17). 


From  these,  inasmuch  as  a,  (3,  y must  each  be  independent  of 
z,  we  find 


728.] 


STATICS. 


273 


(a)  + cI_y  — throughout  the  solid ; 

( b ) y = 0 when  x = oo  ; 

(c)  n-~  = 0 when  y = 0 or  b ; 

and  ( d)  n-~^  — <£  ( y ) when  x = 0 ; 


Case  of  § 647 
independ- 
ently in- 
vestigated. 


(is); 


and  all  the  equations,  both  internal  and  superficial,  involving 
a and  (3  are  satisfied  by  a = 0,  /3  = 0,  and  therefore  (App.  C.) 
require  a - 0,  /?  = 0.  By  means  of  (a),  (b),  and  (c)  the  Fourier 
solution  is  seen  to  be  of  the  form 

y = %A^  ~b  cob—  (19); 

and,  because  of  (<7),  the  coefficients  A i are  to  be  found  so  as  to 
make 

m r . . im/ 

-y  2iAi  cos  -y=<t>{y)  (20). 

They  are  therefore  [as  we  see  by  taking  in  § 77,  (13)  and  (14), 
such  that  </>  (p  - £)  = <f>  (£),  and  putting  p = 26]  as  follows  : — 

. b 1 2 . iny 

At=-™-Tb)0’t‘W°os  ~rdy (21)- 

If  (for  the  particular  case  of  § 727)  we  take 

$ (y)  = (22), 


we  find  At.  = 0,  and  Au+l  = 6 ~ 
and  so  arrive  at  the  result  (1G). 


W (2i+l)3 


(23), 


729.  It  is  remarkable  how  very  rapidly  the  whole  disturb-  Rapid  de- 
ance  represented  by  this  result  diminishes  inwards  from  the  SSSSL 
edge  where  the  disturbing  traction  is  applied  (compare  § 586):  feds80 
also  how  very  much  more  rapidly  the  second  term  diminishes 
than  the  first;  and  so  on. 

Thus  as 


€ = 2-71828,  el*  = 4-801,  e*,3O3=10,  <*  = 23*141,  e2* 

VOL.  II. 


535-5, 

18 


274 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[729. 


Rapid  de- 
crease of 
disturbance 
from  edge 
inwards. 


Problems  to 
be  solved. 


General 
problem  of 
infinite 
solid: 


solved  for 

isotropic 

substance. 


we  have  for 
1 


x = 


3-1416 


6,y=6 


to_ 

nb 

n 


. 7T 


y = (,nb[~ 


TT 


x 


M03  6 0 (2 

' • nnh  \ 7j* 


7T 


x = b, 
x - 2b, 


0/2 
?i6  \7T 


7 


= 6 


'cos  iry Jb  cos  Tiirylb  cos  57 ry lb 

2^718  “ 38 . 2-7  188  + 58. 2-7  1 8* 
cos  Try  lb  cos  Zirylb  cos  Sirylb 


4-801  38. 4-80  Is  58,4-80r 

’cos  7 ry/b  cos  S-rry/b  cos  5-rry/b 


10 


33.  103 


53. 10* 


cos  Try /b  cos  2nry/b  i cos  5-rrylb 
23-14  “ 33 . 23-148  + 58. 23-14* 
cos  7 ry/b  cos  Siry/b  > cos  5-rry/b 

535-5  “ 33 . 5 35 -53  + ff3.lT35-55 


- etc.^ 

- etc.^ 

- etc.  J 

- etc.^ 

•) 


wliicli  proves  most  strikingly  the  concluding  statement  of  § 


etc 

647. 


730.  We  regret  that  limits  of  space  compel  us  to  leave 
uninvestigated  the  torsion- flexure  rigidities  of  a prism  and  the 
flexural  rigidities  of  a plate  of  aeolotropic  substance : and  to 
still  confine  ourselves  to  isotropic  substance  when,  in  conclu- 
sion, we  proceed  to  find  the  complete  integrals  of  the  equations 
[§  697  (2)]  of  internal  equilibrium  for  an  infinite  solid  under 
the  influence  of  any  given  forces,  and  the  harmonic  solutions 
suitable  for  problems  regarding  spheres  and  spherical  shells, 
and  solid  and  hollow  circular  cylinders  (§  738)  under  plane 
strain.  The  problem  to  be  solved  for  the  infinite  solid  is  this: 

Let  in  (6)  of  § 698,  X,  7,  Z be  any  arbitrary  functions  what- 
ever of  {x,  y,  z ),  either  discontinuous  and  vanishing  in  all  points  ■ 
outside  some  finite  closed  surface,  or  continuous  and  vanishing  at 1 
all  infinitely  distant  points  with  sufficient  convergency  to  make 
ED  converge  to  0 as  D increases  to  <x> , if  E be  the  resultant  of 
X,  Y,  Z for  any  point  at  distance  D from  origin.  It  is  required 
to  find  a,  (I,  y satisfying  those  equations  [(16)  of  § 698],  subject 
to  the  condition  of  each  vanishing  for  infinitely  distant  points  ■ 
{that  is,  for  infinite  values  of  x,  y,  or  z). 

d 

(a)  Taking  ~ of  the  first  of  these  equations,  ^ of  the 


second,  and  of  the  third,  and  adding,  we  lia^  e 


dz 


dX  dY  . dZ 


w„  „ _ U>£J  _ 
/ m _i_  »n\  r-rX  4- H ; — -1 — ; — t) 


.(1). 


730.] 


STATICS. 


275 


(b)  This  shows  that  if  we  imagine  a mass  distributed  through 
space,  witli  density  p given  by 

1 fdX  dY  dZ\ 

P 47 t (m  + n)\dx  + dy  + dz  ) ' '* 

S must  be  equal  to  its  potential  at  (x,  y,  z).  For  [§  491  (c)]  if 
J be  this  potential  we  have 

y2F+  4irp  = 0. 

Subtracting  this  from  (1)  divided  by  (m  4-  n),  we  have 

V2  (8  - V)  = 0 (3), 

for  all  values  of  (x,  y,  z).  Now  the  convergency  of  XD,  YD, 
ZD  to  zero  when  D is  infinite,  clearly  makes  V=0  for  all 
infinitely  distant  points.  Hence  if  S be  any  closed  surface 
round  the  origin  of  co-ordinates,  everywhere  infinitely  distant 
from  it,  the  function  (8  - V)  is  zero  for  all  points  of  it,  and 
satisfies  (3)  for  all  points  within  it.  Hence  [App.  A.  (e)]  we 
must  have  8 = V.  In  other  words,  the  fact  that  (l)  holds  for  all 
points  of  space  gives  determinately 


fdX'  dY'  dZ'\ 

s_  i r r r U*'  + + 

4r  ( m + »)  I.  L„  vL(*-*')'+(^-y'r+(*-*')T ' ' (4)’ 

where  X',  T,  Z’  denote  the  values  of  X,  Y,  Z for  any  point 

¥>  V‘,  2'). 


General 
equations 
for  infinite 
isotropic 
solid  inte- 
grated. 


(c)  . Modifying  by  integration  by  parts,  and  attending  to  the 
prescribed  condition  of  convergences,  according  to  which  when 
oi  is  infinite, 


we  have 


X'dy'dz 

J[(x  - x)iV{l , - y'Y  + {z  _ zyj  = 0 


(5), 


8 


-1 

4t r ( m + n) 


X’(x-x')+r(y-y')  + Z'(z-z') 

[{x-x'Y  + iy-y'y+^^zy^ 


which  for  most  purposes  is  more  convenient  than  (4). 


dx'dy'dz'  (G), 


(d)  On  precisely  the  same  plan  as  ( b ) we  now  integrate  each 
of  the  three  equations  (6)  of  § G98  separately  for  a,  B y 
respectively,  and  find  7 


a=u+U,  (3  = v+V,  y = w+W 

w>  ^ > K W denote  the  potentials  at 


(7) 

(x,  y,  z)  of 

18—2 


where  u,  v, 


276 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[730. 


General 
equations 
for  infinite 
isotropic 
solid  inte- 
grated. 


Force 
applied 
uniformly 
to  spherical 
portion  of 
infinite 
homogene- 
ous solid. 


distributions  of  matter  through  all  space  of  densities  respec- 
tively 

m d8  77i  in  d8  Z Y Z 

\nn  dx  ’ 47m  dy  ’ 47m  dz  ’ iirn  ’ 47m  ’ 47m  ’ 

in  other  words,  such  functions  that 


w2w  + — = 0,  etc.,  andv2Z7+  — = 0,  etc., 

7i  dx  n 


•(8), 


each  through  all  space.  Thus  if  8",  X",  Y ",  Z"  denote  the 
values  of  8,  X,  Y,  Z for  a point  (x",  7j",  z"),  we  find,  for  a, 


a 


2 r CO  rCO  r 00 

^n]_x  J_x  J_c 


(m  djx  + X"^j  dx''dy"dz" 
[(x-x"y+(y-7/y+(z-zyf 


.(9). 


if  in  this  we  substitute  for  8"  its  value  by  (6)  we  have  a ex- 
pressed by  the  sum  of  a sextuple  integral  and  a triple  integral, 
the  latter  being  the  U of  (7) ; and  similarly  for  /3  and  y.  These 
expressions  may,  however,  be  greatly  simplified,  since  we  shall 
see  presently  that  each  of  the  sextuple  integrals  may  be  reduced 
to  a triple  integral. 

(e)  As  a particular  case,  let  X,  Y,  Z be  each  constant 
throughout  a spherical  space  having  its  centre  at  the  origin  and 
radius  a , and  zero  everywhere  else.  This  by  (6)  will  make  - 8 
the  sum  of  the  products  of  X,  Y,  Z respectively  into  the 
corresponding  component  attractions  of  a unifoim  distubution  of. 
matter  of  density  1/4tt  (m  + n)  through  this  space.  Hence: 
[§  491  (i b )] 


8 = 
and 
8 = 


a' 


3 (77i  + n)  r‘ 

-1 


(Xx  + Yy  + Zz ) for  points  outside  the  spherical  space, 


(Xx  + Yy+  Zz)  for  points  within  the  spherical  space. 


(1 


Dilatation 
produced 
by  it. 


3 (m  + 7l) 

Now  we  may  divide  u of  (8)  into  two  parts,  u'  and  u , depend- 
ing on  the  values  of  d8/dx  within  and  without  the  spherical 
space  respectively ; so  that  we  have, 

mX 

for  r < a, 


2 f 

V w = 


‘in  ( 77i  + n) 


, a constant, 


yV  = 0 ; 


•(H); 


for  r > a, 


730.] 


STATICS. 


277 


for  r < a, 
for  r > a, 


vV'=  0, 


m d8 
n 


wO  1*1  • 

-r-  , which  is  a 


solid  spherical  harmonic  of  degree  — 3,  because  8 
is  given  by  the  first  of  equations  (10). 

The  solution  of  (11),  being  simply  the  potential  due  to  a uniform 


Investiga- 
tion of  dis- 
placement. 


.(12). 


1 


sphere  of  density  - — 


ml 


u = 


4:7r  3 n (m  + n) 

— mX 


, is  of  course 


Yq — r (3a3  - r 3)  for  r <a, 

1 bn  ( m + 7i)s  ' 


u = 


— mX 


a 


— for  r > a. 


.(13). 


9 n ( m + n)  r 

Again,  if  in  (12)  of  App.  B.  we  put  m = 2,  n—  — 3,  and 
F_3  = d8Jdx,  we  have 

, d8s 


dx 


rd8 

= — b lor  r > a 
dx 


•(14), 


since,  for  r > a,  d8/dx  is  a spherical  harmonic  of  order  — 3.  And 

r5d8/dx  is  [App.  B.  (13)]  a solid  harmonic  of  degree  2:  hence 

if  \d8ldx\  denote,  for  any  point  within  the  spherical  space,  the 

same  algebraic  expression  as  d8/dx  by  (10)  for  the  external  space, 
- *“ - 

is  a function  which,  for  all  the  interior  space,  satisfies 


a 


dx 


the  equation  V ~u  — 0,  and  is  equal  to  r3  d8/dx  for  points  infinitely 

5 [—  — 

near  the  surface,  outside  and  inside  respectively.  Hence  ^ — 

for  interior  space,  and  r3  cl8/dx  for  exterior  space,  constitute  the  Force 
potential  of  a distribution  of  matter  of  density  *d8Udx  outside  uniformly 
the  spherical  space  and  zero  within,  and,  so  far  as  yet  tested,  porlion  of0,1 
any  layer  of  matter  whatever  distributed  over  the  separating  homogene- 
spherical  surface.  To  find  the  surface  density  of  this  layer  we  ous 
first,  for  an  exterior  point  infinitely  near  the  surface,  take 

f d d d\  f 2d8\ 

\di+vd^+zdi)\di)' whloh  may  be  denoted  ky  - w 

and,  for  an  interior  point  infinitely  near  the  surface, 


( 


d d d 
x~  + y — + z 


dx  J dy 


\(rs 

~d8~ 

/ V 

dx 

, which  may  be  denoted  by  -\rR\ 


278 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[730. 


Force 
applied 
uniformly 
to  spherical 
portion  of 
infinite 
homogene- 
ous solid. 


Then,  remembering  that  x-r-+y~  + z~  is  the  same  as  r — 

ax  dy  dz  dr ’ 


according  to  the  notation  of  App.  A.  (a);  we  find  [by  App.  B.  (5)] 


{R)  = r 


d8 

dx  ’ 


and  [A]  = 


~d8~ 

dx 


Therefore,  as  r"  d8/dx  for  external  space  is  independent  of  r,  and 
as  r differs  infinitely  little  from  a for  each  of  the  two  points, 


{«}-[*]  = -3 


i^dS 

a2  dx  ’ 


But  {A}  and  [A]  being  the  radial  components  of  the  force  at 
points  infinitely  near  one  another  outside  and  inside,  correspond- 
ing to  the  supposed  distribution  of  potential,  it  follows  from  § 478 
that  to  produce  this  distribution  there  must  be  a layer  of  matter 

on  the  separating  surface,  having  ~ ({A}  — [A])  for  surface 

4-7T 

density.  But,  inasmuch  as  {A}  — [A]  is  a surface  harmonic  of 
the  second  order,  the  potential  due  to  that  surface  distribution 
alone  is  [§  536  (4)] 

T2 

i ({A}  — [A])  — through  the  inner  space, 

Cl 

a* 

and  i ({A}  - [A])  -3  through  the  outer  space ; 


or,  according  to  the  value  found  above  for  {A}  - [A], 
'd8' 


r 5 
3 _ 

5 a3 


dx 


through  the  inner  space, 


and 


3 

-5a 


d8 

dx 


through  the  outer  space. 


Subtracting  now  this  distribution  of  potential  from  the  whole  dis- 
tribution formerly  supposed,  we  find 


5 a3 


AS' 

dx 


dS 


for  the  inner  space,  and  (r2  — ia?)  for  the  outer, 

as  the  distribution  of  potential  due  simply  to  an  external  dis- 
tribution of  matter,  of  density  %d8/7rdx,  with  no  surface  layer. 
Hence,  and  by  (14),  we  see  that  the  solution  of  (12)  is 

dh' 


m r 


730.] 


STATICS. 


279 


And  [(8)  showing  that  U is  the  potential  of  a distribution  of 
matter  of  density  equal  to  JT/47ra]  as  X is  constant  through  the 
spherical  space  and  zero  everywhere  outside  it,  we  have 


£7==-  (3 a2-r2)  for  r<a, 

tt  X a*  r 
U = o for  r > a. 

on  r 

This,  with  (13),  (15),  and  (10),  gives  by  (7) 


.(16). 


Displace- 
ment pro- 
duced by  it. 


for  r < a, 

1 

a — 


18w  (m+n) 
and  for  r > a , 


2 BXO  5 d Xx+Yy+Zz\ 
X(Za-r)-tmrTx ? j 

d Xx+  Yy+Zz\ 


“ = {2m+3n)  7 - “ *“*>  dx 

with  symmetrical  expressions  for  (3  and  y. 


f J 


(17), 


731.  A detailed  examination  of  this  result,  with  graphic 
illustrations  of  the  displacements,  strains,  and  stresses  con- 
cerned, is  of  extreme  interest  in  the  theory  of  the  transmission 
of  force  through  solids;  but  we  reluctantly  confine  ourselves 
to  the  solution  of  the  general  problem  of  § 730. 


To  deduce  which,  we  have  now  only  to  remark  that  if  a becomes 
infinitely  small,  X,  Y,  Z remaining  finite,  the  expressions  for 
ct,  (3,  y become  infinitely  small,  even  within  the  space  of  applica- 
tion of  the  force,  and  at  distances  outside  it  great  in  comparison 
with  a,  they  become 


a = 


<rr j — — — - (2  (2m  + 3 n)  — — mr2  -j- 

A\.-nn  (m  + n)  ( ' r dx 

(3  = etc.,  y = etc. 


d Xx  + Yy  + Zz) 


Displace- 
ment pro- 
duced by  a 
force  ap- 
plied to  an 
infinitely 
small  part 
of  an  infi- 
nite elastic 
solid. 


..(18), 


where  V denotes  the  volume  of  the  sphere.  As  these  depend 
simply  on  the  whole  amount  of  the  force  (its  components  being 
XV,  YV,  ZV),  and  when  it  is  given  are  independent  of  the 
radius  of  the  sphere,  the  same  formulae  express  the  effect  of  the 
same  whole  amount  of  force  distributed  through  an  infinitely 
small  space  of  any  form  not  extending  in  any  direction  to  more 
than  an  infinitely  small  distance  from  the  origin  of  co-ordinates. 


280 


a = 

p= 

y— 


Displace- 
ment pro- 
duced by 
any  distri- 
bution of 
force 

through  an 
infinite 
elastic  solid. 


Application 
to  problem 
of  § 696. 


General 
problem  of 
§696  reduced 
to  case  of  no 
bodily  force. 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [731, 

Hence,  recurring  to  the  notation  of  § 730  ( b ),  we  have  for  the 
required  general  solution 


2 <2“ + 3n>  T>  - mD ’ & v± -i3  j . 

fffdx'dy'clA  2 (2m  + 3 n)  ~ - mD » -/  X'{x  + ^ ~ y">  + Z'(z~  z')  j > 


24irn(m  + ny 


247ni(m+"ttj  fffdx'dy’dz1 


2 (2m  + 3n)  mD2  XAx  ~ X'^ + Y ^ + Z'(z~  z')  j 
D dz  DA  ) 


where  D = J{(x  — x')2  + (y  — y')2  + {z  — z')2}, 

///  denotes  integration  through  all  space,  and  X',  Y',  Z'  are  three 
arbitrary  functions  of  x , f , z restricted  only  by  the  convergency 
condition  of  § 730. 


H 


This  solution  was  first  given,  though  in  a somewhat  different 
form,  in  the  Cambridge  and  Dublin  Mathematical  Journal , 1848, 
On  the  Equations  of  Equilibrium  of  an  Elastic  Solid.  [See 
Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers , Stokes,  Vol.  I.] 


Comparing  it  with  (9),  we  now  see  the  promised  reduction  of 
the  sextuple  integral  involved  in  that  expression  to  a triple 
integral. 


The  process  (e)  by  which  it  is  effected  consists  virtually  of 
the  evaluation  of  a certain  triple  integral  by  the  proper  solution  of 
the  partial  differential  equation  V2  V -f  47rp  = 0 [like  that  formerly 
worked  out  (§  649)  for  the  much  simpler  case  of  p merely  a 
function  of  r].  Proof  of  the  result  by  direct  integration  is  a 
good  exercise  in  the  integral  calculus. 

732.  In  §§  730,  731  the  imagined  subject  has  been  a homo- 
geneous elastic  solid  filling  all  space,  and  experiencing  the 
effect  of  a given  distribution  of  force  acting  bodily  on  its 
substance.  The  solution,  besides  the  interesting  application 
indicated  in  § 731,  is  useful  for  simplifying  the  practical  pro- 
blem of  § 696,  by  reducing  it  immediately  to  the  case  in  which 
no  force  acts  on  the  interior  substance  of  the  body,  thus: — 


The  equations  to  be  satisfied  being  (6)  of  § 698,  throughout 
the  portion  of  space  occupied  by  the  body,  and  certain  equations 
for  all  points  of  its  boundary  expressing  that  the  surface  displace- 
ments or  tractions  fulfil  the  prescribed  conditions;  let  a,  /?,  y 
be  functions  of  ( x , y,  z ),  which  satisfy  the  equations 


732.] 


STATICS. 


281 


g,  d'8  ,r  3V  eP8  tt  a dy8 

wv  a + m -y—  + A = 0,  wv  /3  + m — + T = 0,  ?iy  y + m 4-^-0, 

/>*  d/V  Cv^ 


dx 

where,  for  brevity, 


>■  (i). 


cTa  <7'/3  cTy 
dx  + dy  + dz  ’ 

through  the  space  occupied  by  the  body.  Then,  if  we  put 


a = 'a  + a/,  /?  = '£  + £,  7=7  + %,- 


•(2), 


we  see  that  to  complete  the  solution  we  have  only  to  find  a/}  /?,, 
y(,  as  determined  by  the  equations 


a d8  dS  d8 

nv  at  + m-^  = 0,  A + m = 0,  wvy,  + m ^ = °> 

c?cq  ^ ^ 

‘ dx  dy  dz  ’ 


}>  (3) 


to  be  fulfilled  throughout  the  space  occupied  by  the  body,  and 
certain  equations  for  all  points  of  its  boundary,  found  by  sub- 
tracting from  the  prescribed  values  of  the  surface  displacement 
or  traction,  as  the  case  may  be,  components  of  displacement  or 
traction  calculated  from  'a,  '(3,  'y. 

Values  for  'a,  '/?,  'y  may  always  be  found  according  to  §§  730, 
731,  by  supposing  equations  (1)  § 732  to  hold  through  all  space, 
and  X , Y,  Z to  be  discontinuous  functions,  having  the  given 
values  for  all  points  of  the  body,  and  being  each  zero  for  all 
points  of  space  not  belonging  to  it.  But  all  that  is  necessary  is 
that  (1)  be  satisfied  through  the  space  actually  occupied  by  the 
body ; and  in  some  of  the  most  important  practical  cases  this 
condition  may  be  more  easily  fulfilled  otherwise  than  by  deter- 
mining 'a,  '/},  'y  in  that  way  with  its  superadded  condition  for 
the  rest  of  space. 


733.  Thus,  for  example,  let  us  suppose  the  forces  to  be  important 
. such  that  Xdx  + Ydy+Zdz 1 is  the  differential  of  a function,  W,  ™,°f 


Let  m be  the  mass  of  any  small  part  of  the  body,  x,  y,  z its  co-ordinates  at 
any  time,  and  Pm,  Qm,  Rm  the  components  of  the  force  acting  on  it.  If  the 
system  be  conservative,  Pdx  + Qdy  + Rdz  must  be  the  differential  of  a function  of 
a,  y,  z.  Let,  for  instance,  the  forces  on  all  parts  of  the  body  be  due  to  attractions 
or  lepulsions  from  fixed  matter;  and  let  the  particle  considered  be  the  matter  of 
the  body  within  an  infinitely  small  volume  Sxdydz.  Then  we  have  Pm=XSxSydz, 
etc. ; and  therefore,  if  p be  the  density  of  the  matter  of  m,  so  that  pSxSydz—m 
we  have,  in  the  notation  of  the  text,  Pp  = X,  Qp=Y,  Rp  = Z;  and  therefore 


282 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[733. 


Srr*  of  x>  V'  z considered  as  independent  variables.  This  assump- 
cas°8’  tion  includes  some  of  the  most  important  and  interesting 

practical  applications,  among  which  are — 

(1)  A homogeneous  isotropic  body  acted  on  by  gravitation 
sensibly  uniform  and  in  parallel  lines,  as  in  the  case  of  a body 
of  moderate  dimensions  under  the  influence  of  terrestrial 
gravity. 


(2)  A homogeneous  isotropic  body  acted  on  by  any  distribu- 
tion of  gravitating  matter,  and  either  equilibrated  at  rest  by 
the  aid  of  surface-tractions  if  the  attracting  forces  do  not  of 
themselves  balance  on  it;  or  fulfilling  the  conditions  of  in- 
ternal equilibrium  by  the  balancing,  according  to  DAlembert’s 
principle  (§  264)  of  the  reactions  against  acceleration  of  all 
parts  of  its  mass  and  the  forces  of  attraction  to  which  it  is 
subjected,  when  the  circumstances  are  such  that  no  accele- 
ration of  rotation  has  to  be  taken  into  account.  To  this  case 
belongs  the  problem,  solved  below,  of  finding  the  tidal  deforma- 
tion of  the  solid  Earth,  supposed  of  uniform  specific  gravity  and 
rigidity  throughout,  produced  by  the  tide-generating  influence 
of  the  Moon  and  Sun. 


(3)  A uniform  body  strained  by  centrifugal  force  due  to 
uniform  rotation  round  a fixed  axis. 

But  it  does  not  include  a solid  with  any  arbitrary  non- 
uniform  distribution  of  specific  gravity  subjected  to  any  of 
those  influences;  nor  generally  a piece  of  magnetized  steel 
subjected  to  magnetic  attraction  ; nor  even  a uniform  body 
fulfilling  the  conditions  of  internal  equilibrium  under  the  in- 
fluence of  reactions  against  acceleration  round  a fixed  axis 
produced  by  forces  applied  to  its  surface. 

Xdx+  Ydy  + Zdz  is  or  is  not  a complete  differential  according  as  p is  or  is  not  a 
function  of  the  potential ; that  is  to  say,  according  as  the  density  of  the  body  is 
or  is  not  uniform  over  the  equipotential  surfaces  for  the  distribution  of  force  to 
which  (P,  Q,  It)  belongs.  Thus  the  condition  of  the  text,  if  the  system  of  force 
is  conservative,  is  satisfied  when  the  body  is  homogeneous.  But  it  is  satisfied 
whether  the  system  be  conservative  or  not  if  the  density  is  so  distributed,  that, 
were  the  body  to  lose  its  rigidity,  and  become  an  incompressible  liquid  held  in  a 
closed  rigid  vessel,  it  would  (§  755)  be  in  equilibrium. 


733.] 


STATICS. 


283 


We  have,  according  to  the  present  assumption, 

dW  dW  r dW  y 
dx  ~ ’ dy  ’ dz  


which  give 


dX  dY  dZ  „nr 

d^+ii;+di=vW- 


Hence,  for  '8  as  in  § 730  (a)  for  8, 

(m  + n ) A2'8  + y2  JF=  0, 
which  is  satisfied  by  the  assumption 


'8  = - 


W 
m + n 


reduced  to 
case  of  no 
bodily  force. 


(5). 


Next,  introducing  these  assumptions  in  (1)  of  § 732,  we  see  that 
these  equations  are  finally  satisfied  by  values  for  'a,  '/3,  'y, 
assumed  as  follows  : — • 


1 


a = 


d$  V/3  _ 

> P ~ . 


1 tZ3 


y~ 


l 


m + ndx’  r m + n dy1 
where  3 is  any  function  satisfying  v23  = — If. 


V3 

m + n dz 


.(6). 


Further,  we  may  remark  that  if  IF  be  a spherical  harmonic 
[App.  B.  (a)],  a supposition  including,  as  we  shall  see  later, 
the  most  important  applications  to  natural  problems,  we  have  at 
once,  from  App.  B.  (12),  an  integral  of  the  equation  for  3,  as 
follows  : — 


3 = ■ 


r2 


(2  i + 3) 


W, 


•(7); 


where  the  suffix  is  applied  to  IF  to  denote  that  its  degree  is  i. 


734.  The  general  problem  of  § 696  being  now  reduced  to  Problem  of 
the  case  in  w hich  no  force  acts  on  the  interior  substance,  it  no9forceth 
becomes  this,  in  mathematical  language  To  find  a,  j3,  y,  three  Serr 
functions  of  [x,  y,  z ) which  satisfy  the  equations 


n 

n 

n 


fddx  d2a 
[dx*  dy 2 

\da f dy 2 

(<Fy  . d* 7 

W + dy* 


dx  [dx  dy  dz  J 

. d (dx  d/3  dy\ 

+ mTy{d^  + dy+£)=0 

+ mA  + 

dz  \djc  dy  dz) 


(1) 


284 


ABSTKACT  DYNAMICS. 


[734. 


§ 696  with  hll  points  of  space  occupied  by  the  body,  and  the  proper 
exceptCover  equations  for  all  points  of  the  boundary  to  express  one  or  other 
or  any  sufficient  combination  of  the  two  surface  conditions 
indicated  in  § 69(5.  When  these  conditions  are  that  the 
surface  displacements  are  given,  the  equations  expressing  them 
are  of  course  merely  the  assignment  of  arbitrary  values  to 
a,  /3,  7 for  every  point  of  the  bounding  surface.  On  the  other 
hand,  when  force  is  arbitrarily  applied  in  a fully  specified 
manner  over  the  whole  surface,  subject  only  to  the  conditions 
of  equilibrium  of  forces  on  the  body  supposed  rigid  (§  564),  in 
its  actual  strained  state,  and  the  problem  is  to  find  how  the 
body  yields  both  at  its  surface  and  through  its  interior,  the 
conditions  are  as  follows  : — Let  clQ  denote  an  infinitesimal 
element  of  the  surface  ; and  F,  G,  H functions  of  position  on 
the  surface,  expressing  the  components  of  the  applied  traction. 
These  functions  are  quite  arbitrary,  subject  only  to  the  follow- 
ing conditions,  being  the  equations  [§  551  (a),  (5)]  of  equili- 
brium of  a rigid  body  : — 


equations  of 
equilibrium 
to  which  the 
surface- 
tractions 
are  subject. 

Equations  of 
surface- 
condition, 
when  trac- 
tions are 
given. 


jjFdn  = o,  jj  Gcin  = o,  jf Hem  = o i 

ff(Hy- Gz)d£l  = 0,  Jf(Fz—Hx)dQ,  = 0,  //( Gx-Fy)d£l  = 0j"  "(2) ; 

and  the  strain  experienced  by  the  body  must  be  such  as  to 
satisfy  for  every  point  of  the  surface  the  following  equations ; — 


/ , da  , 


clfi  + dy 
dy  dz 


f+n 


da  d/3 
dy  dx 
d(3  dy N 
dz  dy  j 


dy  da\  . 
dx  + dz)hz 


{ 

{<”•+’*)§' + <”  - n>  (I + !)[ h+n  (£ + £)  ■ f+n  (S  ■ + 1)  ■ °=H 


(3) 


which  we  find  by  (1)  of  § 662,  with  (6)  of  § 670,  with  (5)  of  § 693, 
and  (5)  of  §698;  f,  g,  li  being  now  taken  to  denote  the  direc- 
tion-cosines of  the  normal  to  the  bounding  surface  at  (, v , y,  z ). 


Problem  of  735.  The  solution  of  this  problem  for  the  spherical  shell 
fmspherical  (§  696),  found  by  aid  of  Laplace’s  spherical  harmonic  analysis, 
was  first  given  by  Lamd  in  a paper  published  in  Liouvilles 
Journal  for  1854.  It  becomes  much  simplified 1 by  the  plan 


1 “Dynamical  Problems  regarding  Elastic  Spheroidal  Shells,  and  Spheroids 
of  Incompressible  Liquid.”  W.  Thomson.  Phil . Trans.,  1862. 


STATICS. 


285 


735.]  

we  follow  of  adhering  to  algebraic  notation  and  symmetrical 
formulae  [App.  B.  (l)-(24)],  until  convenient  practical  expan- 
sions of  the  harmonic  functions,  whether  in  algebraic  or  trigono- 
metrical forms,  are  sought  [App.  B.  (25)-(41),  (56)-(66)]. 

(a)  Using  for  brevity  the  same  notation  8 and  as  hitherto 
[§  G98  (8)  (9)],  we  find,  from  (1)  of  § 734,  by  the  process  (a)  of 
§ 730,  v28  = 0. 

(b)  Now  let  the  actual  values  of  8 over  any  two  concentric 
spherical  surfaces  of  radii  a and  a be  expanded,  by  (52)  of 
App.  B.,  in  series  of  surface  harmonics,  S0,  Sx,  S2,  etc.,  and 
aS"0,  S\,  S'2,  etc. ; so  that  when 

r = a,  8 = S0  + Sx  + Sa+  ...Si+  ...  ) 

and  r = a',  $ = S'0  + S\  + S’a+ ...  \ 

Then,  throughout  the  intermediate  space,  we  must  have 

s 2 (ai+lS{  - a'i+1S\)  r<  - (aaj+1  (a'%  - a%)  r"*"1  /K. 

8 = ? Tfrtzfc?- 1 -(5>- 

For  (i)  this  series  converges  for  all  values  of  r intermediate 
between  a and  a , as  we  see  by  supposing  a'  to  be  the  less  of  the 
two,  and  writing  it  thus  : — 


Problem  of 
§ 696  solved 
for  spherical 
shell. 


Dilatation 
proved  ex- 
pressible in 
convergent 
series  of 
spherical 
harmonics. 


.(4). 


00  00 

8 - 28,  + 23_,._ 

0 0 


• (6) 


where  St,  S_1_1  are  solid  harmonics  of  degrees  i and  -i  - 1 given 
by  the  following  : — 

‘ I -(‘‘f"  W’ and  wTpv)  • 

For  very  great  values  of  i these  become  sensibly 

and  therefore,  as  each  of  the  series  (4)  is  necessarily  convergent, 
the  two  series  into  which  in  (6)  the  expansion  (5)  is  divided, 
ultimately  converge  more,  rapidly  than  the  geometrical  series 

©■©“•©"' 

respectively. 


286 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Dilatation 
proved  ex- 
pressible in 
convergent 
sories  of 
spherical 
harmonics. 


[735. 


Again  (ii)  the  expression  (5)  agrees  with  (4)  at  the  boundary 
of  the  space  referred  to  (the  two  concentric  spherical  surfaces). 

And  (iii)  it  satisfies  V23  = 0 throughout  the  space. 

Hence  (iv)  no  function  differing  in  value  from  that  given  by 
(5),  for  any  point  of  the  space  between  the  spherical  surfaces,  can 

[App.  A.  (e)]  satisfy  the  conditions  (iii)  and  (iv)  to  which  8 is 
subject. 


In  words,  this  conclusion  is  that 


General 
theorem  re- 
garding ex- 
pansibility 
in  solid 
harmonics. 


736.  Any  function,  8,  of  x,  y,  z,  which  satisfies  the  equation 
\7  8 = 0 for  any  point  of  the  space  between  two  concentric 
spherical  surfaces,  may  be  expanded  into  the  sum  of  two  series 
of  complete  spherical  harmonics  [App.  B.  (c)]  of  positive  and 
of  negative  degrees  respectively,  which  converge  for  all  points 
of  that  space. 


Displace- 
ment deter- 
mined on 
temporary 
supposition 
that  dilata- 
tion is 
known. 


(c)  We  may  now  write  (6),  for  brevity,  thus— 

s = -|s. (7), 


where  S;,  a complete  harmonic  of  any  positive  or  negative  degree, 
i,  is  to  be  determined  ultimately  to  fulfil  the  actual  conditions  of 
the  problem.  But  first  supposing  it  known,  we  find  a,  (3,  y as  in 
§ 730  ( d ),  except  that  now  we  take  advantage  of  the  formula 
appropriate  for  spherical  harmonics  instead  of  proceeding  by 
triple  integration.  Thus,  by  (1)  and  (7),  we  have 


2 ™ - d8. 

Xa  = -n^di’ 


cl$ 

and  therefore,  as  is  a harmonic  of  degree  i—  1,  by  taking,  in 


App.  B.  (12),  n = i—  1 and  m-  2,  we  see  that  the  complete 
solution  of  this  equation,  regarded  as  an  equation  for  a,  is 

mr2  1 dS. 
a=  u — — — 2 T 

2 n 2t  + 1 dx 


where  u denotes  any  solution  whatever  of  the  equation  \2u  = 0. 
Similarly,  if  v and  w denote  any  functions  such  that  y2y  = 0 and 
\r2w  = 0,  we  have 


mr 3 _ 1 d8{ 

2 n 2i  + 1 dy' 


and 


y = w — 


mr 
2 n 


1 d8, 

2i  + 1 dz  ’ 


736.] 


STATICS. 


287 


(d)  Now,  in  order  that  (1)  may  be  satisfied,  Sj  must  be  so 
related  to  u}  v,  w that 

ch  + f + p-  = S = 2$,. 

dx  ay  dz 

Hence,  by  differentiating  the  expressions  just  found  for  a,  /?,  y, 
and  attending  to  the  formula 

d (j  . d ( d(j>{\  d f d<f>\  ( d d d\  „ 

*V  dx)  + TyK!  dy)  + d,(r  &)=2(a:<5+2/Si;+S&y*+,'V^ 

= 2i<f>  +r2v2</><---(8), 

<£,  being  any  homogeneous  function  of  degree  i,  we  find 


This  gives 


„„  du  dv  dw  m i 

* dx  + d,y  + dz  n 2i  + 1 ' ’ 

du  + dv  dw  (2i+l)n+im 
dx  dy+  dz  ~ ( 2i  + 1 )n  1 


.(9). 


If,  therefore,  2^,  %wi  be  the  harmonic  expansions  (§  736) 
of  u,  v,  w we  must  have 


8.  = (2i+l)n  fduc+1  , <K, x dwi+1\ 

(2i  + 1)  n + im  \ dx  dy  dz  ) 


.(10). 


Using  this,  with  i changed  into  i - 1,  in  the  preceding  expressions 
for  a,  /?,  y,  we  have  finally,  as  the  spherical  harmonic  solution 
of  (1),  § 734, 


1 = 00 


1=  — oo 
i=co 


mr 


d^  fdui  dvi  dw\  j ' 

(2i  — 1)  n + (i  — 1)  m dx  \dx  + dy  + dz  )) 


i=D  r 


mr2 


i= oo  r 

y=J-Aw'-kw. 


d_  fdux  dvi  dwX'y 

1)  n + (i-  1)  m dy  \dx  + dy+  dz)) 

d_  ^du(  + dv{  + dw^ ) 


mr 


•(H), 


'(2i- \)n  + (i-  1)  m dz  \dx  dy  dz)) 

j 

where  un  v{J  w(  denote  any  spherical  harmonics  of  degree  i. 

For  the  analytical  investigations  that  follow,  it  is  convenient 
to  introduce  the  following  abbreviations  : 


Complete 
harmonic 
solution  of 
equations 
or  interior 
equilibrium. 


288 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[73G. 


Complete 
harmonic 
solution  of 
equations 
of  interior 
equilibrium. 


Solid  sphere 
with  surface 
displace- 
ments given. 


Shell  with 
given  dis- 
placements 
of  its  outer 
and  inner 
surfaces. 


so  that  (11)  becomes 

! #f-l 


X=  — 00 
i = cc 


(3=  2 

i=-co\  dy 


.(14). 


y=  2 [w  — Mqr 


J> 

dz 


) 


(e)  It  is  important  to  remark  that  the  addition  to  w,  -y,  w re- 
spectively of  terms  d^/dy,  d<f>/dz  (<j>  being  any  function 

satisfying  v2</>=°)>  does  not  alter  the  equation  (10).  This 
allows  us  at  once  to  wifite  down  as  follows  the  solution  of  the 
problem  for  the  solid  sphere  with  surface  displacement  given. 


Let  a be  the  radius  of  the  sphere,  and  let  the  arbitrarily  given 
values  of  the  three  components  of  displacement  for  every  point 
of  the  surface  be  expressed  [App.  B.  (52)]  by  series  of  surface 
harmonics,  2d;,  2 2 Bt,  respectively.  The  solution  is 


l — GO 


i= 0 


a=  2 A - + 


m (a2  — r2)  g?®{_ 

2a‘[(2i—  \)n+  (i  — 1)  m]  dx 


/3  = ‘s"  + 

i= 0 t 


m (a2  — r2) 


d®, 


where 


a/  2al  [(2i  — 1)  n + (i  — 1)  m]  eft/ 

m (a2  - r2)  d®t_ l 

2ai[(2i~  1)  n+  (i-  \)ni\  dz 

d(Af)  d (B/)  d (Cf) 


} 


+ 


+ 


dx  dy  dz 

For  this  is  what  (11)  becomes  if  we  take 


(15). 


m 


Ux  A 1 \a / + 2 a'  [(2 i + 3)  n + (i  + 1)  m]  dx 
and  it  makes 


d®, , . 

+ , v{=  etc.,  etc.  ; 


a = 2 A0  /3  = '%Bi,  7 = 2^,  whenr=a (16). 

This  result  might  have  been  obtained,  of  course,  by  a purely 
analytical  process;  and  we  shall  fall  on  it  again  as  a particular 
case  of  the  following: — 

(f)  The  problem  for  a shell  with  displacements  given  arbitrarily 
for  all  points  of  each  of  its  concentric  spherical  bounding  sur- 
faces is  much  more  complicated,  and  we  shall  find  a purely 
analytical  process  the  most  convenient  for  getting  to  its  solution. 


736.] 


STATICS. 


280 


Let  a and  a be  the  radii  of  the  outer  and  inner  spherical  surfaces,  Shell  with 
and  let  2d.,  etc.,  2d',.,  etc.,  be  the  series  of  surface  harmonics  placements 
expressing  [App.  B.  (52)]  the  arbitrarily  given  components  ofandinnerr 
displacement  over  them;  so  that  our  surface  conditions  are  surfaces. 


a = 2d. 


] «=2  AY 

l when  r = a ; and  /?  = 2 B\ 

• when  r = a 

1 7=267 

...(17). 


Using  the  abbreviated  notation  (12)  and  (13),  selecting  from  (14) 
all  terms  of  a which  become  surface  harmonics  of  order  i for  a 
constant  value  of  r,  and  equating  to  the  proper  harmonic  terms 
of  (17),  we  have 

Remarking  that  r^u.,  r'+'u^,  r^Jdx,  and  r'+'d^/dx  are 
each  of  them  independent  of  r,  we  have  immediately  from  (18) 

the  following  two  equations  towards  determining  these  four 
functions : — 

+ a-<-i  - a2  fr^  ^=f\  l=Ai 

and  X ' dx  J A 

«'  (r-%)  + - a*  + a,-,_a  j = ^ 

These,  and  the  symmetrical  equations  relative  to  y and  z,  suffice, 
with  (13),  for  the  determination  of  u„  va  wt  for  every  value,' 
positive  and  negative,  of  i.  The  most  convenient  order  of  pro- 
cedure is  first  to  find  equations  for  the  determination  of  the  if/ 

functions  by  the  elimination  of  the  u,  v,  w,  thus: — From  (19) 
we  have  v 7 

(a!i+3  " a'2‘+3)  + ^ ~ ^ + (ai+1A{-  a’WJQr* 


119). 


«<= 
i-i  = 


azi+l  - a'2^1 


)M+1(a2  - ***1+ 


diT+  (aa')2(a2i_1  ~ (aay+ 1 - a%) r~<Jl 

a- 1+1  - a'2H-i  

and  symmetrical  equations  for  v and  w.  Or  if,  for  brevity,  we 


•(20) 


3 _ai+lAi-a/t+lA'i 


±_t  m.  (aa'y+1  (alA! anA) 

1 ~'2i+r~  } xl , = ' : — l7  /oi  \ 

* a - a i+L  


rt2*TI 

(i  —a 

VOL.  II. 


19 


290 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[736. 


Shell  with 
given  dis- 
placements 
of  its  outer 
and  inner 
surfaces. 


and 

+ 2 = ^2i  + I 


aai+3  - a!i+3 


M i)  (aa)  (a  aj)  ^ /22) 

CO  — CO 


v^etc.,  v_t_Y  = etc.,  w£  = etc.,  = etc. 


(23). 


Performing  the  proper  differentiations  and  summations  to  elimi- 
nate the  w,  v,  ttf  functions  between  these  (23)  and  (13),  and 
taking  advantage  of  the  properties  of  the  if/  functions,  that 


V.+.  = o.  vY-,=  o,  = 


£C 


cZx  ’ 17  dy 
dyj/_i  dif/_{  d\]/_i_ 


dx 


+ y^J77  + z 


dy  dz 


-fy-n 


we  find 


ft-i="(2»  + l)  *$-«**“  V-i+  da. 
and 


d(gfr*)  dm^)  dj&id) 

dy  dz 


1 (21). 


d&L'ir™)  ddS'i?—-1)  d(«t'lr-i-') 

^-2=(2i  + l)(i  + D^+2r-2£-Vm  +■ 4 


Changing  i into  i + 1 in  the  first  of  these,  and  into  i 1 in  tin 
second,  we  have  two  equations  for  the  two  unknown  quantities 
ij/i  and  i which  gi-ve 


.,2t  + 1 


0,.+  (2i  + 3)  (i  + 1) 

1 - (2 i+  3)  (2 i - 1) (i  + l)iM.tBt+l 

(2i-l)fi)i,.+l0ir-2i-,  + 0'_t._1 
i - (2 i + 3)  (2 i - 1)  (i  + 1)  iia_  j)£i+1 . 

where,  for  brevity, 

n <im..s") , <*(»>,,/*')  d 

©,  = :■ + — + dz 


dx 


dy 


and  = 


dW^r-*)  . d 

^ -4- 


c&c 


c&c 


+ 


dx 


.(25), 


■(26). 


The  functions  i/;,  and  for  every  value  of  t being  thus  given 
(23)  and  (14)  complete  the  solution  of  the  problem. 


736.] 


STATICS. 


291 


([/)  The  composition  of  this  solution  ought  to  be  carefully  Shell  with 
studied.  Thus  separating  for  simplicity  the  part  due  to  the  placements 
terms  An  etc.,  A „ etc.,  of  the  single  order  i,  in  the  surface  data,  andL°nerr 
we  see  that  were  there  no  such  terms  of  other  orders,  all  the  ij/  surfaces- 
functions  would  vanish  except  fi+l,  ^ _{_2 . These 

■would  give  u(_2,  ut,  ui+a,  w_,+],  w_,_, , and  w_,_3;  with  symmetri- 
cal expressions  for  the  v and  to  functions;  of  which  the  composi- 
tion will  be  best  studied  by  first  writing  them  out  in  full,  explicitly 

in  terms  of  $(„  33,,  ©,,  ST,,  33',,  and  the  derived  solid  har- 
monics ©,_,  and 


737.  W hen,  instead  of  surface  displacements,  the  force  Surf”CG 
applied  over  the  surface  is  given,  the  problem,  whether  for  the  given- 
solid  sphere  or  the  shell,  is  longer  because  of  the  preliminary 
process  (h)  required  to  express  the  components  of  traction  on 
any  spherical  surface  concentric  with  the  given  sphere  or  shell, 
in  proper  harmonic  forms  ; and  its  solutionis  more  complicated! 
because  of  the  new  solid  harmonic  function  0.+1  [(32)  below] 
which,  besides  the  function  employed  above,  we  are 
obliged  to  introduce  in  this  preliminary  jirocess. 

(A)  Taking  F,  G,  II  to  denote  the  components  of  the  traction 
on  the  spherical  surface  of  any  radius  r,  having  its  centre  at  the 
origin  of  co-ordinates,  instead  of  merelv  for  the  boundary  of  the 
body  as  supposed  formerly  in  § 734  (3),  we  have  still  the  same 
formulae  : but  in  them  we  have  now  to  put  f = x/r,  g = yjr,  h = zjr. 

By  grouping  their  terms  conveniently,  we  may,  with  the  notation 
(2b),  put  them  into  the  following  abbreviated  forms : 


Fr=  (m  - n)  8 . x + n \lr~  - l)  a + © ] 

!\  dr  J dx) 


where 

and 


£ — o.x  + f3  y + yz 

^ d d 
dr  dx+V  dy  + Zdz 


bo  that  'dr  is  the  radial 


(27), 


(28), 


Component 
tractions  on 
any  spheri- 
cal surface 
concentric 
with  origin. 


component  of  the  displacement  at  any 

19—2 


292 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[737. 


Component 
tractions  on 
any  spheri- 
cal surface 
concentric 
with  origin. 


point,  and  djdr  prefixed  to  any  function  of  x , y,  z denotes  the 
rate  of  its  variation  per  unit  of  length  in  the  radial  direction. 

It  is  interesting  to  remark  that  if  we  denote  by  R the  radial 
component  of  the  traction,  we  find,  from  (2()  and  (28), 


R = *F+f.G  + Z-H  = (m-n)  S + y(f~[) (28'). 


(fc)  To  reduce  these  expressions  to  surface  harmonics,  let  us  - 
consider  homogeneous  terms  of  degree  i of  the  complete  solutioi: 
(14),  which  we  shall  denote*  by  cq,  (3i}  y<,  and  let  S,_, , £(+ 
denote  the  corresponding  terms  of  the  other  functions.  Thuf 
we  have 

.*&+t 


7 y \ 

Fr  = $ |(m  - n)  + »(»-!)  + n J 


6rr=^|(m- w)Si_12/  + w(i-l)^<  + w-^1|  !•  ...(29). 

Hr=  2 |(m  - n)  8 + n {%  - 1)  yt  + n j 


(l)  The  second  of  the  three  terms  of  order  i in  these  equa 
tions,  when  the  general  solution  of  § (d)  is  used,  become  at  thl 
boundary  each  explicitly  the  sum  of  two  surface  harmonics  c 
orders  i and  i - 2 respectively.  To  bring  the  other  parts  of  th 
expressions  to  similar  forms,  it  is  convenient  that  we  shoul 
first  express  £f+1  in  terms  of  the  general  solution  (14)  of  § (d 
by  selecting  the  terms  of  algebraic  degree  i.  Thus  we  have 


vir 


1 


.(30), 


a‘  Ui  2 [(2i  - 1)  n + (i  - 1)  m]  dx 
and  symmetrical  expressions  for  /3;  and  yi}  from  which  we  find 


(i-  1)  i 

aLx  + P,y  + y£z  = &+ 1 = uix  + V'V  + wiz  ~ 2 [(2  f-  1)  w + (i^l)  m] ' 


Hence,  by  the  proper  formulae  [see  (36)  below]  for  reduction  1 
harmonics, 


1 ( (2i-l)[(i-l)m-2n]  l . . (3 1 ), 

“ Si+T  12  [(2i  - 1) » + (i  - 1)»»]  ft~l  9+J 


* The  suffixes  now  introduced  have  reference  solely  to  the  algebraic  degTf 
positive  or  negative,  of  the  functions,  whether  harmonic  or  not,  of  the  symW> 
to  which  they  are  applied. 


737.] 


STATICS. 


293 


w 


liere 


I 

9<+ 1 — 1 


(8i+3 


(d  + /j2) 

\ dx  dy  dz  ) 


Component 
tractions  on 
any  spheri- 
, cal  surface 
concentric 
with  origin 


.(33). 


and  (as  before  assumed  in  § 12) 

dut  dv\  dWi 
^<_1  dx  + dy  + dz 
Also,  by  (10)  of  § 736,  or  directly  from  (30)  by  differentiation, 
we  have 

(34). 


(2i-  l)w  + (i  — 1)  m 

Substituting  these  expressions  for  Si_1 , a0  and  £(+1  in  (29),  we 
find 

_ . f ..  n(2i-  1)  [Yi  + 2)m-(2t-l)9i] 

Fr  = 2 ] n (i  - 1)  Ui  + ^ . . r/V- — h — T\ — n x^t-\ 

( v ' (2i  + 1)  [(2t-  l)7t  + (t-  l)mj 


harmoni- 
ex- 


n[2i(i-\)m-(2i-\)n\  , d^  _ n d<f>i+l\  cal)y ex. 

(2i  + 1)  [(2i  — 1)  w + (i  — 1)  m]  dx  2i+l  dx  J"'v  '*  Pressed- 

This  is  reduced  to  the  required  harmonic  form  by  the  obviously 
proper  formula 

<36>- 

Thus,  and  dealing  similarly  with  the  expressions  for  Gr  and  Hr , 
we  have,  finally, 

Fr=>n2  |(f-l)M,-2(i- 2 ^ 

*«*  j(i  - lh  - * I-'  - 

Jfr=„2  {(«-  !)»,-  2(i  - } 


dec 

m 


y (37), 


where  [as  above  (1 2)],  if,  = 4 — tt — , — 

L v z (2i-\)n  + (i-\)  m 

(i  + 2)m-(2i-  l)?t 


and  now,  further,  E{  = 


(2i+  1)  [(2i-l)n  + (i-l)m\ 


...(38). 


(m)  To  express  the  surface  conditions  by  harmonic  equations  Prescribed 

• surface  con- 

fer the  shell  bounded  by  the  concentric  spherical  surfaces,  r = a,  ditions  put 

r - a\  let  us  suppose  the  superficial  values  of  F,  G,  H to  be  monies. 

given  as  follows  : — 

when  r = a,  F=^Ai}  G = 'ZFi,  H=2lCi  1 

\H=%C’i}"' 


aud  when  r-a,  F=  G = 2$',. 


.(39), 


294 


Prescribed 
surface  con- 
ditions put 
into  har- 
monics. 


Equations  of 
equilibrium 
to  which  the 
surface 
tractions 
are  subject. 

- fftlwZ  {aUi 


Limitations 
imposed  on 
the  other- 
wise arbi- 
trary har- 
monic data 
of  surface 
tractions, 
for  their 
equilibrium. 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[737. 


where  Ai}  Bi}  Gu  A\,  B\,  G\  denote  surface  harmonics  of. 
order  i. 

To  apply  to  this  harmonic  development  the  conditions  § 734 
(2)  to  which  the  surface  traction  is  subject,  let  a2dv7  and  a!2dvs 
be  elements  of  the  outer  and  inner  spherical  surfaces  subtending,-! 
at  the  centre  (§  468)  a common  infinitesimal  solid  angle  dzs : 
and  let  / jd-m  denote  integration  over  the  whole  spherical  surface  i 
of  unit  radius.  Equations  (2)  become 

ar2A\)  = 0,  etc.;  and  ffdvo[y2(a*Ct- a'2C\)  - z2(a2^- a'2B\)]  = 0,  etc.  (40). 

Now  App.  B.  (16)  shows  that,  of  the  first  three  of  these,  all 
terms  except  the  first  (those  in  which  i = 0)  vanishes ; and  that 
of  the  second  three  all  the  terms  except  the  second  (those  for 
which  7=1)  vanish  because  x,  y,  z are  harmonics  of  order  1. 
Thus  the  first  three  become 

JJdzu  ( a2A0  - a'2A'0),  etc. ; j 

which,  as  A0,  A'g,  etc.,  are  constants,  require  simply  that 

a2A0  = a'2A'0,  a2B0  = a'2B'0,  a2G=a'2G\  (41). 


The  second  three  are  equivalent  to 


r{a2A1-a,2A'1)=<^,  - a,2B\)  = ^ , r(a2C'1-a'2C"1)=dH‘ 


dy 


dx 


(42), 


where  //2  is  a homogeneous  function  of  x,  y,  z of  the  second 
degree.  Eor  [App.  B.  (a)]  rAjy  rA\,  etc.,  are  linear  functions 
of  x,  y , 2.  If  therefore  (A,  x),  (A,  y)...(B,  a?)... denote  nine 
constants,  we  have 


r (a2A1  - a'2A\)  = (A,  x)x  + (A,  y)y+  (A,  z)  zy 
r ( a2B , - a'2B\)  = (B,  x)  x+  (B,  y)y+  (B,  z)  z, 
r ( a2Gl  - d*C\ ) = ( C , x)  x + (C,  y)  y + ( C , z)  z.  j 

Using  these  in  the  second  three  of  (40)  of  which,  as  remarked 
above,  all  terms  except  those  for  which  7=1  disappear,  and  re- 
marking that  yz,  zx,  xy  are  harmonics,  and  therefore  (App. 
B.  (16)]  ff yzd-m  = 0,  ffzxdm  = 0,  ffxydm  = 0, 

we  have  ( G , y)  ff y-dzs  - (B,  z)  ffz\lw  = 0 : etc. 

From  these,  because  / f x3drz  = // y~dzu  = f fz'd-ni, 


it  follows  that 

(G,  y)  = (B,  z),  (A,  z)  = (G,  x),  (B,  x)  = (A,  y), 
which  prove  (42). 


737.] 


STATICS. 


295 


n 

r 


(n)  The  terms  of  algebraic  degree  i,  exhibited  in  the  pre- 
ceding expressions  (37)  for  Fr,  Gr,  Hr,  become,  at  either  of  the 
concentric  spherical  surfaces,  sums  of  surface  harmonics  of 
orders  i and  i — 2 when  i is  positive,  and  of  orders  — i — 1 and 
-i  -3  when  i is  negative.  Hence,  selecting  all  the  terms  Surface^ 

which  lead  to  surface  harmonics  of  order  i,  and  equating  to  the  expressed  in 

harmonic 

proper  terms  of  the  data  (39),  we  have  equations. 


(i  - 1)11,- (i  + 2)  «_<_1  - 2iMi+,  t"  (h^  + 2 (i  + l)M_i+1r* 


| - E,r-i+1  _ E_{  r 

dx 


dw+yw)  _ i_  (d<pt+ 1 

dx  2t  + l \ dx 


(At  when  r — a 1 
[A',  when  r—a!  f 


and  symmetrical  equations  relative  to  y and  z. 

(o)  These  equations  are  to  be  treated  precisely  on  the  same 
plan  as  formerly  were  (18).  Thus  after  finding  u ,•  and  u_{_x , 
we  perform  on  u„  v„  w,  the  operations  of  (33),  and  on 
v_,_x,  w-i-\  those  of  (32),  and  so  arrive  at  two  equations  Surface  ^ 
which  involve  as  unknown  quantities  only  i{/i_1 , \J/_{,  </>_<,  and 
taking  the  corresponding  expressions  for  u,_2,  w_i+1,  and  apply-  for  spherical 
ing  (32)  to  u._2,  v._a_,  w,_2,  and  (33)  to  u_i+1,  v_i+1,  we 

similai’ly  obtain  two  equations  between  <]>,_■,,  \f/t_ x,  and  Thus 
we  have  in  all  four  simple  algebraic  equations  between 
xj/_ti  <£,_!>  hy  which  we  find  these  four  unknown  functions  : 
and  the  u,  v,  w functions  having  been  already  explicitly  ex- 
pressed in  terms  of  them,  we  thus  have,  in  terms  of  the  data  of 
the  problem,  every  unknown  function  that  appears  in  (14)  its 
solution. 


(p)  The  case  of  the  solid  sphere  is  of  course  fallen  on  from  for  solid 

1 stihoro 

the  more  general  problem  of  the  shell,  by  putting  a!  = 0.  But 
if  we  begin  with  only  contemplating  it,  we  need  not  introduce 
any  solid  harmonics  of  negative  degree  (since  every  harmonic  of 
negative  degree  becomes  infinite  at  the  centre,  and  therefore  is 
inadmissible  in  the  expression  of  effects  produced  throughout  a 
solid  sphere  by  action  at  its  surface) ; and  (43),  and  all  the 
formulae  described  as  deducible  from  it,  become  much  shortened 
when  we  thus  confine  ourselves  to  this  case.  Thus,  instead  of 
(43),  we  now  have  simply 

when  r=a 


29G 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Surface 
tractions 
given : gene- 
ral solution ; 
for  solid 
sphere. 


[737. 

Hence,  attending  [as  formerly  in  (/)]  to  the  property  of  a 
homogeneous  function  Hj}  of  any  order  j,  that  is  indepen- 
dent of  r,  and  depends  only  on  the  ratios  xjr,  ylr,  z/r ; we  have 
for  all  values  of  x,  y , z, 

(45). 

From  this  and  the  symmetrical  equations  for  v and  w,  we  have 
by  (33), 

[i  - 1 + (2i  + 1)  iEt]  jd^  + <Ml. 3 + d(Crf 

and  by  (32) 


dx  dy  dz 

) , dlCjr*-!) 


'}(«); 


2i,i+1+2i(i+1)(2i+i)^fe=^{M+^) +<sega|  (47). 

Eliminating,  by  this,  cf>i+l  from  (45),  and  introducing  the  abbre- 
viated notation,  <hi+1  [(50)  below],  we  find 


(«-l)*-<MW«rf=£*- +^[>+8^  =2»J  (48), 


^-J  = 


and  (43)  gives 

\T/ 

™<— 1 


= [(*  -l)m  + (2t-l)7t]^_, 

‘-1  r(2i*+n1»-/2t-nnijww 


[(i  — l)  + (2i  + l)ijE,i]  wa1  1 [(2i2+  1)  m— (2i—  1)  w] 


where 


and  <3>, 


* (V)  [ <W)  | d(Cf) 

’ 1 e&c  cfy  efe 


_ r2‘‘+s 

l 


'd(Af-*-')  ( cf(Zbr~*-)  , d (Cj) 


+ 


(50). 


2 


i+1  ' [ dx  ^ dy  ' cfs 

With  these  expressions  for  if/t  and  uiy  (14)  is  the  complete  solu- 
tion of  the  problem. 

(q)  The  composition  and  character  of  this  solution  are  made 
manifest  by  writing  out  in  full  the  terms  in  it  which  depend  on 
harmonics  of  a single  order,  i,  in  the  surface  data.  Thus  if 
the  components  of  the  surface  traction  are  simply  A.,  B.,  C.,  all 
the  functions  except  and  all  the  <£  functions  except 

<3>.+1  vanish.  Hence  (48)  shows  that  all  the  u functions  except 
u._2  and  u{  vanish  : and  for  these  it  gives 

#<-i 


= Ma! 


dx 


ut  = ^K( E^~  r~<+')  + + o-/o1;  1 

?.  — !(.  dxyr  nal  1[_  2i(2»  + l)  (fa;  J J J 


(51). 


STATICS. 


297 


797.] 


a 


Using  this  in  (14)  and.  for  Ei  and  substituting  their  values  by 
(38),  we  have,  explicitly  expressed  in  terms  of  the  data,  and  the 
solid  harmonics  'PJ_1,  M>1+1,  derived  from  the  data  according  to 
the  formulae  (50),  the  final  solution  of  the  problem  as  follows : 


1 ( m{a?-r-)  dSP.-i 

nai-1  l “ (2i2+l)m-(2i-l)/i  dx 


r (t+2)?n-(2t-l)  n r2l'+h?(^,-Ir~2l'+1) 
L(2i2+l)m-(2t-l)/i  (2i+l)cZcc 


_1_ 

+ 2i{2i+l) 


with  symmetrical  expressions  for  (3  and  y. 


(?•)  The  case  of  i = 1 is  interesting,  inasmuch  as  it  seems  at 
first  sight  to  make  the  second  part  of  the  expression  (52)  for  a 
infinite  because  of  the  divisor  i — 1.  But  the  terms  within  the 
brackets  [ ] vanish  for  i = 1,  owing  to  the  relations  (42)  proved 
above,  which,  for  the  solid  sphere,  become 


dB% 

dx  ’ 


dz 


(53), 


II 2 denoting  any  homogeneous  function  of  x,  y,  z of  the  second 
degree.  The  verification  of  this  presents  no  difficulty,  and  we 
leave  it  as  an  exercise  to  the  student.  The  true  interpretation 
of  the  § appearing  thus  in  the  expressions  for  a,  (3,  y is  clearly 
that  they  are  indeterminate : and  that  they  ought  to  be  so,  we  see 
by  remarking  that  an  infinitesimal  rotation  round  any  diameter 
without  strain  may  be  superimposed  on  any  solution  without 
violating  the  conditions  of  the  problem : in  other  words  (§§  89,  95), 


o)2z  — c o3y,  w3x  — (otz,  wyx  — w2x 

may  be  added  to  the  expressions  for  a,  (3,  y in  any  solution,  and 
the  result  will  still  be  a solution. 


But  though  a,  (3,  y are  indeterminate,  (50)  gives  i[/0  and  <£, 
determinately.  The  student  will  find  it  a good  and  simple 
exercise  to  verify  that  the  determination  of  i f/0  and  c/>o  determines 
the  state  of  strain  [homogeneous  (§  155)  of  course  in  this  case] 
actually  produced  by  the  given  surface  traction. 


738.  A solid  is  said  (§  730)  to  experience  a plane  strain, 
or  to  be  strained  in  two  dimensions,  when  it  is  strained  in  any 
manner  subject  to  the  condition  that  the  displacements  are  all 
in  a set  of  parallel  planes,  and  are  equal  and  parallel  for  all 
points  in  any  line  perpendicular  to  these  planes : and  any  one 
of  these  planes  may  be  called  the  plane  of  the  strain.  Thus, 


Case  of 
homogene- 
ous strain. 


Indetermi- 
nate rota- 
tions with- 
out strain, 
necessarily 
included  in 
general  so- 
lution for 
displace- 
ment, when 
the  data  are 
merely  of 
force. 


Plane  strain 
defined. 


298 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[738. 


deflned.train  *n  l^ane  strain,  all  cylindrical  surfaces  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  the  strain  remain  cylindrical  surfaces  perpendicular 
to  the  same  plane,  and  nowhere  experience  stretching  along  the 
generating  lines. 


The  condition  of  plane  strain  expressed  analytically,  if  we  take 
XOY  for  the  plane,  is  that  y must  vanish,  and  that  a and  (3  must 
be  functions  of  x and  y,  without  z.  Thus  we  see  that 


Only  two  independent  variables  enter  into  the  analytical  ex- 
pression of  plane  strain  ; and  thus  this  case  presents  a class  of 
problems  of  peculiar  simplicity.  For  instance,  if  an  infinitely 
long  solid  or  hollow  circular  cylinder  is  the  “ given  solid”  of 
Problem  for  § 69G,  and  if  the  bodily  force  (if  any)  and  the  surface  action 
under  plane  consist  of  forces  and  tractions  everywhere  perpendicular  to  its 
axis,  and  equal  and  parallel  at  all  points  of  any  line  parallel 
to  its  axis,  we  have,  whether  surface  displacement  or  surface 
traction  be  given,  problems  precisely  analogous  to  those  of 
§§  735,  736,  but  much  simpler,  and  obviously  of  very  great 
practical  importance  in  the  engineering  of  long  straight  tubes 
under  strain. 


solved  in 
terms  of 
“ plane 
harmonics.” 


Plane 
harmonic 
f unctions 
defined. 


739.  It  is  interesting  to  remark,  that  in  these  cylindrical 
problems,  instead  of  surface  harmonics  of  successive  orders 
1,  2,  3,  etc.,  which  are  [App.  B.  (6)]  functions  of  spherical 
surface  co-ordinates  (as,  for  instance,  latitude  and  longitude  on 
a globe),  we  have  simple  harmonic  functions  (§§  54,  75)  of  the 
same  degrees,  of  the  angle  between  two  planes  through  the 
axis,  and  of  its  successive  multiples : and  instead  of  solid 
harmonic  functions  [App.  B.  (a)  and  (6)],  we  have  what  we 
may  call  plane  harmonic  f unctions,  being  the  algebraic  functions 
of  two  variables  (x,  y),  which  we  find  by  expanding  cos  id  and 
sin  id  in  powers  of  sines  or  cosines  of  9,  taking 


cos  6 = 


x 


, and  sin  6 = - 


V 


,2\  > 


v/(^  + 2/y  v {x* + if) 

X{ 

and  multiplying  the  result  by  (x2  4-  yf2 . 

A plane  harmonic  function  is  of  course  the  particular  case  of  a 
solid  harmonic  [App.  B.  (a)  and  (5)]  in  which  z does  not  appear  j 


STATICS. 


299 


■39.] 


that  is  to  say,  it  is  any  homogeneous  function,  1 , of  x and  y, 
which  satisfies  the  equation 

70  TT  7 2 T T 

— h — = 0,  or,  as  we  may  write  it  tor  brevity,  \/'V—  0. 

dxa  dy 

And,  as  we  have  seen  [§  707  (23)],  the  most  general  expression 
for  a plane  harmonic  of  degree  i (positive  or  negative,  integral 
or  fractional)  is 

^A{(x  + yv y + (x-  yd)1)  - \Bv{(x  + yv)1  - (x  - yv)’}  j 

where  v stands  for  — 1,  or  in  polar  co-ordinates  r (1). 

(A  cos  id  + B sin  id)  rl 

The  equations  of  internal  equilibrium  [§  698  (6)]  with  no  bodily 
force  (that  is,  X=  0 and  Y=  0)  become,  for  the  case  of  plane  strain, 


The  plane  harmonic  solution  of  these,  found  by  precisely  the 
same  process  as  §§  735,  736  (a)...(e),  but  for  only  two  variables 
instead  of  three,  is 


a = h 

(3=1 


u,  — 


vi~ 


where 


m 

r2  #»_, 

2 (i 

-1)(2  n+m) 

dx 

m 

2 (i- 

-l)(2?i+  m) 

dy 

du.  dvx 

Yl-i 

dx  dy 

•(3), 


and  u.,  vi  denote  any  two  plane  harmonics  of  degree  i,  so  that 
is  a plane  harmonic  of  degree  i—\.  Of  course  i may  be 
positive  or  negative,  integral  or  fractional. 

This  solution  may  be  reduced  to  polar  co-ordinates  with  advan- 
tage for  many  applications,  by  putting 

x = r cos  6,  y = r sin  6, 
and  taking  ul  = r{  (A.  cos  id  +A'{  sin  id) 
vt  = r*  (B.  cos  id  +B\  sin  id) 

which  give 

2 n+m 

~2n~  S‘"‘ = = ir 1 U4  + B'i)  cos  (i-l)Q  + (A\ -Bt)  sin  (t-l)0}..(5), 


Plane 

harmonic 

functions 

defined. 


Problem 
for  cylinders 
under  plane 
strain  solved 
in  terms  of 
plane  har- 
monics. 


300 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[739. 


a = 1r 


/3  = 27- 


Problem 
for  cylinders 
under  piano 
strain  solved 
in  terms  of 
plane  har- 
monics. 


Small 
bodies 
stronger 
than  large 
ones  in 
proportion 
to  their 
weights. 


and 

( IHX  \ 

•'  j 7?iCOS id+B'i  sin iO  - 2{^n+vi)  sin  6’-2) 9 + (A>‘  ~ Bi) cos  (*  " 2 )0]  j 


(6). 


The  student  will  find  it  a good  exercise  to  work  out  in  full,  to 
explicit  expressions  for  the  displacement  of  any  point  of  the  solid, 
in  the  cylindrical  problems  corresponding  to  the  spherical  pro- 
blems of  § 735  ( f ),  and  of  §73G  ( h)...(r ).  The  process  (l)  of 
the  latter  may  be  worked  through  in  the  symmetrical  algebraic 
form,  as  an  illustration  of  the  plan  we  have  followed  in  dealing 
with  spherical  harmonics ; but  the  result  corresponding  to  (37) 
of  § 737  may  be  obtained  more  readily,  and  in  a simpler  form, 
by  immediately  putting  (29)  of  § 737  into  polar  co-ordinates,  as 
(4),  (5),  (6)  of  § 739.  We  intend  to  use,  and  to  illustrate,  these 
solutions  under  “Properties  of  Matter.” 


740.  In  our  sections  on  hydrostatics,  the  problem  of  finding 
the  deformation  produced  in  a spheroid  of  incompressible  liquid 
by  a given  disturbing  force  will  be  solved ; and  then  we  shall 
consider  the  application  of  the  preceding  result  [§  736  (51)] 
for  an  elastic  solid  sphere  to  the  theory  of  the  tides  and  the 
rigidity  of  the  earth.  This  proposed  application,  however, 
reminds  us  of  a general  remark  of  great  practical  importance, 
with  which  we  shall  leave  elastic  solids  for  the  present. 
Considering  different  elastic  solids  of  similar  substance  and 
similar  shapes,  we  see  that  if  by  forces  applied  to  them  in  any 
way  they  are  similarly  strained,  the  surface  tractions  in  or 
across  similarly  situated  elements  of  surface,  whether  of  their 
boundaries  or  of  surfaces  imagined  as  cutting  through  their 
substances,  must  be  equal,  reckoned  as  usual  per  unit  of  area. 
Hence;  the  force  across,  or  in,  any  such  surface,  being  resolved 
into  components  parallel  to  any  directions ; the  whole  amounts 
of  each  such  component  for  similar  surfaces  of  the  different 
bodies  are  in  proportion  to  the  squares  of  their  linear  dimen- 
sions. Hence,  if  equilibrated  similarly  under  the  action  of 
gravity,  or  of  their  kinetic  reactions  (§  264)  against  equal 
accelerations  (§  28),  the  greater  body  would  be  more  strained 
than  the  less;  as  the  amounts  of  gravity  or  of  kinetic  reaction 
of  similar  portions  of  them  are  as  the  cubes  of  their  linear 


STATICS. 


301 


740.] 


dimensions.  Definitively,  the  strains  at  similarly  situated  smaU 
points  of  the  bodies  will  be  in  simple  proportion  to  their  linear  strong 
dimensions,  and  the  displacements  will  be  as  the  squares  of  ^oporUcn 
these  lines,  provided  that  there  is  no  strain  in  any  part  of  any  totW 
of  them  too  great  to  allow  the  principle  of  superposition  to  hold 
with  sufficient  exactness,  and  that  no  part  is  turned  through 
more  than  a very  small  angle  relatively  to  any  other  part. 

To  illustrate  by  a single  example,  let  us  consider  a uniform  Example: 
long,  thin,  round  rod  held  horizontally  by  its  middle.  Let  its 
substance  be  homogeneous,  of  density  p,  and  Young  s modulus, 

M ; and  let  its  length,  l,  be  p times  its  diameter.  Then  (as 
the  moment  of  inertia  of  a circular  area  of  radius  r round  a 
diameter  is  ^7r?-4)  the  flexural  rigidity  of  the  rod  will  (§  715) 
be  \Mir(y%p)\  which  is  equal  to  B/g  in  the  notation  of  § 610, 
as  B is  there  reckoned  in  kinetic  or  absolute  measure  (§  223) 
instead  of  the  gravitation  measure  in  which  we  now,  according 
to  engineers’  usage  (§  220),  reckon  M.  Also  w = pir(lj2p ) , and 
therefore,  for  § 617, 

qw  lGrfp 

'll  ~ * 


This,  used  in  § 617  (10),  gives  us;  for  the  curvature  at  the 
middle  of  the  rod ; the  elongation  and  contraction  where 
greatest,  that  is,  at  the  highest  and  lowest  points  of  the  normal 
section  through  the  middle  point;  and  the  droop  of  the  ends; 
the  following  expressions, 


? £p . pb. 

M ’ M* 


and 


i£p 

m 


Thus,  for  a rod  whose  length  is  200  times  its  diameter,  if  its 
substance  be  iron  or  steel,  for  which  p — 7'75,  and  M=  194  x 107 
grammes  per  square  centimetre,  the  maximum  elongation  and 
contraction  (being  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  the  middle  section 
where  it  is  held)  are  each  equal  to  ’8  x 10”°  x l,  and  the  droop  of 
its  ends  to  2 x 10-6  x l*.  Thus  a steel  or  iron  wire,  ten  centi-  stiffness  of 
metres  long,  and  half  a millimetre  in  diameter,  held  hori-  steel  rods  of 
zontally  by  its  middle,  would  experience  only  ’000008  as  dimensions 
maximum  elongation  and  contraction,  and  only  *002  of  a 
centimetre  of  droop  in  its  ends : a round  steel  rod,  of  half  a 
centimetre  diameter,  and  one  metre  long,  would  experience 


.302 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Stiffness  of 
uniform 
steel  rods  of 
different 
dimensions. 


Transition 
to  hydro- 
dynamics. 


I m perfect- 
ness of 
elasticity 
in  solids. 


Viscosity  of 
solids. 


[740. 

•00008  as  maximum  elongation  and  contraction,  and  -2  of  a 
centimetre  of  droop:  a round  steel  rod,  of  ten  centimetres 
diameter,  and  twenty  metres  long,  need  not  be  of  remarkable 
temper  (see  Vol.  il,  Properties  of  Matter)  to  bear  being  held  by 
the  middle  without  taking  a very  sensible  permanent  set : and 
it  is  probable  that  any  temper  of  steel  or  iron  except  the  softest 
is  strong  enough  in  a round  shaft  forty  metres  long,  if  only  twenty 
centimetres  in  diameter,  to  allow  it  to  be  held  by  its  middle, 
drooping  as  it  would  to  the  extent  of  320  centimetres  at  its 
ends,  without  either  bending  it  beyond  elasticity ; or  breaking  it. 
(See  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Article  “Elasticity,”  § 22.) 

741.  In  passing  from  the  dynamics  of  perfectly  elastic  solids 
to  abstract  hydrodynamics,  or  the  dynamics  of  perfect  fluids, 
it  is  convenient  and  instructive  to  anticipate  slightly  some  of 
the  views  as  to  intermediate  properties  observed  in  real  solids 
and  fluids,  which,  according  to  the  general  plan  proposed 
(§  449)  for  our  work,  will  be  examined  with  more  detail  under 
Properties  of  Matter. 

By  induction  from  a great  variety  of  observed  phenomena, 
we  are  compelled  to  conclude  that  no  change  of  volume  or  of 
shape  can  be  produced  in  any  kind  of  matter  without  dis- 
sipation of  energy  (§  275);  so  that  if  in  any  case  there  is  a 
return  to  the  primitive  configuration,  some  amount  (however 
small)  of  work  is  always  required  to  compensate  the  energy 
dissipated  away,  and  restore  the  body  to  the  same  physical 
and  the  same  palpably  kinetic  condition  as  that  in  which  it 
was  given.  We  have  seen  (§  672),  by  anticipating  something 
of  thermodynamic  principles,  how  such  dissipation  is  inevitable, 
even  in  dealing  with  the  absolutely  perfect  elasticity  of  volume 
presented  by  every  fluid,  and  possibly  by  some  solids,  as,  for 
instance,  homogeneous  crystals.  But  in  metals,  glass,  porcelain, 
natural  stones,  wrood,  india-rubber,  homogeneous  jelly,  silk 
fibre,  ivory,  etc.,  a distinct  frictional  resistance*  against  every 
change  of  shape  is,  as  we  shall  see  in  Vol.  II.,  under  Pro- 
perties of  Matter,  demonstrated  by  many  experiments,  and  is 
found  to  depend  on  the  speed  with  which  the  change  of 

'*  See  Proceedings  of  the  Eoyal  Society,  May  18C5,  “ On  the  Viscosity  and 
Elasticity  of  Metals  ” (W.  Thomson). 


STATICS. 


303 


741.] 


shape  is  made.  A very  remarkable  and  obvious  proof  °f  yj®co8ity  °f 
frictional  resistance  to  change  of  shape  in  ordinary  solids 
is  afforded  by  the  gradual,  more  or  less  rapid,  subsidence  of 
vibrations  of  elastic  solids;  marvellously  rapid  in  india-rubber, 
and  even  in  homogeneous  jelly;  less  rapid  in  glass  and  metal 
springs,  but  still  demonstrably  much  more  rapid  than  can  be 
accounted  for  by  the  resistance  of  the  air.  This  molecular 
friction  in  elastic  solids  may  be  properly  called  viscosity  of 
solids,  because,  as  being  an  internal  resistance  to  change  of 
shape  depending  on  the  rapidity  of  the  change,  it  must  be 
classed  with  fluid  molecular  friction,  which  by  general  con- 
sent is  called  viscosity  of  fluids.  But,  at  the  same  time,  we  ^]°sity  of 
feel  bound  to  remark  that  the  word  viscosity,  as  used  hitherto 
by  the  best  writers,  when  solids  or  heterogeneous  semisolid- 
semifluid  masses  are  referred  to,  has  not  been  distinctly  applied 
to  molecular  friction,  especially  not  to  the  molecular  friction  of 
a highly  elastic  solid  within  its  limits  of  high  elasticity,  but 
has  rather  been  employed  to  designate  a property  of  slow,  con- 
tinual yielding  through  very  great,  or  altogether  unlimited, 
extent  of  change  of  shape,  under  the  action  of  continued  stress. 

It  is  in  this  sense  that  Forbes,  for  instance,  has  used  the  word 
in  stating  that  “ Viscous  Theory  of  Glacial  Motion”  which  he  Forbes’ 

_ " **  Viscous 

demonstrated  by  his  grand  observations  on  glaciers.  As,  how-  Theory  of 

i , . . ° Glacial 

ever,  he,  and  many  other  writers  after  him,  have  used  the  words  Motion.” 
plasticity  and  plastic,  both  with  reference  to  homogeneous 
solids  (such  as  wax  or  pitch,  even  though  also  brittle ; soft 
metals;  etc.),  and  to  heterogeneous  semisolid-semifluid  masses 
(as  mud,  moist  earth,  mortar,  glacial  ice,  etc.),  to  designate  the 
property*,  common  to  all  those  cases,  of  experiencing  under 
continued  stress  either  quite  continued  and  unlimited  change 
of  shape,  or  gradually  very  great  change  at  a diminishing 

Some  confusion  of  ideas  might  have  heen  avoided  on  the  part  of  writers  who 
have  professedly  objected  to  Forbes’  theory  while  really  objecting  only  (and  we 
believe  groundlessly)  to  his  usage  of  the  word  viscosity,  if  they  had  paused  to  con- 
sider that  no  one  physical  explanation  can  hold  for  those  several  cases ; and  that 
Forbes  theory  is  merely  the  proof  by  observation  that  glaciers  have  the  property 
which  mud  (heterogeneous),  mortar  (heterogeneous),  pitch  (homogeneous),  water 
(homogeneous),  all  have  of  changing  shape  indefinitely  and  continuously  under 
the  action  of  continued  stress. 


304 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[741 


Plasticity  (asymptotic)  rate  through  infinite  time ; and  as  the  use  of  the 
of  solids.  , J * /,  . ..  ° ..  , . ..  1-1 

term  plasticity  implies  no  more  than  does  viscosity  any  physical 

theory  or  explanation  of  the  property,  the  word  viscosity  is 

without  inconvenience  left  available  for  the  definition  we  have 

given  of  it  above. 

Perfect  and  742.  A perfect  fluid,  or  (as  we  shall  call  it)  a fluid,  is  an 

plasticity  unrealizable  conception,  like  a rigid,  or  a smooth,  body:  it  is 

by°internai  defined  as  a body  incapable  of  resisting  a change  of  shape  : and 

character-  therefore  incapable  of  experiencing  distorting  or  tangential 
isticofthe  ~ __  . r ° r , ,, 

idesd  perfect  stress  (§  669).  Hence  its  pressure  on  any  surface,  whether 
abstract  0f  a solid  or  of  a contiguous  portion  of  the  fluid,  is  at  every 

hydrody-  0 A 

namics.  point  perpendicular  to  the  surface.  In  equilibrium,  all  common 
liquids  and  gaseous  fluids  fulfil  the  definition.  But  there  is 
finite  resistance,  of  the  nature  of  friction,  opposing  change  of 
shape  at  a finite  rate ; and  therefore,  while  a fluid  is  changing 
shape,  it  exerts  tangential  force  on  every  surface  other  than 
normal  planes  of  the  stress  (§  664)  required  to  keep  this  change 
of  shape  going  on.  Hence;  although  the  hydrostatical  results, 
to  which  we  immediately  proceed,  are  verified  in  practice ; in 
treating  of  hydrokinetics,  in  a subsequent  chapter,  we  shall  be 
obliged  to  introduce  the  consideration  of  fluid  friction,  except 
in  cases  where  the  circumstances  are  such  as  to  render  its 
effects  insensible. 

Fluid  743.  With  reference  to  a fluid  the  pressure  at  any  point  in 

pressure.  ^ direction  is  an  expression  used  to  denote  the  average  pres- 
sure per  unit  of  area  on  a plane  surface  imagined  as  containing 
the  point,  and  perpendicular  to  the  direction  in  question,  when 
the  area  of  that  surface  is  indefinitely  diminished. 

744.  At  any  point  in  a fluid  at  rest  the  pressure  is  the 
same  in  all  directions:  and,  if  no  external  forces  act,  the 
pressure  is  the  same  at  every  point.  For  the  proof  of  these 
and  most  of  the  following  propositions,  we  imagine,  according 
to  § 564,  a definite  portion  of  the  fluid  to  become  solid,  without 

changing  its  mass,  form,  or  dimensions. 

Suppose  the  fluid  to  be  contained  in  a closed  vessel,  the 
pressure  within  depending  on  the  pressure  exeited^on  it  by  the 
vessel,  and  not  on  any  external  force  such  as  giaiity. 


STATICS. 


305 


745.] 


745.  The  resultant  of  the  fluid  pressures  on  the  elements  Fluid  pres- 
of  any  portion  of  a spherical  surface  must,  like  each  of  its  |q^annaU 
components,  pass  through  the  centre  of  the  sphere.  Hence, 
if  we  suppose  (§  564)  a portion  of  the  fluid  in  the  form  of 
a plano-convex  lens  to  be  solidified,  the  resultant  pressure  on 
the  plane  side  must  pass  through  the  centre  of  the  sphere;  and, 
therefore,  being  perpendicular  to  the  plane,  must  pass  through 
the  centre  of  the  circular  area.  From  this  it  is  obvious  that 
the  pressure  is  the  same  at  all  points  of  any  plane  in  the  fluid. 

Hence,  by  § 562,  the  resultant  pressure  on  any  plane  surface 
passes  through  its  centre  of  inertia. 

Next,  imagine  a triangular  prism  of  the  fluid,  which  ends 
perpendicular  to  its  faces,  to  be  solidified.  The  resultant 
pressures  on  its  ends  act  in  the  line  joining  the  centres  of 
inertia  of  their  areas,  and  are  equal  (§  552)  since  the  re- 
sultant pressures  on  the  sides  are  in  directions  perpendicular 
to  this  line.  Hence  the  pressure  is  the  same  in  all  parallel 
planes. 

But  the  centres  of  inertia  of  the  three  faces,  and  the  resultant 
pressures  applied  there,  lie  in  a triangular  section  parallel  to 
the  ends.  The  pressures  act  at  the  middle  points  of  the  sides 
of  this  triangle,  and  perpendicularly  to  them,  so  that  their 
directions  meet  in  a point.  And,  as  they  are  in  equilibrium, 
they  must  be,  by  § 559,  e,  proportional  to  the  respective  sides  of 
the  triangle;  that  is,  to  the  breadths,  or  areas,  of  the  faces  of 
the  prism.  Thus  the  resultant  pressures  on  the  faces  must  be 
proportional  to  the  areas  of  the  faces,  and  therefore  the  pressure 
is  equal  in  any  two  planes  which  meet. 

Collecting  our  results,  we  see  that  the  pressure  is  the  same 
at  all  points,  and  in  all  directions,  throughout  the  fluid  mass. 


746.  One  immediate  application  of  this  result  gives  us  a Application 
simple  though  indirect  proof  of  the  second  theorem  in  § 559,  e,  soiidsticsof 
for  we  have  only  to  suppose  the  polyhedron  to  be  a solidified 
portion  of  a mass  of  fluid  in  equilibrium  under  pressures  only. 

The  resultant  pressure  on  each  side  will  then  be  proportional 
to  its  area,  and,  by  § 562,  will  act  at  its  centre  of  inertia;  which, 
in  this  case,  is  the  CentvB  of  Pvgssutg. 

VOL.  II. 


Centre  of 
pressure. 


20 


306 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[747. 


Application  747.  Another  proof  of  the  equality  of  pressure  throughout 
cipieofrm"  a mass  of  fluid,  uninfluenced  by  other  external  force  than  the 
energy.  pressure  0f  the  containing  vessel,  is  easily  furnished  by  the 
energy  criterion  of  equilibrium,  § 289 ; but,  to  avoid  complica- 
Proofby  tion,  we  will  consider  the  fluid  to  be  incompressible.  Suppose 
thereBquaiity  a number  of  pistons  fitted  into  cylinders  inserted  in  the  sides 
pressure  of  the  closed  vessel  containing  the  fluid.  Then,  if  A be  the 
directions,  area  of  one  of  these  pistons,  p the  average  pressure  on  it,  x the 
distance  through  which  it  is  pressed,  in  or  out ; the  energy 
criterion  is  that  no  work  shall  be  done  on  the  whole,  i.e.  that 


APxXl  + APJ* 2 + — *2  (APX)  = °> 


as  much  work  being  restored  by  the  pistons  which  are  forced 
out,  as  is  done  by  those  forced  in.  Also,  since  the  fluid  is  in- 
compressible, it  must  have  gained  as  much  space  by  forcing 
out  some  of  the  pistons  as  it  lost  by  the  intrusion  of  the  others. 


This  gives 


Atxx  + A2x2  -K . .—  X ( Ax ) — 0. 


The  last  is  the  only  condition  to  which  xt,  x2,  etc.,  in  the  first 
equation,  are  subject;  and  therefore  the  first  can  only  be 
satisfied  if 

P1=Pz  = Ps  = etc-’ 

that  is,  if  the  pressure  be  the  same  on  each  piston.  Upon  this 
property  depends  the  action  of  Bramah’s  Hydrostatic  Press. 

If  the  fluid  be  compressible,  the  work  expended  in  compressing 
it  from  volume  F to  F-8F,  at  mean  pressure  p,  is  pSV. 

If  in  this  case  we  assume  the  pressure  to  be  the  same  through- 
out, we  obtain  a result  consistent  with  the  energy  criterion. 

The  work  done  on  the  fluid  is  2 (Apx),  that  is,  iu  consequence 
of  the  assumption,  (Ax). 

But  this  is  equal  to  pSF,  for,  evidently,  2 (Ax)  = 8 F. 


Fluid  pres-  748.  When  forces,  such  as  gravity,  act  from  external  matter 
pending  on  upon  the  substance  of  the  fluid,  either  in  proportion  to  the 
forces.  density  of  its  own  substance  in  its  different  parts,  or  in  propor- 
tion to  the  density  of  electricity,  or  of  magnetic  polarity,  01  of 
any  other  conceivable  accidental  property  of  it,  the  pressure  will 


748.] 


STATICS. 


307 


still  be  the  same  in  all  directions  at  any  one  point,  but  will 
now  vary  continuously  from  point  to  point.  For  the  preceding 
demonstration  (§  745)  may  still  be  applied  by  simply  taking 
the  dimensions  of  the  prism  small  enough ; since  the  pressures 
are  as  the  squares  of  its  linear  dimensions,  and  the  effects  of 
the  applied  forces  such  as  gravity,  as  the  cubes. 

749.  When  forces  act  on  the  whole  fluid,  surfaces  of  equal 
pressure,  if  they  exist,  must  be  at  every  point  perpendicular 
to  the  direction  of  the  resultant  force.  For,  any  prism  of  the 
fluid  so  situated  that  the  whole  pressures  on  its  ends  are  equal 
must  (§  552)  experience  from  the  applied  forces  no  component 
in  the  direction  of  its  length;  and,  therefore,  if  the  prism  be 
so  small  that  from  point  to  point  of  it  the  direction  of  the 
resultant  of  the  applied  forces  does  not  vary  sensibly,  this 
direction  must  be  perpendicular  to  the  length  of  the  prism. 
From  this  it  follows  that  whatever  be  the  physical  origin,  and 
the  law,  of  the  system  of  forces  acting  on  the  fluid,  and  whether 
it  be  conservative  or  non-conservative,  the  fluid  cannot  be  in 
equilibrium  unless  the  lines  of  force  possess  the  geometrical 
property  of  being  at  right  angles  to  a series  of  surfaces. 


Fluid  pres- 
sure de- 
pending on 
external 
forces. 


Surfaces  of 
equal  pres- 
sure are  per- 
pendicular 
to  the  lines 
of  force. 


750.  Again,  considering  two  surfaces  of  equal  pressure  in- 
finitely near  one  another,  let  the  fluid  between  them  be  divided 
into  columns  of  equal  transverse  section,  and  having  their 
lengths  perpendicular  to  the  surfaces.  The  difference  of  pres- 
sures on  the  two  ends  being  the  same  for  each  column,  the 
resultant  applied  forces  on  the  fluid  masses  composing  them 
must  be  equal.  Comparing  this  with  § 488,  we  see  that  if  the  And  are 
applied  forces  constitute  a conservative  system,  the  density  of  equafden- 
matter,  or  electricity,  or  whatever  property  of  the  substance  °f%uai 
they  depend  on,  must  be  equal  throughout  the  layer  under  whin  the 
consideration.  This  is  the  celebrated  hydrostatic  proposition  f°rce  *? con' 
that  in  a fluid  at  rest,  surfaces  of  equal  pressure  are  also  surfaces 

of  equal  density  and  of  equal  potential. 

751.  Hence,  when  gravity  is  the  only  external  force  con-  Gravity  the 
sidered,  surfaces  of  equal  pressure  and  equal  density  are  (when  fflSST 
of  moderate  extent)  horizontal  planes.  On  this  depends  the 

action  of  levels,  syphons,  barometers,  etc.;  also  the  separation 

20—2 


308 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[751. 


Gravity  the 
only  exter- 
nal force. 


Rate  of 
increase  of 
pressure. 


of  liquids  of  different  densities  (which  do  not  mix  or  combine 
chemically)  into  horizontal  strata,  etc.  etc.  The  free  surface  of 
a liquid  is  exposed  to  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  simply ; 
and  therefore,  when  in  equilibrium,  must  be  a surface  of  equal 
pressure,  and  consequently  level.  In  extensive  sheets  of  water, 
such  as  the  American  lakes,  differences  of  atmospheric  pressure, 
even  in  moderately  calm  weather,  often  produce  considerable 
deviations  from  a truly  level  surface. 


752.  The  rate  of  increase  of  pressure  per  unit  of  length  in 
the  direction  of  the  resultant  force,  is  equal  to  the  intensity  of 
the  force  reckoned  per  unit  of  volume  of  the  fluid.  Let  F 'be * the 
resultant  force  per  unit  of  volume  in  one  of  the  columns  o § 0 > 
p and  p the  pressures  at  the  ends  of  the  column,  l its  length, 
S its  section.  We  have,  for  the  equilibrium  of  the  column, 

(p'  — p)  8 = SIF. 

Hence  the  rate  of  increase  of  pressure  per  unit  of  length  is  F. 

If  the  applied  forces  belong  to  a conservative  system  for 
which  V and  V'  are  the  values  of  the  potential  at  the  ends  o 

the  column,  we  have  (§  486) 

V'  - V—  — IFp, 

where  p is  the  density  of  the  fluid.  This  gives 

p'  — p = — p(F'  — V) 


dp  — — pd  F 

Hence  in  the  case  of  gravity  as  the  only  impressed  force  the 

te  of  increase  of  pressure  per  unit  of  depth  m the  fluid  is  p, 

i gravitation  measure  (usually  employed  in  hydrostatics).  n 

inetic  or  absolute  measure  (§  2245)  it  is  y/P- 

If  the  fluid  be  a gas.  such  as  air,  and  be  kept  at  a constant 
It  the  hum  S’  denotes  a constant,  the 

temperature  « ;Le  homogeneous  atmosphere, » 

77™“  7tf Mow.  Hence,  in  a calm  atmosphere  of  uniform 

defined  (§  ) , d y . anq  from  this,  by  Integra- 

temperature  ha™  ** at  any  particular  level 

;ie’  FJU  for  JL»)  "here  ™ Choose  to  reckon  the 

potential  as  zero. 


752.] 


STATICS. 


309 


When  the  differences  of  level  considered  are  infinitely  small  in  of 

comparison  with  the  earth’s  radius,  as  we  may  practically  regard  pressure, 
them,  in  measuring  the  height  of  a mountain,  or  of  a balloon,  by 
the  barometer,  the  foi’ce  of  gravity  is  constant,  and  theiefore 
differences  of  potential  (force  being  reckoned  in  units  of  weight) 
are  simply  equal  to  differences  of  level.  Hence  if  x denote 
height  of  the  level  of  pressure  p above  that  of  p0 , we  have,  in 
the  preceding  formulae,  V=x,  and  therefore  p = pQe  cx-  That  is 
to  say — 


753.  If  the  air  be  at  a constant  temperature,  the  pressure 
diminishes  in  geometrical  progression  as  the  height  increases 
in  arithmetical  progression.  This  theorem  is  due  to  Halley.  ^epera' 
Without  formal  mathematics  we  see  the  truth  of  it  by  remark- 
ing that  differences  of  pressure  are  (§  752)  equal  to  differences 
of  level  multiplied  by  the  density  of  the  fluid,  or  by  the  proper 
mean  density  when  the  density  differs  sensibly  between  the  two 
stations.  But  the  density,  when  the  temperature  is  constant, 
varies  in  simple  proportion  to  the  pressure,  according  to  Boyle’s 
and  Mariotte’s  law.  Hence  differences  of  pressure  between  pairs 
of  stations  differing  equally  in  level  are  proportional  to  the  proper 
mean  values  of  the  whole  pressure,  which  is  the  well-known 
compound  interest  law.  The  rate  of  diminution  of  pressure 
per  unit  of  length  upwards  in  proportion  to  the  whole  pressure 
at  any  point,  is  of  course  equal  to  the  reciprocal  of  the  height 
above  that  point  that  the  atmosphere  must  have,  if  of  constant 
density,  to  give  that  pressure  by  its  weight.  The  height  thus 
defined  is  commonly  called  “the  height  of  the  homogeneous  Height  of 
atmosphere,”  a very  convenient  conventional  expression.  It  geneous  at- 
is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  volume  occupied  by  the  unit  mosphere‘ 
mass  of  the  gas  at  any  pressure  into  the  value  of  that  pressure 
reckoned  per  unit  of  area,  in  terms  of  the  weight  of  the  unit  of 
mass.  If  we  denote  it  by  H,  the  exponential  expression  of  the 
law  is  p =p0e~x,n,  which  agrees  with  the  final  formula  of  § 752. 

The  value  of  H for  dry  atmospheric  air,  at  the  freezing 
temperature,  according  to  Regnault,  is,  in  the  latitude  of  Paris, 

799,020  centimetres,  or  26,215  feet.  Being  inversely  as  the  force 
of  gravity  in  different  latitudes  (§  222),  it  is  798,533  centimetres, 
or  26,199  feet,  in  the  latitude  of  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow. 


310 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Analytical 
investiga- 
tion of  the 
preceding 
theorems. 


Conditions 
of  equi- 
librium of 


[753. 


Let  X,  F,  Z be  the  components,  parallel  to  three  rectangular 
axes,  of  the  force  acting  on  the  fluid  at  ( x , y,  z),  reckoned  per 
unit  of  its  mass.  Then,  inasmuch  as  the  difference  of  pressures 
on  the  two  faces  SySz  of  a rectangular  parallelepiped  of  the  fluid 

is  SySz  J Sx,  the  equilibrium  of  this  portion  of  the  fluid,  regarded 

for  a moment  (§  564)  as  rigid,  requires  that 

SySz  Sx  —XpSxSySz  = 0. 

From  this  and  the  symmetrical  equations  relative  to  y and  2 we 

dp  =y  dp 


have 


dP  Yn 

dx  Xp’ 


dy  ~ dz 

which  are  the  conditions  necessary  and  sufficient  for  the  equi- 
librium of  any  fluid  mass. 

From  these  we  have 

dp  = ^-dx  + C^dy  + °£dz  = p ( Xdx  +Ydy  + Zdz ) (2). 

ctoc 

This  shows  that  the  expression  Xdx  + Ydy  + Zdz  must  be  the 
complete  differential  of  a function  of  three  independent  variables, 
or  capable  of  being  made  so  by  a factor;  that  is  to  say,  that  a 
series  of  surfaces  exists  which  cuts  the  lines  of  force  at  right 
angles ; a conclusion  also  proved  above  (§  7 49). 

When  the  forces  belong  to  a conservative  system  no  factor  is 
required  to  make  the  complete  differential ; and  we  have 

Xdx  + Ydy  + Zdz  = — dV 

if  V denote  (§  485)  their  potential  at  ( x , y,  z):  so  that  (2)  be- 
comes dp  — - pdV (3). 

This  shows  that  p is  constant  over  equipotential  surfaces  (or  is  a 
function  of  V) ; and  it  gives 


•(1), 


P = - 


dp 

dV 


•(4), 


showing  that  p also  is  a function  of  V ; conclusions  of  which  we 
have  had  a more  elementary  proof  in  § 752.  As  (4)  is  an 
analytical  expression  equivalent  to  the  three  equations  (1),  for 
the  case  of  a conservative  system  of  forces,  we  conclude  that 

754.  It  is  both  necessary  and  sufficient  for  the  equilibrium 
}f  an  incompressible  fluid  completely  filling  a rigid  closed 


STATICS. 


311 


754.] 


vessel,  and  influenced  only  by  a conservative  system  of  forces, 
that  its  density  be  uniform  over  every  equipotential  surface,  inga  closed 
that  is  to  say,  every  surface  cutting  the  lines  of  force  at  right 
angles.  If,  however,  the  boundary,  or  any  part  of  the  boun- 
dary, of  the  fluid  mass  considered,  be  not  rigid ; whether  it  be 
of  flexible  solid  matter  (as  a membrane,  or  a thin  sheet  of 
elastic  solid),  or  whether  it  be  a mere  geometrical  boundary,  on 
the  other  side  of  which  there  is  another  fluid,  or  nothing  [a 
case  which,  without  believing  in  vacuum  as  a reality,  we  may 
admit  in  abstract  dynamics  (§  438)],  a farther  condition  is 
necessary  to  secure  that  the  pressure  from  without  shall  fulfil 
(4)  at  every  point  of  the  boundary.  In  the  case  of  a bounding 
membrane,  this  condition  must  be  fulfilled  either  through 
pressure  artificially  applied  from  without,  or  through  the  in- 
terior elastic  forces  of  the  matter  of  the  membrane.  In  the 
case  of  another  fluid  of  different  density  touching  it  on  the 
other  side  of  the  boundary,  all  round  or  over  some  part  of  it, 
with  no  separating  membrane,  the  condition  of  equilibrium  of 
a heterogeneous  fluid  is  to  be  fulfilled  relatively  to  the  whole 
fluid  mass  made  up  of  the  two ; which  shows  that  at  the  boun- 
dary the  pressure  must  be  constant  and  equal  to  that  of  the 
fluid  on  the  other  side.  Thus  water,  oil,  mercury,  or  any  other  Free  surface 
liquid,  in  an  open  vessel,  with  its  free  surface  exposed  to  the  ^ssei  is 
air,  requires  for  equilibrium  simply  that  this  surface  be  level. 


755.  Recurring  to  the  consideration  of  a finite  mass  of  fluid  Fluid  in 
completely  filling  a rigid  closed  vessel,  and  supposing  that,  ifvelei, 
the  potential  of  the  force-system  (as  in  the  case  referred  c?n£va-°n' 
to  in  the  sixth  and  seventh  lines  of  § 758)  be  a cyclic*  func-  ofVfoS.em 


* We  here  introduce  term  “cyclic  function”  to  designate  a function  of 
more  than  one  variable  which  experiences  a constant  addition  to  its  value 
every  time  the  variables  are  made  to  vary  continuously  from  a given  set  of 
values  through  some  cycle  of  values  back  to  the  same  primitive  set  of  values. 

Examples  (1)  tan  1 (y jx).  This  is  the  potential  of  the  conservative  system 
referred  to  in  the  first  clause  of  the  third  sentence  of  § 758. 

(2)  f (,t2  + ?/2)  tan-1  (y/x).  This  expresses  the  fluid  pressure  in  the  case 
of  hydrostatic  example  described  in  the  next  to  the  last  sentence  of  § 758. 

(3)  The  apparent  area  of  a closed  curve  (plane  or  not  plane)  as  seen 
from  any  point  ( x , y,  z). 


312 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[755. 


Fluid,  in 
closed 
vessel, 
under a non- 
conserva- 
tive system 
of  forces. 


tion,  the  enclosure  containing  the  liquid  is  singly-continuous, 
we  see,  from  what  precedes,  that,  if  homogeneous  and  incom- 
pressible, the  fluid  cannot  be  disturbed  from  equilibrium  by 
any  conservative  system  of  forces;  but  we  do  not  require  the 
analytical  investigation  to  prove  this,  as  we  should  have  “ the 
perpetual  motion”  if  it  were  denied,  which  would  violate  the 
hypothesis  that  the  system  of  forces  is  conservative.  On  the 
other  hand,  a non-conservative  system  of  forces  cannot,  under 
any  circumstances,  equilibrate  a fluid  which  is  either  uniform 
in  density  throughout,  or  of  homogeneous  substance,  rendered 
heterogeneous  in  density  only  through  difference  of  pressure. 
But  if  the  forces,  though  not  conservative,  be  such  that  through 
every  point  of  the  space  occupied  by  the  fluid  a surface  can  be 
drawn  which  shall  cut  at  right  angles  all  the  lines  of  force  it 
meets,  a heterogeneous  fluid  will  rest  in  equilibrium  under 
their  influence,  provided  (§  750)  its  density,  from  point  to  point 
of  every  one  of  these  orthogonal  surfaces,  varies  inversely  as  the 
product  of  the  resultant  force  into  the  thickness  of  the  infi- 
nitely thin  layer  of  space  between  that  surface  and  another  of 
the  orthogonal  surfaces  infinitely  near  it  on  either  side.  (Com- 
pare § 488.) 


Fluid  under 
any  system 
of  forces. 


The  same  conclusion  is  proved  as  a matter  of  course  from  (1) 
since  that  equation  is  merely  the  analytical  expression  that  the 
force  at  every  point  (x,  y,  z)  is  along  the  normal  to  that  surface 
of  the  series  given  by  different  values  of  C in  p = C,  which 
passes  through  ( x , y,  z) ; and  that  the  magnitude  of  the  resultant 
force  is 


/ /dp2  dp3  dp2\ 
\/  \dx2  f dy2  + dz2) 


P 


of  which  the  numerator  is  equal  to  SC/r,  if  t be  the  thickness  at 
(x,  y,  z)  of  the  shell  of  space  between  two  surfaces  p = G and 
p = C+  SC,  infinitely  near  one  another  on  two  sides  of  (x,  y,  z). 


(4)  Functions  of  any  number  of  variables  invented  by  suggestion 
from  (2). 

The  designation  “many- valued  function”  which  has  hitherto  been  applied 
to  such  functions  is  not  satisfactory,  if  only  because  it  is  also  applicable  to 
functions  of  roots  of  algebraic  or  transcendental  equations. 


755.] 


STATICS. 


313 


of  forces. 


The  analytical  expression  of  the  condition  which  X,  Y,  Z must 
fulfil  in  order  that  (1)  may  be  possible  is  found  thus; 

d dp 
dz  dy 


smce 


d dp 

TIT'  etc‘» 
dy  dz 


.(5). 


we  have  ^(pT)  =^<PZ) 

Performing  the  differentiations,  and  multiplying  the  first  of  the 
resulting  equations  by  X,  the  second  by  Y,  and  the  third  by  Z, 
we  have 

^(dZ  dY\  v/dX  dZ\  y (dY  dX\ 

x{Ty- d,j + 7 hr*  - s) ■ +i% - <¥r 0 -(6); 

which  is  merely  the  well-known  condition  that  Xdx+  Ydy  + Zdz 
may  be  capable  of  being  rendered  by  a factor  the  complete  dif- 
ferential of  a function  of  three  independent  variables. 

Or  if  we  multiply  the  first  of  (5)  by  dp/dx,  the  second  by  dpldy, 
and  the  third  by  dpldz,  and  add,  we  have 

dp  / dZ  dY\  dp  fdX  dZ\  dp /dY  c?X\  _ 
dx\dy  dz)+dy\dz  dx) + dz  \dx  dy)  

This  shows  that  the  line  whose  direction-cosines  are  propor- 
dZ  _clY  dX_dZ  dY  _dX 
dy  dz  ’ dz  dx’  dx  dy 

is  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  equal  density  through  (x,  y,  z) ; 
and  (6)  shows  that  the  same  line  is  perpendicular  to  the  resultant 
force.  It  is  therefore  tangential  both  to  the  surface  of  equal 
density  and  to  that  of  equal  pressure,  and  therefore  to  their 
curve  of  intersection.  The  differential  equations  of  this  curve 
are  therefore 

dx  dy  dz 


tional  to 


dZ 

dy 


dY 

dz 


clX 

dz 


d_Z 

dx 


dY 

dx 


dX 

dy 


.(8). 


756.  If  we  imagine  all  the  fluid  to  become  rigid  except  an  Equilibrium 
infinitely  thin  closed  tubular  portion  lying  in  a surface  of  equal 
density,  and  if  the  fluid  in  this  tubular  circuit  be  moved  through 
any  space  along  the  tube  and  left  at  rest,  it  will  remain  in 


314 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[756. 


condition11111  e(lu^r^um  in  the  new  position,  all  positions  of  it  in  the  tube 
being  indifferent  because  of  its  homogeneousness.  Hence  the 
work  (positive  or  negative)  done  by  the  force  ( X , Y,  Z)  on  any 
portion  of  the  fluid  in  any  displacement  along  the  tube  is 
balanced  by  the  work  (negative  or  positive)  done  on  the 
remainder  of  the  fluid  in  the  tube.  Hence  a single  particle, 
acted  on  always  by  the  resultant  of  X , Y,  Z,  and  kept  moving 
round  the  circuit,  that  is  to  say  moving  along  any  closed  curve 
on  a surface  of  equal  density,  has,  at  the  end  of  one  complete 
circuit,  done  just  as  much  work  against  that  resultant  force 
in  some  parts  of  its  course,  as  the  resultant  force  does  on  it  in 
the  remainder  of  the  circuit. 


An  interesting  application  of  (j)  § 190  may  be  made  to  prove 
this  result  analytically.  Thus,  if  we  take  for  a,  (3 , y our  present 
force-components  X,  Y,  Z ; and  for  the  surface  there  referred 
to,  a surface  of  equal  density  in  our  heterogeneous  fluid;  the 
expression 


<1Z  \ d Y dX  \ ) 

dx  ) + U dx  dy  )) 


vanishes  because  of  (7),  and  we  conclude  that 
/ (Xdx  + Ydy  + Zdz)  = 0, 

for  any  closed  circuit  on  a surface  of  equal  density. 


Weal  757.  The  following  ideal  example,  and  its  realization  in  a 

unde^non™  subsequent  section  (§  759),  show  a curiously  interesting  practical 
Uveforces.  application  of  the  theory  of  fluid  equilibrium  under  extraordi- 
nary circumstances,  generally  regarded  as  a merely  abstract 
analytical  theory,  practically  useless  and  quite  unnatural,  “ be- 
cause forces  in  nature  follow  the  conservative  law.” 

758.  Let  the  lines  of  force  be  circles,  with  their  centres  all 
in  one  line,  and  their  planes  perpendicular  to  it.  They  are  cut 
at  right  angles  by  planes  through  this  axis ; and  therefore  a 
fluid  may  be  in  equilibrium  under  such  a system  of  forces. 
The  system  will  not  be  conservative  if  the  intensity  of  the 
force  be  according  to  any  other  law  than  inverse  proportionality 
to  distance  from  this  axial  line ; and  the  fluid,  to  be  in  equili- 
brium, must  be  heterogeneous,  and  be  so  distributed  as  to  vary 


STATICS. 


315 


758.] 


in  density  from  point  to  point  of  every  plane  through  the  axis, 
inversely  as  the  product  of  the  force  into  the  distance  from  the 
axis.  But  from  one  such  plane  to  another  it  may  be  either 
uniform  in  density,  or  may  vary  arbitrarily.  To  particularize 
farther,  we  may  sujipose  the  force  to  be  in  direct  simple  pro- 
portion to  the  distance  from  the  axis.  Then  the  fluid  will  be 
in  equilibrium  if  its  density  varies  from  point  to  point  of  every 
plane  through  the  axis,  inversely  as  the  square  of  that  distance. 
If  we  still  farther  particularize  by  making  the  force  uniform 
all  round  each  circular  line  of  force,  the  distribution  of  force 
becomes  precisely  that  of  the  kinetic  reactions  of  the  parts  of  a 
rigid  body  against  accelerated  rotation.  The  fluid  pressure  will 
(§  749)  be  equal  over  each  plane  through  the  axis.  And  in 
one  such  plane,  which  we  may  imagine  carried  round  the  axis 
in  the  direction  of  the  force,  the  fluid  pressure  will  increase  in 
simple  proportion  to  the  angle  at  a rate  per  unit  angle  (§  41) 
equal  to  the  product  of  the  density  at  unit  distance  into  the 
force  at  unit  distance.  Hence  it  must  be  remarked,  that  if  any 
closed  line  (or  circuit)  can  be  drawn  round  the  axis,  without 
leaving  the  fluid,  there  cannot  be  equilibrium  without  a firm 
partition  cutting  every  such  circuit,  and  maintaining  the  differ- 
ence of  pressures  on  the  two  sides  of 
it,  corresponding  to  the  angle  2tt. 

Thus,  if  the  axis  pass  through  the 
fluid  in  any  part,  there  must  be  a 
partition  extending  from  this  part  of 
the  axis  continuously  to  the  outer 
bounding  surface  of  the  fluid.  Or 

if  the  bounding  surface  of  the  whole 
fluid  be  annular  (like  a hollow  anchor-ring,  or  of  any  irregular 
shape),  in  other  words,  if  the  fluid  fills  a tubular  circuit;  and 
the  axis  (A)  pass  through  the  aperture  of  the  ring  (without 
passing  into  the  fluid);  there  must  be  a firm  partition  (CD) 
extending  somewhere  continuously  across  the  channel,  or 
passage,  or  tube,  to  stop  the  circulation  of  the  fluid  round  it; 
otherwise  there  could  not  be  equilibrium  with  the  supposed 
forces  in  action.  If  we  further  suppose  the  density  of  the  fluid 
to  be  uniform  round  each  of  the  circular  lines  of  force  in  the 


Ideal 

example  of 
equilibrium 
under  non- 
conserva- 
tive forces. 


316 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[758. 


example  oir  sys^em  we  have  so  far  considered  (so  that  the  density  shall  he 
un'dernonin  e(lua^  over  every  circular  cylinder  having  the  line  of  their 
tiveforces  cen^res  f°r  hs  axis,  and  shall  vary  from  one  such  cylindrical 
surface  to  another,  inversely  as  the  squares  of  their  radii),  we 
may,  without  disturbing  the  equilibrium,  impose  any  conserva- 
tive system  of  force  in  lines  perpendicular  to  the  axis;  that  is 
(§  488),  any  system  of  force  in  this  direction,  with  intensity 
varying  as  some  function  of  the  distance.  If  this  function  be 
the  simple  distance,  the  superimposed  system  of  force  agrees 
precisely  with  the  reactions  against  curvature,  that  is  to  say, 
the  centrifugal  forces,  of  the  parts  of  a rotating  rigid  body. 

Actual  case.  759.  Thus  we  arrive  at  the  remarkable  conclusion,  that  if 
a rigid  closed  box  be  completely  filled  with  incompressible 
heterogeneous  fluid,  of  density  varying  inversely  as  the  square 
of  the  distance  from  a certain  line,  and  if  the  box  be  moveable 
round  this  line  as  a fixed  axis,  and  be  urged  in  any  way  by 
forces  applied  to  its  outside,  the  fluid  will  remain  in  equilibrium 
relatively  to  the  box ; that  is  to  say,  will  move  round  with  the 
box  as  if  the  whole  were  one  rigid  body,  and  will  come  to  rest 
with  the  box  if  the  box  be  brought  again  to  rest:  provided 
always  the  preceding  condition  as  to  partitions  be  fulfilled  if 
the  axis  pass  through  the  fluid,  or  be  surrounded  by  continuous 
lines  of  fluid.  For,  in  starting  from  rest,  if  the  fluid  moves 
like  a rigid  solid,  we  have  reactions  against  acceleration,  tan- 
gential to  the  circles  of  motion,  and  equal  in  amount  to  mr 
per  unit  of  mass  of  the  fluid  at  distance  r from  the  axis,  w 
being  the  rate  of  acceleration  (§  42)  of  the  angular  velocity; 
and  (§  259)  we  have,  in  the  direction  perpendicular  to  the 
axis  outwards,  reaction  against  curvature  of  path,  that  is  to 
say,  “ centrifugal  force,”  equal  to  coV  per  unit  of  mass  of  the 
fluid.  Hence  the  equilibrium  which  we  have  demonstrated 
in  the  preceding  section,  for  the  fluid  supposed  at  rest,  and 
arbitrarily  influenced  by  two  systems  of  force  (the  circular 
non-conservative  and  the  radial  conservative  system)  agreeing 
Actual  case  in  law  with  these  forces  of  kinetic  reaction,  proves  for  us  now 
equilibrium  the  D’Alembert  (§  264)  equilibrium  condition  for  the  motion 
connserrvT'  0f  the  whole  fluid  as  of  a rigid  body  experiencing  accelerated 
uve  forces.  ^ that  is  to  say,  shows  that  this  kind  of  motion  fulfils 


STATICS. 


317 


759.] 


for  the  actual  circumstances  the  laws  of  motion,  and,  therefore, 
that  it  is  the  motion  actually  taken  by  the  fluid. 

760.  If  the  fluid  is  of  homogeneous  substance  and  uniform  ^Mon 
temperature  throughout,  but  compressible,  as  all  real  fluids  are,  ^^1tdaa1n0df 
it  can  be  heterogeneous  in  density,  only  because  of  difference  j^g'ged 
of  pressure  in  different  parts,;  the  surfaces  of  equal  density 
must  be  also  surfaces  of  equal  pressure ; and,  as  we  have  seen 
above  (§  753),  there  can  be  no  equilibrium  unless  the  system 
of  forces  be  conservative.  The  function  which  the  density  is 
of  the  pressure  must  be  supposed  known  (§  448),  as  it  depends 
on  physical  properties  of  the  fluid.  Compare  § 752. 


Let  p=/(p ) (9)- 

We  have,  by  § 753  (3),  integrated, 

Jdp/f(p)  = C-V (10), 

or,  if  F denote  such  a function,  that 

*{f*Plf(P)}=P (U)> 

p = F(G-V), 

and,  by  (9),  p=f{F{C-V)} (12). 


761.  In  8 746  we  considered  the  resultant  pressure  on  a Resultant 

° 1 pressure  on 

plane  surface,  when  the  pressure  is  uniform.  We  may  now  apianearea. 
consider  briefly  the  resultant  pressure  on  a plane  area  when 
the  pressure  varies  from  point  to  point,  confining  our  attention 
to  a case  of  great  importance; — that  in  which  gravity  is  the 
only  applied  force,  and  the  fluid  is  a nearly  incompressible 
liquid  such  as  water.  In  this  case  the  determination  of  the 
position  of  the  Centre  of  Pressure  is  very  simple  ; and  the 
whole  pressure  is  the  same  as  if  the  plane  area  were  turned 
about  its  centre  of  inertia  into  a horizontal  position. 

The  pressure  at  any  point  at  a depth  2 in  the  liquid  may  be  Kinetic 
expressed  by  p = pz  + p0  p=gpz+Po- 

where  p is  the  (constant)  density  of  the  liquid,  and  p0  the  (atmo- 
spheric) pressure  at  the  free  surface,  reckoned  in  units  of  weight 
per  unit  of  area. 

Let  the  axis  of  x be  taken  as  the  intersection  of  the  plane 
of  the  immersed  plate  with  the  free  surface  of  the  liquid,  and 
that  of  y perpendicular  to  it  and  in  the  plane  of  the  plate.  Let 


318 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Resultant 
pressure  on 
a plane 
area. 


Loss  of 
apparent 
weight  by 
immersion 
in  a fluid. 


[761. 


a be  the  inclination  of  the  plate  to  the  vertical.  Let  also  A be 
the  area  of  the  portion  of  the  plate  considered,  and  x,  y,  the  co- 
ordinates of  its  centre  of  inertia. 

Then  the  whole  pressure  is 

ffpdxdy  = Jj(p0  + py  cos  a)  dxdy 
= Ap0  + A py  cos  a. 

The  moment  of  the  pressure  about  the  axis  of  x is 
f jpydxdy  = Ap0y  + Ak2p  cos  a, 

k being  the  radius  of  gyration  of  the  plane  area  about  the  axis 
of  x. 

For  the  moment  about  y we  have 

f fpxdxdy  = Ap0x  + p cos  a ff  xydxdy. 

The  first  terms  of  these  three  expressions  merely  give  us  again 
the  results  of  § 746 ; we  may  therefore  omit  them.  This  will  be 
equivalent  to  introducing  a stratum  of  additional  liquid  above  the 
free  surface  such  as  to  produce  an  equivalent  to  the  atmospheric 
pressure.  If  the  origin  be  now  shifted  to  the  upper  surface  of 
this  stratum  we  have 

Pressure  = Apy  cos  a, 

Moment  about  Ox  = Ak3p  cos  a, 

k2 

Distance  of  centre  of  pressure  from  axis  of  x — — . 

But  if  kx  be  the  radius  of  gyration  of  the  plane  area  about  a 
horizontal  axis  in  its  plane,  and  passing  through  its  centre  of 
inertia,  we  have,  by  § 283,  k2  = k2  + y2 . 

Hence  the  distance,  measured  parallel  to  the  axis  of  y , of  the 
centre  of  pressure  from  the  centre  of  inertia  is  k2/y;  and,  as  we 
might  expect,  diminishes  as  the  plane  area  is  more  and  more 
submerged.  If  the  plane  area  be  turned  about  the  line  through 
its  centre  of  inertia  parallel  to  the  axis  of  x,  this  distance  varies 
as  the  cosine  of  its  inclination  to  the  vertical;  supposing,  of 
course,  that  by  the  rotation  neither  more  nor  less  of  the  plane 
area  is  submerged. 

762.  A body,  wholly  or  partially  immersed  in  any  fluid 
influenced  by  gravity,  loses,  through  fluid  pressure,  in  apparent 
weight  an  amount  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  fluid  displaced. 
For  if  the  body  were  removed,  and  its  place  filled  with  fluid 
homogeneous  with  the  surrounding  fluid,  there  would  be  equi- 


STATICS. 


319 


762.] 


librium,  even  if  this  fluid  be  supposed  to  become  rigid.  And  Jj°p^r°efnt 
the  resultant  of  the  fluid  pressure  upon  it  is  therefore  a single  ^Mby 
force  equal  to  its  weight,  and  in  the  vertical  line  through  its  in  a fluid- 
centre  of  gravity.  But  the  fluid  pressure  on  the  originally 
immersed  body  was  the  same  all  over  as  on  the  solidified  portion 
of  fluid  by  which  for  a moment  we  have  imagined  it  replaced, 
and  therefore  must  have  the  same  resultant.  This  proposition 
is  of  great  use  in  Hydrometry,  the  determination  of  specific 
gravity,  etc.  etc. 


Analytically,  the  following  demonstration  is  of  interest, 
especially  in  its  analogies  to  some  preceding  theorems,  and 
othei'S  which  occur  in  electricity  and  magnetism. 

If  V be  the  potential  of  the  impressed  forces,  - d Vldx  is  the 
force  parallel  to  the  axis  of  x on  unit  of  matter  at  xyz,  and 
pdxdydz  is  the  mass  of  an  element  of  the  fluid,  and  therefore  the 
whole  force  parallel  to  the  axis  of  a;  on  a mass  of  fluid  substituted 
for  the  immersed  body,  is  represented  by  the  triple  integral 


dxdydz  taken  through  the  whole 


space  enclosed  by  the 


surface.  But,  by  § 752, 

dp  _ dV 
dx  ^ dx  ‘ 

Hence  the  triple  integral  becomes 


///: 


% dxdydz  = jjpdydz 


extended  over  the  whole  surface. 


Let  dS  be  an  element  of  any  surface  at  x,  y,  z;  X,  y,  v the 
direction-cosines  of  the  normal  to  the  element • p the  pressure  in 
the  fluid  in  contact  with  it.  rl he  whole  resolved  pressure  parallel 
to  the  axis  of  x is  Px  = ffXpdS 

— ffpdydz, 

the  same  expression  as  above. 

The  couple  about  the  axis  of  2,  due  to  the  applied  forces  on 
any  fluid  mass,  is  (§  559)  %dm  {Xy  — Yx),  dm  representing  the 
mass  of  an  element  of  fluid. 


This  may  be  written  in  the  form 

-SS!^dz(ydZ-x^-y 

the  integral  being  taken  throughout  the  mass. 


320 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[7G2. 


Loss  of 
apparent 
weight  by 
immersion 
in  a fluid. 


Lemma. 


This  is  evidently  equal  to 


/// 


dp 

yTx~x 


= J Jpydydz  — / Jpxdzdx 

= Up  (\y  - (*x) 

which  is  the  couple  due  to  surface-pressure  alone. 


763.  The  following  lemma,  while  in  itself  interesting,  is  of 
great  use  in  enabling  us  to  simplify  the  succeeding  investigations 
regarding  the  stability  of  equilibrium  of  floating  bodies: — 

Let  a homogeneous  solid,  the  weight  of  unit  of  volume  of 
which  we  suppose  to  be  unity,  be  cut  by  a horizontal  plane 

in  XYX'T.  Let  0 be  the 
centre  of  inertia,  and  let  XX', 
YY'  be  the  principal  axes,  of 
this  area. 

Let  there  be  a second  plane 
section  of  the  solid,  through 
YY',  inclined  to  the  first  at 
an  infinitely  small  angle,  8. 
Then  (1)  the  volumes  of  the 
two  wedges  cut  from  the  solid  by  these  sections  are  equal ; 
(2)  their  centres  of  inertia  lie  in  one  plane  perpendicular  to 
FF;  and  (3)  the  moment  of  the  weight  of  each  of  these, 
round  FF,  is  equal  to  the  moment  of  inertia  about  it  of  the 
corresponding  portion  of  the  area,  multiplied  by  8. 

Take  OX,  OY  as  axes,  and  let  6 be  the  angle  of  the  wedge: 
the  thickness  of  the  wedge  at  any  point  P (x,  y)  is  8x,  and  the 
volume  of  a right  prismatic  portion  whose  base  is  the  elementary 
area  dxdy  at  P is  Oxdxdy.  Now  let  []  and  ()  be  employed  to 
distinguish  integrations  extended  over  the  portions  of.  area  to 
the  right  and  left  of  the  axis  of  y respectively,  while  integrals 
over  the  whole  area  have  no  such  distinguishing  mark.  Let 
a and  a be  these  areas,  v and  v'  the  volumes  of  the  wedges; 
(*>  y),  (»',  V)  tlie  co-ordinates  of  their  centres  of  inertia.  Then 

v = 6 [/ Jxdxdy]  — axO 
- v = 6 (jxdxdy)  = ax  6, 

whence  v -v'  = 6J Jxdxdy  = 0 since  0 is  the  centre  of  inertia. 


763.] 


STATICS. 


321 


Hence  v — v',  which  is  (1).  Lemma. 

Again,  taking  moments  about  XX', 

vy=  6 [ffxydxdy], 
and  - v'y  = 6 (JJxydxdy). 

Hence  vy  — vy’  — 6 ff xydxdy. 

But  for  a principal  axis  (§  281)  'Zxydm  vanishes.  Hence 
vy—vy=  0,  whence,  since  v — v',  we  havey  = y,  which  proves  (2). 

And  (3)  is  merely  a statement  in  words  of  the  obvious  equation 
[f Jx.xOdxdy]  = 6 [/ fx2dxdy]. 

764.  If  a positive  amount  of  work  is  required  to  produce  stability  of 

1 . equilibrium 

any  possible  infinitely  small  displacement  of  a body  from  a ^|yfloating 
position  of  equilibrium,  the  equilibrium  in  this  position  is 
stable  (§  291).  To  apply  this  test  to  the  case  of  a floating 
body,  we  may  remark,  first,  that  any  possible  infinitely  small 
displacement  may  (§§  26,  95)  be  conveniently  regarded  as  com- 
pounded of  two  horizontal  displacements  in  lines  at  right  angles 
to  one  another,  one  vertical  displacement,  and  three  rotations 
round  rectangular  axes  through  any  chosen  point.  If  one  of 
these  axes  be  vertical,  then  three  of  the  conrponent  displace- 
ments, viz.  the  two  horizontal  disjdacements  and  the  rotation 
about  the  vertical  axis,  require  no  work  (positive  or  negative), 
and  therefore,  so  far  as  they  are  concerned,  the  equilibrium  is 
essentially  neutral.  But  so  far  as  the  other  three  modes  of 
displacement  are  concerned,  the  equilibrium  may  be  stable,  or 
may  be  unstable,  or  may  be  neutral,  according  to  the  fulfilment 
of  conditions  which  we  now  proceed  to  investigate. 

765.  If,  first,  a simple  vertical  displacement,  downwards  Vertical  dis- 
let  us  suppose,  be  made,  the  work  is  done  against  an  increasing  placement!5- 
resultant  of  upward  fluid  pressure,  and  is  of  course  equal 

to  the  mean  increase  of  this  force  multiplied  by  the  whole 
space.  It  this  space  be  denoted  by  z,  the  area  of  the  plane  of 
flotation  by  A,  and  the  Aveight  of  unit  bulk  of  the  liquid  by  w, 
the  increased  bulk  of  immersion  is  clearly  Az,  and  therefore 
the  increase  of  the  resultant  of  fluid  pressure  is  wAz,  and  is 
in  a line  vertically  upward  through  the  centre  of  gravity  of  A. 

The  mean  force  against  which  the  work  is  done  is  therefore 
$wAz,  as  this  is  a case  in  which  work  is  done  against  a force 
VOL.  II.  21 


Work  dono 
in  vertical 
displace- 
ment. 


Displace- 
ment by 
rotation 
about  an 
axis  in  the 
plane  of 
flotation. 


322 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[765. 


increasing  from  zero  in  simple  proportion  to  the  space.  Hence 
the  work  done  is  \wAz 2.  We  see,  therefore,  that  so  far  as 
vertical  displacements  alone  are  concerned,  the  equilibrium  is 
necessarily  stable,  unless  the  body  is  wholly  immersed,  when 
the  area  of  the  plane  of  flotation  vanishes,  and  the  equilibrium 
is  neutral. 

766.  The  lemma  of  § 763  suggests  that  we  should  take,  as 
the  two  horizontal  axes  of  rotation,  the  principal  axes  of  the 
plane  of  flotation.  Considering  then  rotation  through  an  in- 
finitely small  angle  6 round  one  of  these,  let  G and  E be  the 


displaced  centres  of  gravity  of  the  solid,  and  of  the  portion 
of  its  volume  which  wras  immersed  when  it  was  floating  in 
equilibrium,  and  G' , E'  the  positions  which  they  then  had 
all  projected  on  the  plane  of  the  diagram  which  we  suppose  to 
be  through  I the  centre  of  inertia  of  the  plane  of  flotation 
The  resultant  action  of  gravity  on  the  displaced  body  is  W,  its- 
weight,  acting  downwards  through  G;  and  that  ol  the  fluio 


STATICS. 


323 


766.] 


pressure  on  it  is  W upwards  through  E corrected  by  the  amount 
(upwards)  due  to  the  additional  immersion  of  the  wedge  AIA' , ^t0a^°^1n 
and  the  amount  (downwards)  due  to  the  extruded  wedge  B'lB.  “^neof116 
Hence  the  whole  action  of  gravity  and  fluid  pressure  on  the  flotation, 
displaced  body  is  the  couple  of  forces  up  and  down  in  verticals 
through  G and  E,  and  the  correction  due  to  the  wedges.  This 
correction  consists  of  a force  vertically  upwards  through  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  A' I A,  and  downwards  through  that  of  BIB' . 

These  forces  are  equal  [§  763  (1)],  and  therefore  constitute  a 
couple  which  [§  763  (2)]  has  the  axis  of  the  displacement  for 
its  axis,  and  which  [§  763  (3)]  has  its  moment  equal  to  9wFA, 
if  A be  the  area  of  the  plane  of  flotation,  and  k its  radius  of 
gyration  (§  281)  round  the  principal  axis  in  question.  But 
since  GE,  which  was  vertical  (as  shown  by  G'E')  in  the  position 
of  equilibrium,  is  inclined  at  the  infinitely  small  angle  9 to  the 
vertical  in  the  displaced  body,  the  couple  of  forces  W in  the 
verticals  through  G and  E has  for  moment  Wh9,  if  li  denote  GE ; 
and  is  in  a plane  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  and  in  the  direction 
tending  to  increase  the  displacement,  when  G is  above  E. 

Hence  the  resultant  action  of  gravity  and  fluid  pressure  on  the 
displaced  body  is  a couple  whose  moment  is 

(wAF  — Wh)  9,  or  w (. Ak 2 — Vh)  6, 

if  V be  the  volume  immersed.  It  follows  that  when  AF>  Vh 
the  equilibrium  is  stable,  so  far  as  this  displacement  alone  is 
concerned. 

Also,  since  the  couple  worked  against  in  producing  the  dis-  work  done 
placement  increases  from  zero  in  simple  proportion  to  the  placement 
angle  of  displacement,  its  mean  value  is  half  the  above;  and 
therefore  the  whole  amount  of  work  done  is  equal  to 

\w  (AF  - Vh)  9\ 


767.  If  now  we  consider  a displacement  comjDounded  of  a General  dis- 
vertical  (downwards)  displacement  £,  and  rotations  through 
infinitely  small  angles  9,  9'  round  the  two  horizontal  principal 
axes  of  the  plane  of  flotation,  we  see  (§§  765,  766)  that  the  Wwk  re- 
work required  to  produce  it  is  equal  to  quired' 

\w  [ Az 2 + (AF  - Vh)  9 2 + (. Ah' 2 - Vh) 

21—2 


324 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[7G7. 


o^stabiuty.  and  we  conclu(Je  that,  for  complete  stability  with  reference  to 
all  possible  displacements  of  this  kind,  it  is  necessary  and 

sufficient  that  h<~,  and 


cenZeta'  768‘  When  the  displacement  is  about  any  axis  through  the 
Condition  of  centre  of  inertia  of  the  plane  of  flotation,  the  resultant  of  fluid 
encef18 ' pressure  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  body ; but  it  is  only 
when  the  axis  is  a principal  axis  of  the  plane  of  flotation  that 
this  resultant  is  in  the  plane  of  displacement.  In  such  a case 
the  point  of  intersection  of  the  resultant  with  the  line  originally 
vertical,  and  through  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  body,  is  called 
the  Metacentre.  And  it  is  obvious,  from  the  above  investisra- 
tion,  that  for  either  of  these  planes  of  displacement  the  con- 
dition of  stable  equilibrium  is  that  the  metacentre  shall  be 
above  the  centre  of  gravity. 

769.  The  spheroidal  analysis  with  which  we  propose  to 
conclude  this  volume  is  proper,  or  practically  successful,  for 
hydrodynamic  problems  only  when  the  deviations  from  spheri- 
cal symmetry  are  infinitely  small ; or,  practically,  small  enough 
to  allow  us  to  neglect  the  squares  of  ellipticities  (§801);  or, 
which  is  the  same  thing,  to  admit  thoroughly  the  principle  of 
the  superposition  of  disturbing  forces,  and  the  deviations  pro- 
duced by  them.  But  we  shall  first  consider  a case  which 
admits  of  very  simple  synthetical  solution,  without  any  re- 
striction to  approximate  sphericity ; and  for  which  the  follow- 
ing remarkable  theorem  was  discovered  by  Newton  and 
Maclaurin  : — 


a homo-  770.  An  oblate  ellipsoid  of  revolution,  of  any  given  eccen- 
eiTpsold  is  tricity,  is  a figure  of  equilibrium  of  a mass  of  homogeneous 
equfuibrium  incompressible  fluid,  rotating  about  an  axis  with  determinate 
hquidmasf  angular  velocity,  and  subject  to  no  forces  but  those  of  gravitation 
among  its  parts. 

The  angular  velocity  for  a given  eccentricity  is  independent 
of  the  bulk  of  the  fluid,  and  proportional  to  the  square  root  of 
its  density, 

771.  The  proof  of  these  propositions  is  easily  obtained  from 


STATICS. 


325 


71.] 


the  results  already  deduced  with  respect  to  the  attraction  of  an  a homo- 

^ peneous 

ellipsoid  and  the  properties  of  the  free  surface  of  a fluid  as  ellipsoid  is 

r 1 x a figure  of 

follows  : equilibrium 

of  a rotating 

We  know,  from  § 522,  that  if  APB  be  a meridional  section  hquid  maS3- 
of  a homogeneous  oblate  spheroid,  OC  the  polar  axis,  OA  an 
equatorial  radius,  and  P any  point  on  the  surface,  the  attraction 
of  the  spheroid  may  be  resolved  into  two  components;  one,  Pp, 
perpendicular  to  the 
polar  axis,  and  vary- 
ing as  the  ordinate 
PM ; the  other,  Ps, 
parallel  to  the  polar 
axis,  and  varying  as 
PN.  These  compo- 
nents are  not  equal 
when  MP  and  PN  are 
equal,  else  the  result- 
ant attraction  at  all 
points  in  the  surface 

would  pass  through  0;  whereas  we  know  that  it  is  in  some 
such  direction  as  Pf  cutting  the  radius  OA  between  0 and  A, 
but  at  a point  nearer  to  0 than  n the  foot  of  the  normal  at  P. 

Let  then  Pp  = a . PM, 


and  Ps  — y . PN, 

where  a and  y are  known  constants,  depending  merely  on  the 
density,  (p),  and  eccentricity  (e),  of  the  spheroid. 

Also,  we  know  by  geometry  that  Nn  = (1  - e~)  ON. 


Hence ; to  find  the  magnitude  of  a force  Pq  perpendicular 
to  the  axis  of  the  spheroid,  which,  when  compounded  with  the 
attraction,  will  bring  the  resultant  force  into  the  normal  Pn  : 
make  pr  = Pq,  and  we  must  have 


Pr  _ Nn  ON 

Ps  PN~  1 6 'PN  ~ 


(1-e2) 


7-  Pp 
a .Ps  ' 


Pr  = (1  — e2)  ^ Pp 


Pp-Pq  = {l-e*)r±Pp, 


Hence 


326 


ARSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[771. 


A homo- 
geneous 
ellipsoid  is 
a figure  of 
equilibrium 
of  a rotating 
liquid  mass. 


The  square 
of  a requi- 
site angular 
velocity  is 
as  the  den- 
sity of  the 
liquid. 


or  Pq  = [l  - (1  - i)  ll  pp 

= {a  - (1  — e’)  7)  PM. 

Now  if  the  spheroid  were  to  rotate  with  angular  velocity  « 
about  OG,  the  centrifugal  force  (§§  32,  35a,  259),  would  be  in 
the  direction  Pq,  and  would  amount  to  (PPM . 

Hence,  if  we  make  to2  = a — (1  — e2)  7 (i)  • 

the  whole  force  on  P,  that  is,  the  resultant  of  the  attraction 
and  centrifugal  force,  will  be  in  the  direction  of  the  normal  to 
the  surface,  which  is  the  condition  for  the  free  surface  of  a mass 
of  fluid  in  equilibrium. 

Now,  § 527  (31)*  7 = 4 ttP  !±£  (/-  tan'1  /) 


Hence  by  (1)  = ‘jP  {(3  + /')  tan-/-  3/J  (3). 

This  determines  the  angular  velocity,  and  proves  it  to  be  pro- 
portional to  Jp. 

When  e,  and  therefore  also  f is  small,  this  formula  is  most 
easily  calculated  from 

2^r*/!-*/‘  + etc. (4), 

of  which  the  first  term  is  sufficient  when  we  deal  with  spheroids 
so  little  oblate  as  the  earth. 

772.  The  following  table  has  been  calculated  by  means  of 
these  simplified  formulae.  The  last  figure  in  each  of  the  four 
last  columns  is  given  to  the  nearest  unit.  The  two  last  columns 
will  be  explained  in  §§  775,  776. 

From  this  we  see  that  the  value  of  &)2/27rp  increases  gradually 
from  zero  to  a maximum  as  the  eccentricity  e rises  from  zero  to 

* Remark  that  the  “e”  of  § 527  is  not  the  eccentricity  of  the  oblate 
spheroid  which  we  now  denote  by  e,  and  that  with  / as  there  and  e as  here  we 
have  l-e2=  1/(1  +/2). 


772.]  statics.  327 

about  0 93,  and  then  (more  quickly)  falls  to  zero  as  the  eccen- 


ii.  iii.  iv.  v. 

see  § 775.  see  § 776. 


eccentri- 
city e = 

//V(1+/2) 

/= 

«/V(  I-*3)- 

w2 
2 irp 

Eotational  period,  in 
mean  solar  seconds, 
for  case  of  density 
equal  to  Earth’s 
mean  density. 

/i2_(l+/2)Sw2 

k 2i rp 

where  /u.  is  mo- 
ment of  momen- 
tum, and  k a 
constant*. 

0 

0 

0 

CO 

0 

0-093 

•0934 

•0023 

86,164 

•0023 

•1 

•1005 

•0027 

79,966 

•0027 

•2 

•2041 

•0107 

39,397 

•0110 

•3 

•3145 

•0243 

26,495 

•0258 

•4 

•4365 

•0436 

19,780 

•0490 

•5 

•5774 

•0690 

15,730 

•0836 

•6 

•7502 

•1007 

13,022 

•1356 

•7 

•9804 

•1387 

11,096 

•2172 

•8 

1-3333 

•1816 

9,697 

•3588 

•8127 

1-3946 

•1868 

9,561 

•3838 

•9 

2-0648 

•2203 

8,804 

•6665 

•91 

2-1949 

•2225 

8,759 

•7198 

•92 

2-3474 

•2241 

8,729 

•7813 

•93 

2-5304 

•2247 

8,718 

•8533 

•94 

2-7556 

•2239 

8,732 

•9393 

•95 

3-0423 

•2213 

8,783 

1-045 

•96 

3-4282 

•2160 

8,891 

1-179 

•97 

3-9904 

•2063 

9,098 

1-350 

•98 

4-9261 

•1890 

9,504 

1-627 

•99 

7-0175 

•1551 

10,490 

2-113 

1-00 

CO 

0-0000 

CO 

CO 

tricity  rises  from  0‘93  to  unity.  The  values  of  the  other  quan- 
tities corresponding  to  this  maximum  are  given  in  the  table. 


773.  If  the  angular  velocity  exceed  the  value  calculated  from 

4>=°'2247 o». 

when  for  p is  substituted  the  density  of  the  liquid,  equilibrium 
is  impossible  in  the  form  of  an  ellipsoid  of  revolution.  If  the 
angular  velocity  fall  short  of  this  limit  there  are  always  two 
ellipsoids  of  revolution  which  satisfy  the  conditions  of  equi- 
librium. In  one  of  these  the  eccentricity  is  greater  than  0 93, 
in  the  other  less. 


Table  of  cor- 
responding 
values  of 
ellipticities 
and  angular 
velocities. 


* Calculated  from  the  mass  and  density,  by  the  formula 


328 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Mean  den- 
sity of  the 
earth  ex- 
pressed in 
attraction 
units. 


Time  of 
rotation  for 
spheroid  of 
given  eccen- 
tricity. 


Mass  and 
moment  of 
momentum 
of  fluid 
given. 


[774. 


774.  It  may  be  useful,  for  special  applications,  to  indicate 
briefly  how  p is  measured  in  these  formulae.  In  the  definitions 
of  §§  459,  460,  on  which  the  attraction  formulae  are  based, 
unit  mass  is  defined  as  exerting  unit  force  on  unit  mass  at 
unit  distance ; and  unit  volume-density  is  that  of  a body  which 
has  unit  mass  in  unit  volume.  Hence,  with  the  foot  as  our 
linear  unit,  we  have  for  the  earth’s  attraction  on  a particle  of 
unit  mass  at  its  surface 


1 7 tctR3 

~rT 


-|7 rcrR  — 32'2 ; 


where  R is  the  radius  of  the  earth  (supposed  spherical)  in  feet; 
and  a its  mean  density,  expressed  in  terms  of  the  unit  just 
defined. 


Taking  20,900,000  feet  as  the  value  of  R,  we  have 

<r  = 0-000000368  = 3^68  x 1(T7 (6). 

As  the  mean  density  of  the  earth  is  about  5'5  times  that  of 
water,  § 479,  the  density  of  water  in  terms  of  our  jDresent  unit  is 

^10"7  = 6-7xl0-8. 

5'5 


775.  The  fourth  column  of  the  table  above  gives  the  time  of 
rotation  in  seconds,  corresponding  to  each  value  of  the  eccen- 
tricity, p being  assumed  equal  to  the  mean  density  of  the 
earth.  For  a mass  of  water  these  numbers  must  be  multiplied 
by  <]5‘5,  as  the  time  of  rotation  to  give  the  same  figure  is  in- 
versely as  the  square  root  of  the  density. 

For  a homogeneous  liquid  mass,  of  the  earth’s  mean  density, 
rotating  in  23h  56m  4s,  we  find  e = 0093,  which  corresponds  to 
an  ellipticity  of  about 

776.  An  interesting  form  of  this  problem,  also  discussed  by 
Laplace,  is  that  in  which  the  moment  of  momentum  and  the 
mass  of  the  fluid  are  given,  not  the  angular  velocity ; and  it  is 
required  to  find  what  is  the  eccentricity  of  the  corresponding 


STATICS. 


329 


770.] 


ellipsoid  of  revolution,  the  result  proving  that  there  can  be  Masmandf 

but  one.  momentum 

of  fluid. 

Calling  M the  mass,  and  p.  the  moment  of  momentum,  we  givei1' 


have 

and 


M=l-rpc°(\+f-) (7), 

/£  = lift'd  +» (8). 


These  equations,  with  (3)  determine  c,  / and  o>,  for  any  given 
values  of  M and  p.  Eliminating  c and  co  from  (8)  by  (7)  and 
(3),  we  find 


It  is  by  this  formula,  that  Col.  v.  of  the  table  of  § 772  has 
been  calculated.  The  result  shows  that  for  any  given  value  of 
/x,  the  moment  of  momentum,  there  is  one  and  only  one  value 
of/ 


777.  It  is  evident  that  a mass  of  any  ordinary  liquid  (not 
a perfect  fluid,  § 742),  if  left  to  itself  in  any  state  of  motion, 
must  preserve  unchanged  its  moment  of  momentum  (§  235). 
But  the  viscosity,  or  internal  friction  (§  742),  will,  if  the  mass 
remain  continuous,  ultimately  destroy  all  relative  motion 
among  its  parts ; so  that  it  will  ultimately  rotate  as  a rigid 
solid.  We  have  seen  (§  776),  that  if  the  final  form  be  an  ellip- 
soid of  revolution,  there  is  a single  definite  value  of  its  eccen- 
tricity. But,  as  it  has  not  yet  been  discovered  whether  there 
is  any  other  form  consistent  with  stable  equilibrium,  we  do  not 
know  that  the  mass  will  necessarily  assume  the  form  of  this 
particular  ellipsoid.  Nor  in  fact  do  we  know*  whetheV  even 
the  ellipsoid  of  rotation  may  not  become  an  unstable  form  if 
the  moment  of  momentum  exceed  some  limit  depending  on  the 
mass  of  the  fluid.  We  shall  return  to  this  subject  in  Yol.  n., 
as  it  affords  an  excellent  example  of  that  difficult  and  delicate 
question  Kinetic  Stability  (§  346).  [See  § 778  below.] 

* The  present  tense  in  this  sentence  relates  to  fifteen  years  ago.  We  now 
(Jan.  1882)  know  that  the  ellipsoid  of  revolution  is  unstable  for  moment  of 

momentum  exceeding  some  definite  multiple  of  or,  which  comes  to  the 

Bame,  the  figure  is  unstable  with  eccentricity  exceeding  some  definite  amount. 


3.30 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[778. 


SKSdo?  778‘  No  one  seems  yet  to  have  attempted  to  solve  the 
equal  axes.  Seneral  problem  of  finding  all  the  forms  of  equilibrium  which  a 
mass  of  homogeneous  incompressible  fluid  rotating  with  uniform 
angular  velocity  may  assume.  Unless  the  velocity  be  so  small 
that  the  figure  differs  but  little  from  a sphere  (a  case  which 
will  be  carefully  tieated  later),  the  problem  presents  difficulties 
of  an  exceedingly  formidable  nature.  It  is  therefore  of  some 
importance  to  show  by  a synthetical  process  that  besides  the 
ellipsoid  of  revolution,  there  is  an  ellipsoid  with  three  unequal 
axes,  which  is  a figure  of  equilibrium  when  the  moment  of  mo- 
mentum is  great  enough.  This  curious  theorem  was  discovered 
by  Jacobi  in  1834,  and  seems,  simple  as  it  is,  to  have  been 
enunciated  by  him  as  a challenge  to  the  French  mathematicians*. 
The  following  proof  was  given  by  Archibald  Smith  in  the  second 
number  of  the  Cambridge  Mathematical  Journals. 


The  components  of  the  attraction  of  a homogeneous  ellipsoid, 
whose  semi-axes  are  a,  b,  c,  on  a point  (x,  y,  z)  at  its  surface, 
found  in  § 526  above,  may  be  written  Ax,  By,  Cz,  where 


A = \M 


f: 


du 
(gs+u)D  ’ 


b = §m[- 

J 0 


*L_  c-zjf 

(l b2+u)D ’ 


/; 


du 

(c2+u)D 


where  D = (a?  + u ) 2 ( b 2 + u)2  (c2  + u) 


If  the  ellipsoid  revolve,  with  angular  velocity  w,  about  the 
axis  of  z,  the  components  of  the  centrifugal  force  are  w2x,  ary,  0. 
Hence  the  components  of  the  whole  resultant  of  gravity  and 
centrifugal  force  on  a particle  at  (x,  y , z)  are 

(A  — or)  x,  (B  - a)2)  y,  Cz. 

Btit  the  direction-cosines  of  the  normal  to  the  surface  of  the 
ellipsoid  at  (x,  y,  z),  are  proportional  to 

x y z 
a2’  F*  72’ 

and,  for  equilibrium,  the  resultant  force  must  be  perpendicular 
to  the  free  surface.  Hence 

a2  (A  - u>2)  = b2(B-  co2)  = c2C (2). 


* See  a Paper  by  Liouville,  Journal  de  VEcole  Poly  technique,  caliier  xxm. 
foot-note  to  p.  290. 

t Cambridge  Math.  Journal,  Feb.  1838. 


STATTOS. 


331 


8.] 


These  equations  give 


a2b 2 (A  -B)  + (a2  - b 2)  c2C  = 0 

2 a2 A - b~B 
ar_  a2-b 2 


Equilibrium 
ellipsoid  of 
three  un- 


anti 


which,  with  A,  B,  C eliminated  by  (1),  become 


The  first  factor  of  (5)  equated  to  zero,  gives  a = b,  and  (6)  gives 
the  angular  velocity  for  any  assumed  ratio  of  c to  a : thus  we 
fall  back  on  the  solution  by  an  ellipsoid  of  revolution  worked 
out  in  § 771  above. 

Another  solution  is  found  by  equating  the  second  factor  of 
(5)  to  zero.  This  equation  which  is  equivalent  to 


may  be  regarded  as  an  equation  to  determine  c2  for  any  given 
values  of  a and  b.  It  has  obviously  one  and  only  one  real 
positive  root;  which  is  proved  by  remarking,  that  while  u in- 
creases from  zero  to  infinity,  u/D3  decreases  continually  to  zero, 
and  the  last  factor  under  the  integral  sign  continuously  increases, 
only  reaching  a positive  value  for  infinitely  great  values  of  u 
when  c is  zero,  and  being  positive  for  all  values  of  u when 
l/c2  = or  < l/a2+  1/b2 : and  that,  for  any  constant  value  of  u, 
the  last  factor  increases  with  increase  of  cz.  As  every  element 
of  the  integral  is  positive  when  1/c2  — or  d/a2  + 1/b3  and  as 
we  may  write  this  inequality  as  follows,  c2  = or  > 62/(l  + J2/a2), 
we  see  that  if  c = or  < the  less  of  a,  or  b,  every  element  of  the 
integral  is  positive,  and  we  infer  that  the  root  c is  less  than  the 
least  of  a or  b. 

778'.  The  solution  of  (7)  for  the  case  of  a — b is  particularly 
interesting.  It  will  be  interpreted  and  turned  to  account  in 
§ 778".  It  is  the  case,  and  obviously  the  only  case,  in  which  (5), 
regarded  as  an  equation  for  determining  any  one  of  the  quanti- 
ties, a2,  b2,  c 2 in  terms  of  the  two  others,  has  equal  positive  roots. 
In  this  case  the  integral  forming  the  first  member  of  (7)  is 


332 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[778’. 


Equilibrium 
ellipsoid  of 
three  un- 
equal axes. 


reducible  from  the  elliptic  function  required  to  express  it  when 
a is  not  equal  to  b,  to  a formula  involving  no  other  transcendent 
than  an  inverse  circular  function.  The  reduction  is  readily 
performed  by  aid  of  the  notation  of  § 527  (22),  where  however 
a stood  for  what  we  now  denote  by  c.  It  is  to  be  noted  also 
that  the  q of  § 527  is  now  zero,  because  the  point  we  are  now 
considering  is  on  the  surface  of  the  ellipsoid.  The  resulting 
transcendental  equation  equivalent  to  (7)  may,  if,  as  in  § 527 
(28),  we  put 


be  written  as  follows, 

tan"1/  1 +~P 

f ~l  +tt/2+/* 


(9). 


When  / is  increased  continuously  from  zero  to  infinity  the  left- 
hand  member  of  this  equation  diminishes  continuously  from 
unity  to  zero : the  right-hand  member  diminishes  also  from 
unity  to  zero,  but  diminishes  at  first  less  rapidly  and  afterwards 
more  rapidly  than  the  other.  Thus  there  is  one  and  only  one 
root,  which  by  trial  and  error  we  find  to  be 


/=  1-39457. 


Some  numerical  particulars  relating  to  this  case  are  inserted  in 
the  Table  of  § 772,  as  amended  for  the  present  edition. 


General 
problem  of 
rotating 
liquid  mass 


778 '.  During  the  fifteen  years  which  have  passed  since 
the  publication  of  our  first  edition  we  have  never  abandoned 
the  problem  of  the  equilibrium  of  a finite  mass  of  rotating 
incompressible  fluid.  Year  after  year,  questions  of  the  multi- 
plicity of  possible  figures  of  equilibrium  have  been  almost  in- 
cessantly before  us,  and  yet  it  is  only  now,  under  the  compulsion 
of  finishing  this  second  edition  of  the  second  part  of  our  first 
volume,  with  hope  for  a second  volume  abandoned,  that  we 
have  succeeded  in  finding  anything  approaching  to  full  light  on 
the  subject. 


stability  (a)  The  oblate  ellipsoid  of  revolution  is  proved  by  8 776  and 

and  t/  o 

baity  of  by  the  table  of  § 772  to  be  stable,  if  the  condition  of  being  an 
spheroid  of  ellipsoid  of  revolution  be  imposed.  It  is  obviously  not  stable 

revolution.  .....  J 

for  very  great  eccentricities  without  this  double  condition  of 
being  both  a figure  of  revolution  and  ellipsoidal. 


STATICS. 


333 


778''.] 


(6)  If  the  condition  of  being  a figure  of  revolution  is  im- 
posed, without  the  condition  of  being  an  ellipsoid,  there  is,  for 
large  enough  moment  of  momentum,  an  annular  figure  of  equi- 
librium which  is  stable,  and  an  ellipsoidal  figure  which  is  un- 
stable. It  is  probable,  that  for  moment  of  momentum  greater 
than  one  definite  limit  and  less  than  another,  there  is  just  one 
annular  figure  of  equilibrium,  consisting  of  a single  ring. 

(c)  For  sufficiently  large  moment  of  momentum  it  is  certain 
that  the  liquid  maybe  in  equilibrium  in  the  shape  of  two,  three, 
four  or  more  separate  rings,  with  its  mass  distributed  among 
them  in  arbitrary  portions,  all  rotating  with  one  angular  velocity, 
like  parts  of  a rigid  body.  It  does  not  seem  probable  that  the 
kinetic  equilibrium  in  any  such  case  can  be  stable. 

(< d ) The  condition  of  being  a figure  of  equilibrium  being  still 
imposed,  the  single-ring  figure,  when  annular  equilibrium  is 
possible  at  all,  is  probably  stable.  It  is  certainly  stable  for  very 
lame  values  of  the  moment  of  momentum. 

O 


Annular 
figures: 
probably 
not  stable ; 


unless 
under  con- 
straint to 
remain 
symmetri- 
cal round 
an  axis. 


(e)  On  the  other  hand  let  the  condition  of  being  ellipsoidal 
be  imposed,  but  not  the  condition  of  being  a figure  of  revolution. 
Whatever  be  the  moment  of  momentum,  there  is  one,  and  only 
one  revolutional  figure  of  equilibrium,  as  we  have  seen  in  § 776; 
we  now  add  : 


(1)  The  equilibrium  in  the  revolutional  figure  is  stable, 


unstable,  according  as 


is  < or  > T39457. 


Or  Instability 
of  oblate 
spheroid 
and  stabi- 
lity of 
Jacobian 


(2)  When  the  moment  of  momentum  is  less  than  that  which  flKure- 
makes  /=1394o7  (or  eccentricity  = ’81266)  for  the  revolu- 
tional figure,  this  figure  is  not  only  stable,  but  unique. 

(3)  When  the  moment  of  momentum  is  greater  than  that 
which  makes  /=T39457  for  the  revolutional  figure,  there  is, 
besides  the  unstable  revolutional  figure,  the  Jacobian  figure 
(§  778  above)  with  three  unequal  axes,  ■which  is  always  stable 
if  the  condition  of  being  ellipsoidal  is  imposed.  But,  as  will  be 
seen  in  (/)  below,  the  Jacobian  figure,  without  the  constraint 
to  ellipsoidal  figure,  is  in  some  cases  certainly  unstable,  though 

it  seems  probable  that  in  other  cases  it  is  stable  without  any 
constraint. 


Unstable 

Jacobian 

figures. 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[778". 


Configura- 
tion of  two 
detached 
rotating 
masses 
stable. 


334 

(/)  Looking  back  now  to  § 778  and  choosing  the  case  of  a 
a great  multiple  of  b,  we  see  obviously  that  the  excess  of  b above 
c must  m this  case  be  very  small  in  comparison  with  c.  Thus 
we  have  a very  slender  ellipsoid,  long  in  the  direction  of  a,  and 
approximately  a prolate  figure  of  revolution  relatively  to  this 
long  a-axis,  which,  revolving  with  proper  angular  velocity  round 
its  shortest  axis  c,  is  a figure  of  equilibrium.  The  motion  so 
constituted,  which,  without  any  constraint  is,  in  virtue  of  § 778 
a configuration  of  minimum  energy  or  of  maximum  energy,  for 
given  moment  of  momentum,  is  a configuration  of  minimum 
energy  for  given  moment  of  momentum,  subject  to  the  condition 
that  the  shape  is  constrainedly  an  ellipsoid.  From  this  proposi- 
tion, which  is  easily  verified,  in  the  light  of  § 778,  it  follows 
that,  with  the  ellipsoidal  constraint,  the  equilibrium  is  stable. 
The  revolutional  ellipsoid  of  equilibrium,  with  the  same  moment 
of  momentum,  is  a very  flat  oblate  spheroid ; for  it  the  energy 
is  a minimax,  because  clearly  it  is  the  smallest  energy  that  a 
l evolutional  ellipsoid  with  the  same  moment  of  momentum  can 
have,  but  it  is  greater  than  the  energy  of  the  Jacobian  figure 
with  the  same  moment  of  momentum. 

(ff)  If  the  condition  of  being  ellipsoidal  is  removed  and  the 
liquid  left  peifectly  free,  it  is  clear  that  the  slender  Jacobian 
ellipsoid  of  (/)  is  not  stable,  because  a deviation  from  ellipsoidal 
figure  m the  way  of  thinning  it  in  the  middle  and  thickening  it 
towaids  its  ends,  would  with  the  same  moment  of  momentum 
gi\e  less  energy.  With  so  great  a moment  of  momentum  as  to 
give  an  exceedingly  slender  Jacobian  ellipsoid,  it  is  clear  that 
another  possible  figure  of  equilibrium  is,  two  detached  approxi- 
mately spherical  masses,  rotating  (as  if  parts  of  a solid)  round 
an  axis  through  their  centre  of  inertia,  and  that  this  figure  is 
stable.  It  is  also  clear  that  there  may  be  an  infinite  number  of 
such  stable  figures,  with  different  proportions  of  the  liquid  in 
the  two  detached  masses.  With  the  same  moment  of  momen- 
tum there  are  also  configurations  of  equilibrium  with  the  liquid 
in  divers  proportions  in  more  than  two  detached  approximately 
spherical  masses. 

(A)  No  configuration  in  more  than  two  detached  masses, 


STATICS. 


335 


1 1 


8".] 


lias  secular  stability  according  to  the  definition  of  (Jc)  below,  Confl^- 
and  it  is  doubtful  whether  any  of  them,  even  if  undisturbed  by  detached 
viscous  influences,  could  have  true  kinetic  stability : at  all 

events,  unless  approaching  to  the  case  of  the  three  material 
points  proved  stable  by  Gasclieau  (see  Routli  s Rigid 
Dynamics,”  § 475,  p.  381). 

(i)  The  transition  from  the  stable  kinetic  equilibrium  of  a 
liquid  mass  in  two  equal  or  unequal  portions,  so  far  asunder 
that  each  is  approximately  spherical,  but  disturbed  to  slightly 
prolate  figures  (found  by  the  well-known  investigation  of 
equilibrium  tides,  given  in  § 804  below),  and  to  the  more  and 
more  prolate  figures  which  would  result  from  subtraction  of 
energy  without  change  of  moment  of  momentum,  carried  so  far 
that  the  prolate  figures,  now  not  even  approximately  elliptic, 
cease  to  be  stable,  is  peculiarly  interesting.  We  have  a most 
interesting  gap  between  the  unstable  Jacobian  ellipsoid  when 
too  slender  for  stability,  and  the  case  of  smallest  moment  of 
momentum  consistent  with  stability  in  two  equal  detached 
portions.  The  consideration  of  how  to  fill  up  this  gap  with 
intermediate  figures,  is  a most  attractive  question,  towards 
answering  which  we  at  present  offer  no  contribution. 


(j)  When  the  energy  with  given  moment  of  momentum  is 
either  a minimum  or  a maximum,  the  kinetic  equilibrium  is 
clearly  stable,  if  the  liquid  is  perfectly  inviscid.  It  seems 
probable  that  it  is  essentially  unstable,  when  the  energy  is  a 
minimax ; but  we  do  not  know  that  this  proposition  has  been 
ever  proved. 


(Jc)  If  there  be  any  viscosity,  however  slight,  in  the  liquid,  or 
if  there  be  any  imperfectly  elastic  solid,  however  small,  floating- 
on  it  or  sunk  within  it,  the  equilibrium  in  any  case  of  energy 
either  a minimax  or  a maximum  cannot  be  secularly  stable  : 
and  the  only  secularly  stable  configurations  are  those  in  which 
the  energy  is  a minimum  with  given  moment  of  momentum. 
It  is  not  known  for  certain  whether  with  given  moment  of 
momentum  there  can  be  more  than  one  secularly  stable  configu- 
ration of  equilibrium  of  a viscous  fluid,  in  one  continuous  mass, 
but  it  seems  to  us  probable  that  there  is  only  one. 


336 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Digression 
on  spherical 
harmonics. 


Harmonic 

Bpheroid. 


Harmonic 
nodal  cone 
and  line. 


[779. 


779.  A few  words  of  explanation,  and  some  graphic  illustra- 
tions, of  the  character  of  spherical  surface  harmonics  may  pro- 
mote the  clear  understanding  not  only  of  the  potential  and 
hydrostatic  applications  of  Laplace’s  analysis,  which  will  occupy 
us  presently,  but  of  much  more  important  applications  to  be 
made  in  Yol.  IL,  when  waves  and  vibrations  in  spherical  fluid 
or  elastic  solid  masses  will  be  treated.  To  avoid  circumlo- 
cutions, we  shall  designate  by  the  term  harmonic  spheroid , or 
spherical  harmonic  undulation,  a surface  whose  radius  to  any 
point  differs  from  that  of  a sphere  by  an  infinitely  small  length 
varying  as  the  value  of  a surface  harmonic  function  of  the 
position  of  this  point  on  the  spherical  surface.  The  definitions 
of  spherical  solid  and  surface  harmonics  [App.  B.  (a),  (h),  (c)] 
show  that  the  harmonic  spheroid  of  the  second  order  is  a surface 
of  the  second  degree  subject  only  to  the  condition  of  being 
approximately  spherical:  that  is  to  say,  it  may  be  any  elliptic 
spheroid  (or  ellipsoid  with  approximately  equal  axes).  Gene- 
rally a harmonic  spheroid  of  any  order  i exceeding  2 is  a sur- 
face of  algebraic  degree  i , subject  to  further  restrictions  than 
that  of  merely  being  approximately  spherical. 


Let  St  be  a surface  harmonic  of  the  order  i with  the  coefficient  of 
the  leading  term  so  chosen  as  to  make  the  greatest  maximum 
value  of  the  function  unity.  Then  if  a be  the  radius  of  the 
mean  sphere,  and  c the  greatest  deviation  from  it,  the  polar 
equation  of  a harmonic  spheroid  of  order  i will  be 

r = a + cSi (1) 

if  S.  is  regarded  as  a function  of  polar  angular  co-ordinates,  9,  <£. 
Considering  that  c/a  is  infinitely  small,  we  may  reduce  this  to  an 
equation  in  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  degree  i,  thus : — Squaring 
each  member  of  (1);  and  putting  cr{lai+1  for  c/a,  from  which  it 
differs  by  an  infinitely  small  quantity  of  the  second  order,  we 


have 


= (^i) 

tv 


.(2). 


This,  reduced  to  rectangular  co-ordinates,  is  of  algebraic  degree  i. 

780.  The  line  of  no  deviation  from  the  mean  spherical  sur- 
face is  called  the  nodal  line,  or  the  nodes  of  the  harmonic 
spheroid.  It  is  the  line  in  which  the  spherical  surface  is  cut 


STATICS. 


337 


780.] 


by  the  harmonic  nodal  cone;  a certain  cone  with  vertex  at  the  Di^-esrfan^ 
centre  of  the  sphere,  and  of  algebraic  degree  equal  to  the  order  harmonics, 
of  the  harmonic.  An  important  property  of  the  harmonic  nodal  nodal  cone 
line,  indicated  by  an  interesting  hydrodynamic  theorem  due  to 
Rankine*,  is  that  when  self-cutting  at  any  point  or  points,  the 
different  branches  make  equal  angles  with  one  another  round 


each  point  of  section. 

Denoting  of  § 779  by  Vif  we  have 

K = o (3) 

for  the  equation  of  the  harmonic  nodal  cone.  As  V{  is  f App.  Theorem 

1 _ < . regarding 

B.  (a)]  a homogeneous  function  of  degree  i,  we  may  write  nodal  cone. 

V, = H0z*  + -#r1£<~1  + + ZTgis1-3  + etc (4), 


where  H0  is  a constant,  and  77, , II „ , 11. etc.,  denote  integral 
homogeneous  functions  of  x,  y of  degrees  1,2,  3,  etc. ; and  then 
the  condition  \72  Vi  = 0 [App.  B.  («.)]  gives 

V3Hg  + i(i-  l)Ho  = 0,  v3#8  +(i-l)(i-2)H1  = 0\  . . 

V2#,+  (is  + 2 )(i-s  + 1)I1S_2=0  } - 

which  express  all  the  conditions  binding  on  H0 , II x , II ,2,  etc. 

Now  suppose  the  nodal  cone  to  be  autotomic,  and,  for  brevity 
and  simplicity,  take  OZ  along  a line  of  intersection.  Then  z = a 
makes  (3)  the  equation  in  x,  y,  of  a curve  lying  in  the  tangent 
plane  to  the  spherical  surface  at  a double  or  multiple  point  of  the 
nodal  line,  and  touching  both  or  all  its  branches  in  this  point. 
The  condition  that  the  curve  in  the  tangent  plane  may  have  a 
double  or  multiple  point  at  the  origin  of  its  co-ordinates  is,  when 
(4)  is  put  for  Vi, 

II 0 = 0 ; and,  for  all  values  of  x,  y,  Hl  = 0. 

Hence  (5)  gives  V"772  = 0, 

so  that,  if  H2  = Ax 2 + By2  + 2 Gxy, 

we  have  A + B = 0.  This  shows  that  the  two  branches  cut  one 
another  at  right  angles. 

If  the  origin  be  a triple,  or  ^-multiple  point,  we  must  have 

#o=0,  7^  = 0, ...7/^  = 0, 

and  (5)  gives  y277t  = 0. 

* “Summary  of  the  Properties  of  certain  Stream-Lines.”  Phil.  Mag  Oct 
1864. 


VOL.  II. 


22 


338 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[780. 


Digression 
on  spherical 
harmonics. 

Theorem 
regarding 
nodal  cone. 


Cases  of 
solid  har- 
monics re- 
solvable 
into  factors. 

Polar  har- 
monics. 


Zonal  and 
sectorial 
harmonics 
defined. 


Hence  [§  707  (23),  writing  v for  J - 1], 

// 1 = A { (x  + y v)n  + (x  - y v)n } + B u { (x  + yv)n  - (x  - y v)n }, 

or,  if  x = p cos  4>)  V ~P  s^n 

Hn  = 2 pn  (A  cos  n(j>  + B sin  ncj>), 

which  shows  that  the  n branches  cut  one  another  at  equal  angles 
round  the  origin. 

781.  The  harmonic  nodal  cone  may,  in  a great  variety  of 
cases  [Vt  resolvable  into  factors],  be  composed  of  others  of  lower 
degrees.  Thus  (the  only  class  of  cases  yet  worked  out)  each  of 
the  2 i 4- 1 elementary  polar  harmonics  [as  we  may  conveniently 
call  those  expressed  by  (36)  or  (37)  of  App.  B,  with  any  one 
alone  of  the  2f + 1 coefficients  As,  Ba]  has  for  its  nodes  circles 
of  the  spherical  surface.  These  circles,  for  each  such  harmonic 
element,  are  either  (1)  all  in  parallel  planes  (as  circles  of  lati- 
tude on  a globe),  and  cut  the  spherical  surface  into  zones,  in 
which  case  the  harmonic  is  called  zonal ; or  (2)  they  are  all  in 
planes  through  one  diameter  (as  meridians  on  a globe),  and  cut 
the  surface  into  equal  sectors,  in  which  case  the  harmonic  is 
called  sectorial ; or  (3)  some  of  them  are  in  parallel  planes, 
and  the  others  in  planes  through  the  diameter  perpendicular  to 
those  planes,  so  that  they  divide  the  surface  into  rectangular 
quadrilaterals,  and  (next  the  poles)  triangular  segments,  as 
areas  on  a globe  bounded  by  parallels  of  latitude,  and  meiidians 
at  equal  successive  differences  of  longitude. 

With  a given  diameter  as  axis  of  symmetry  there  are,  for 
complete  harmonics  [App.  B.  (c),  (<^)],  just  one  zonal  harmonic 
of  each  order  and  two  sectorial.  The  zonal  harmonic  is  a function 
of  latitude  alone  (|t t-0,  according  to  the  notation  of^App.  B.) ; 
being  the  ®.(0)  given  by  putting  s = 0 in  App.  B.  (38).  The 
sectorial  harmonics  of  order  i,  being  given  by  the  same  with 

S —•  *1)  9/1*0  . . . . . /-t  \ 

siffi#  cos  i(f>,  and  sm^sin?^ AJ* 

The  general  polar  harmonic  element  of  order  «,  being  the 
0WCos 80  and  ©Wsin 8<f>  of  B.  (38),  with  any  value  of  5 from 
0 to  i,  has  for  its  nodes  i-s  circles  in  parallel  planes,  and  s 
great  circles  intersecting  one  another  at  equal  angles  round 


STATICS. 


339 


781.] 


their  poles:  and  the  variation  from  maximum  to  minimum  Digression 

1 ’ on  spherical 

along  the  equator,  or  any  parallel  circle,  is  according  to  the  harmonics, 
simple  harmonic  law.  It  is  easily  proved  (as  the  mathematical 
student  may  find  for  himself)  that  the  law  of  variation  is 
approximately  simple  harmonic  along  lengths  of  each  meridian 
cutting  but  a small  number  of  the  nodal  circles  of  latitude,  and 
not  too  near  either  pole,  for  any  polar  harmonic  element  of  high 
order  having  a large  number  of  such  nodes  (that  is,  any  one  Tesserai 

, . . , . & ® _ rm  \ J , division  of 

tor  which  i — 5 is  a large  number).  The  law  of  variation  along  surface  by 

. ® ' ° nodes  of  a 

a meridian  m the  neighbourhood  of  either  pole,  for  polar  har-  polar  har- 
monic elements  of  high  orders,  will  he  carefully  examined  and 
illustrated  in  Yol.  II.,  when  we  shall  be  occupied  with  vibra- 
tions and  waves  of  water  in  a circular  vessel,  and  of  a circular 
stretched  membrane. 

782.  The  following  simple  and  beautiful  investigation  of 
the  zonal  harmonic  due  to  Murphy*  may  be  acceptable  to  the 
analytical  student ; but  (§  453)  we  give  it  as  leading  to  a use- 
ful formula,  with  expansions  deduced  from  it,  differing  from  any 
of  those  investigated  above  in  App.  B : — 

“ Prop.  I. 

“To  find  a rational  and  entire  function  of  given  dimensions  Murphy’s 
“ with  respect  to  any  variable,  such  that  when  multiplied  by  SSSSlS? 

any  rational  and  entire  function  of  lower  dimensions,  the  harmonics, 
“integral  of  the  product  taken  between  the  limits  0 and  1 
“ shall  always  vanish. 

“ Bet  f(t)  be  the  required  function  of  n dimensions  with  respect 
“ to  the  variable  t ; then  the  proposed  condition  will  evidently  re- 
quire the  following  equations  to  be  separately  true;  namely, 

“ (a) ......  ff(t)dt=0,  Jf(t)tdt=0,  jf(t) t2dt=0, jf(t)t'~'dt= 0, 

each  integral  being  taken  between  the  given  limits. 

Let  the  indefinite  integral  of  f (t),  commencing  when  t = 0,  be 
“ represented  by  /,(£) ; the  indefinite  integral  of  fy(t),  commencing 
“also  when  t = 0,  by/a(^);  and  so  on,  until  we  arrive  at  the 
function  which  is  evidently  of  2 n dimensions.  Then  the 
“ method  of  integrating  by  parts  will  give,  generally, 

“ Jf(t)  fdt  = ffx(t)  - xf-'fa(t)  +x(x- 1)  f -• f3(t)  - etc. 

* 1'reatise  on  Electricity.  Cambridge,  1833. 


22—2 


340 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[782. 


Digression 
on  spherical 
harmonics. 

Murphy’s 
analytical 
invention 
of  the  above 
harmonics. 


Murphy’s 

analysis. 


“ Let  us  now  put  t — 1,  and  substitute  for  x the  values  1,  2,  3, 

“ (i-1)  successively;  then  in  virtue  of  the  equations  (a), 

“ we  get, 

“ (. b ) m = o.  m - o.  /,«=<> •/.(<) = o. 

“ Hence,  the  function  ft(t)  and  its  ( i -1)  successive  differential 
“ coefficients  vanish,  both  when  t = 0,  and  when  t = 1 ; therefore 
“ t'  and  (1  - t)1  are  each  factors  of  f{t) ; and  since  this  function  is 
“ of  2 i dimensions,  it  admits  of  no  other  factor  but  a constant  c. 

“Putting  1 — t = t',  we  thus  obtain 

fi  (0  = e (tt'Y ; 


“ and  therefore 


i («')'• 


U 


“ Corollary. — If  we  suppose  the  first  term  of f(t ),  when  arranged 
according  to  the  powers  of  t,  to  be  unity,  we  evidently  have 

^ r)  on  this  supposition  we  shall  denote  the  above 


“ c = 


1.2.3 i 

“ quantity  by  Qv 


“Prop.  II. 

“The  function  Q.  which  has  been  investigated  in  the  pre- 
ceding proposition,  is  the  same  as  the  coefficient  of  el  in  the 
“ expansion  of  the  quantity 

{1  - 2e  (1  - 2 1)  + e2}4. 

“Let  u be  a quantity  which  satisfies  the  equation 
(c) u = t + eu(  1 - u ); 

“that  is,  u — — h -^{1  — 2e  (1  — 2i)  + e 


“therefore 


2e  2e 

du 
dt 


= {1— 2e(l-2«)+e2} 


-* 


“But  if,  as  before,  we  write  t'  for  1 - t,  we  have,  by  Lagrange’s 
“theorem,  applied  to  the  equation  (c), 


d 


e3  d2 


di 

“ If  we  differentiate,  and  put  for  its  value  1 • 2- 3 • ■ given 


782.J 


STATICS. 


341 


“by  the  former  proposition,  we  get 
du 


dt 


= 1 + Qxe  + Qae2  + Qaea  + etc. 


“Comparing  this  with  the  above  value  of  the  proposition  is 
“manifest. 

“Prop.  V. 

“To  develope  the  function  Qr 

“ First  Expansion. — By  Prop,  i.,  we  have 


Q, 


;SW' 


1.2.3  ...idt1 


“HenCe  °‘=1.2.3...tgT<l 


1 + 


1.2 


t — etc. 


/ 


at-\  , + (<+!)(< + 2) 

w -1  1 J <+  1.2  1.2  r etC- 


11  Second  Expansion. — If  u and  v are  functions  of  any  variable  t, 
“then  the  theorem  of  Leibnitz  gives  the  identity 

r1- 

dt  dt1 


di  . . d{u  . dv  dl  xu  i(i-  1)  d2v  d‘  2v 

= + + ™ +etc. 


dt1  " dt1  ' “ dt  dtx  1 1.2  o?£2  dt'  2 

“ Put  w = t'  and  v = and  dividing  by  1 . 2 . 3. ..i,  we  have 

“ (/) Qi= ? - 0 V1* + 

( 1.2.3  I 


r~V  + etc. 


J 2 

“ Third  Expansion. — Put  1 — 2 t — p.,  and  therefore  it'  — ^ 


2 ) 


“hence  ft.  1 - . * (f  - 1)‘ 


“(S')- 


— ^ |„2i  _ ia2i~2  + w2i-4  _ + ) 

_ 2.4. 6. ..2i  dp1  v ^ + 1.2  ^ et°7 

1.3. 5...(2i-  1)  f t(»-l) 

1.2.3...*  r 2 (2i- 1)  ^ 

»(»-l)(»-2)(»-3)  )„ 

2. 4.  (2£-l)(2t-3)^  * J* 


Digression 
on  spherical 
harmonics. 

Murphy’s 

analysis. 


Expansions 
of  zonal 
harmonics. 


Formula) 
for  zonal, 


342 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Digression 
on  spherical 
harmonica. 

Formulae 
for  zonal, 


and  tesseral 
harmonics. 


— [782. 

The  t,  t'  and  /x  of  Murphy’s  notation  are  related  to  the  0 we 
have  used,  thus  : — 


* = (2sinf0)2,  «'  = (2cos|0)2 

[x  = cos  6 


} 


.(2). 


Also  it  is  convenient  to  recall  from  App.  B.  (v),  (38),  (40),  and 
(42),  that  the  value  of  Q.  [or  of  App.  B.  (61)],  when  0 = 0 is 

unity,  and  that  it  is  related  to  the  ©J’,  of  our  notation  for  polar 
harmonic  elements,  thus  : — 


9v(0)  _ n _ 1 • 3 . 5. ..(2 i — 1)  ^(o) 
1 1. 2.3...i  4 


■(3), 


as  is  proved  also  by  comparing  (g)  with  App.  B.  (38).  We  add 
the  following  formula,  manifest  from  (38),  which  shows  a derive 

tion  of  ©f  from  ©^0),  valuable  if  only  as  proving  that  the  i - s 
roots  of  ©*  = 0 are  all  real  and  unequal,  inasmuch  as  App.  B. 
( p)  proves  that  the  i roots  of  ©f  = 0 are  all  real  and  unequal : — 


(fi)W 

i 


1 


d 


r-  @(*-1)  i 


.(4). 


.(5). 


Biaxal 

harmonic 

expanded. 


= QiQ/+ 2 


sin  6 i — s + 1 dfx  [_sin5  ‘0_ 
From  this  and  (3)  we  find 


®« _ * ■ 2 • 3...^  - s)  dfQ, 
4 1.3. 5...(2i  -l)bm  ° d/x' 


And  lastly,  referring  to  App.  B.  (w) ; let 

Q\  and  [cos  6 cos  6'  + sin  6 sin  6'  cos  (c£  - <£')] 

denote  respectively  what  Qi  becomes  when  cos  6 is  replaced  by 
cos  O',  and  again  by  cos  6 cos  6’  + sin  6 sin  O'  cos  (<£  - <£') : and  let  fx 
denote  cos  6)  and  \x,  cos  O'.  By  what  precedes,  we  may  put  (61) 
of  App.  B into  the  following  much  more  convenient  form,  agree- 
ing with  that  given  by  Murphy  ( Electricity , p.  24): — 

Q.  [cos  0 cos  O'  + sin  0 sin  O'  cos  (<£  - <£')] 

c°y-^Bing8fa,y^,  W + ringin’*' PI  +eto. j (6). 

t(z+l)  d/x  d/x  (t-l)t(i+l)(t+2)  d/x * d/x?  > 


STATICS. 


343 


783.]  01AUW 

783.  Elementary  polar  harmonics  become,  m an  extreme 
case  of  spherical  harmonic  analysis,  the  proper  harmonics  for  reluive.o 
the  treatment,  by  either  polar  or  rectilinear  rectangular  co-  .n^rand 
ordinates,  of  problems  in  which  we  have  a plane,  oi  two  plates, 
parallel  planes,  instead  of  a spherical  surface,  or  two  concentric 
spherical  surfaces,  thus: — 


First,  let  St  be  any  surface  harmonic  of  order  i,  and  V.  and 
F_(_i  the  solid  harmonics  [App.  B.  (b)]  equal  to  it  on  the 
spherical  surface  of  radius  a : so  that 


and  V 


-i-i 


Now  [compare  § 655] 


£ilog  (r/a)  m 

and,  therefore,  if  a be  infinite,  and  r—  a a finite  quantity  denoted 
by  x,  which  makes  log  (r/a)  = x/a,  and  if  i be  infinite,  and 
a/i  = p , we  have 


Q‘=  eixla  = €xlp,  and  similarly  ^J+‘  = e~(i+1)x,a  = e X,P ; 
the  solid  harmonics  then  become 


ex/pS{  and  e~xlpSr 

Supposing  now  S{  to  be  a polar  harmonic  element,  and  consider- 
ing, as  Green  did  in  his  celebrated  Essay  on  Electricity,  an  area 
sensibly  plane  round  either  pole,  or  considering  any  sensibly  plane 
portion  far  removed  from  each  pole,  it  is  interesting  and  instruc- 
tive to  examine  how  the  formulae  [App.  B.  (36). ..(40),  (61),  (65); 
and  § 782,  (e),  (/),  (</)]  wear  down  to  the  proper  plane  polar 
or  rectangular  formulae.  This  we  may  safely  leave  to  the  ana- 
lytical student.  In  Yol.  II.  the  plane  polar  solution  will  be  fully 
examined.  At  present  we  merely  remark  that,  in  rectangular 
surface  co-ordinates  (y,  z ) in  the  spherical  surface  reduced  to  a 
plane,  St  may  be  any  function  whatever  fulfilling  the  equation 


das{dasiMsi_ 

dif  dz*  p*  ’ 

and  that  the  rectangular  solution  into  which  the  elementary  polar 


Examples 
of  polar 
harmonics. 


Sixth- order: 
Zonal, 


Tesseral, 


Sectorial. 

Seventh 
order : 

Zonal, 

Tesseral, 


Sectorial. 


344 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[783. 


spherical  harmonic  wears  down,  for  sensibly  plane  portions  of  the 
spherical  surface  far  removed  from  the  poles,  is 

cf  y % 

o*  = COS  - COS  --7 

9 9 

where  q and  q are  two  constants  such  that  q2  + q'2 


784.  The  following  tables  and  graphic  representations  of 
all  the  polar  harmonic  elements  of  the  6th  and  7th  orders  may 
be  useful  in  promoting  an  intelligent  comprehension  of  the 
subject. 


^6  — T?r  (23  V’  — 31 5 /a4  + 105/a2  - 5) 

— 2tV-0<?>. 

tt • = i (33/a4 -30/a2  + 5) fjL 

= ¥©[1)(1-m2H- 

. d2QR  , , 

■snr  • = tb  (33/a4  - 18/a2  + 1) 

= n&2)a-^)-1. 

• df^~i  l11/42  3)  /a 

= V-0'3)(1-m2H. 

TT2T  • — TU  (HM“  - 1) 

= H©'4,(i-m2)-2. 

t ^5^6_ 

T7Tnre'  V 

- ©<5)(1-/a2)-1 

i d6Q6_ 

Ttrsvo  • dfJ 

= 0^6)(1-/a2)-3  not  shown. 

Q7=?\  (429/a6  - 693/a4  + 315/a2  - 35)  /a=^©(0). 


tts-  • — trj  (429/a6 - 495/t4  + 135/a2  - 5) 

C=l 

1 

r— 1^ 

© 

?}* 

sr° 

ii 

(143/a.4  110/a  +15) /a 

=W0<2,(1-m2)-1. 

•stW  • -^r=^i7  (143/a4  - 66/a2 + 3) 

=W  0^(1 -/**)“*• 

TT3~5-5  • ^7  = tV  (13/a2  —3)  /A 

= ft  0'4)(1-M2)-2. 

wire  • — tv(13m2  1) 

= ff©<3>(i-/A2)-i 

i d6Q7_ 

= ®<B  (I-/A2)-3. 

1 ^7(?7_  1 

Tinrnnr'  V _1 

= ©I.7*  (1  - /a2)-*  not  shown. 

784.] 


STATICS. 


345 


M- 

Qf 

•0 

- -3125 

•0000 

•01 

- -3118 

•05 

- -2961 

+ -0308 

•08 

- -2738 

•10 

- -2488 

+ -0588 

•13 

- -2072 

•15 

- -1746 

+ -0814 

•17 

- -1390 

•2 

- -0806 

+ -0963 

•24 

+ -0029 

•25 

+ -0243 

+ -1017 

•2506 

•3 

+ -1293 

+ -0966 

•34 

+ -2053 

•35 

+ -2225 

+ -0796 

•36 

+ -2388 

•4 

+ -2926 

-f*  *0522 

•43 

+ -3191 

•45 

+ *0157 

•46 

+ -3314 

•4688 

•0000 

•469 

+ -3321 

•5 

+ -3233 

- -0273 

•54 

+ -2844 

•55 

- -0726 

*56 

+ *2546 

•6 

+ -1721 

- -1142 

•63 

+ -0935 

•63 

- -1450 

•66 

+ -0038 

•7 

- -1253 

- -1555 

•74 

- -2517 

•75 

- -2808 

- -1344 

•76 

- -3087 

•8 

- -3918 

- -0683 

•82 

- -4119 

•8302 

- -4147 

•0000 

•84 

- -4119 

•85 

- -4030 

+ -0586 

•87 

- -3638 

•90 

- -2412 

+ -2645 

•92 

- -1084 

+ -1764 

•93 

+ -4346 

•9325 

•0000 

•94 

+ -0751  ; 

+ -5002 

•95 

+ *5704 

*96 

+ -3150 

•97 

+ -7260 

•98 

+ -6203 

+ -8117 

•99 

+ -8003 

+ -9029 

1-00 

+ 1-0000 

+ 1-0000 

, d*Qe 

d/j.'2  ' 

■0000 

+ -0625 

+ -0625 

+ -0307 

+ -0597 

+ -0595 

+ -0585 

+ -0515 

+ -0510 

+ -0805 

+ -0382 

+ -0373 

+ -0944 

+ -0208 

+ -0200 

+ -0984 
+ -0921 

+ -0002 
•0000 
- -0221 

+ -0002 
•0000 
- -0201 

+ -0745 

- -0441 

- -0387 

+ -0479 

- -0647 

- -0544 

+ -0140 

- -0807 

- -0644 

•0000 

- -0237 

- -0898 

- -0674 

- -0606 

- -0891 

- -0622 

- -0914 

- -0752 

- -0481 

- -1102 

- -0446 

- -0258 

- T110 

+ -0064 

+ -0033 

- -0889 

+ -0823 

+ -0360 

- -0410 

+ -1873 

+ -0674 

•0000 

+ -0308 

+ -3263 

+ -0905 

+ -1153 
+ -1464 
+ -1597 

+ -5044 

+ -0958 

+ -1706 
+ -1778 

+ *7271 

+ -0709 

+ -1764 
+ -1615 
+ -1274 
•0000 

+ -8844 
+ -9411 
+ 1-0000 

+ -0350 
+ -0187 

+ -oooo 

Polar  har- 
monics of 
sixth  order. 


ft 


346 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[784. 


* 


Polar  har- 
monics of 
sixth  order. 


n- 

, d2Qo 

T2lnr  d/43  ' 

¥©<3). 

i d4Q6 
d/44  ' 

H©<4). 

©«>. 

•0 

•0000 

•0000 

- -1000 

- -1000 

•0000 

•05 

- -0186 

- -0185 

- -0975 

- -0970 

+ -0497 

•1 

- -0361 

- -0356 

- -0890 

- -0886 

+ -0975 

•15 

- -0516 

- -0499 

- -0753 

- -0720 

+ -1417 

•2 

- -0640 

- -0602 

- -0560 

- -0516 

+ -1806 

•25 

- -0723 

- -0656 

- -0313 

- -0275 

+ -2127 

•3 

- -0754 

- -0655 

- -0010 

- -0008 

+ -2370 

•35 

- -0767 

- -0630 

+ -0348 

+ -0268 

+ ’2524 

•4 

- -0620 

- -0477 

+ -0760 

+ -0536 

+ -2586 

•45 

- -0435 

- -0310 

+ -1227 

+ -0773 

+ -2555 

•5 

- -0156 

- -0101 

+ -1750 

+ -0984 

+ -2436 

•55 

+ -0225 

+ -0131 

+ -2327 

+ T132 

+ -2234 

•6 

+ -0720 

+ -0369 

+ -2960 

+ -1211 

+ -1966 

•63 

+ -3366 

+ -1224 

•65 

+ 1338 

+ -0587 

+ -3647 

+ -1204 

+ -1647 

•7 

+ -2091 

+ -0750 

+ -4390 

+ -1139 

+ -1300 

•75 

+ -2988 

+ -0865 

+ -5188 

+ -0991 

+ -0949 

•8 

+ -4040 

+ -0873 

+ -6040 

+ *0783 

+ -0622 

•83 

+ -6578 

+ -0637 

•85 

+ -5257 

+ -0768 

+ -6947 

+ -0535 

+ -0344 

•87 

+ *7326 

+ -0433 

•89 

+ -7713 

+ -0333 

•9 

+ -6649 

+ -0551 

+ -7910 

+ -0285 

+ -0150 

•92 

+ -0085 

•93 

+ -7572 

+ -0376 

+ -8514 

+ -0155 

•95 

+ -8226 

+ -0249 

+ -8928 

+ -0084 

+ -0028 

•96 

+ -8565 

+ -9138 

•97 

+ -8911 

+ -0128 

+ -9350 

+ -0032 

•98 

+ -9216 

+ -0073 

+ -9564 

+ -0015 

•99 

+ -9629 

+ -9781 

+ -0004 

1-00 

+ 1-0000 

•0000 

+ 1-0000 

•0000 

•0000 

784.] 


STATICS. 


847 


Graphic 
representa- 
tion of  polar 
harmonics  of 
sixth  order. 


348 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[784. 


has  maximum 


784.] 


STATICS. 


349 


ft" 

Qt 

i dQi 
d/z  ' 

•0 

•0000 

- -0781 

•05 

- -1096 

_ -0720 

•1 

- -1995 

- -0578 

•15 

- -2649 

- -0345 

•18 

- -2873 

•2 

- -2935 

- -0057 

•2093 

•0000 

•2261 

.... 

•23 

- -2905 

•24 

+ -0190 

•25 

- -2799 

+ -0251 

•3 

- -2240 

+ -0540 

•35 

- -1318 

+ -0765 

•38 

- -0635 

•4 

- -0365 

+ -0888 

•42 

+ -0356 

•4209 

+ -0901 

•45 

+ -1106 

+ -0875 

•5 

+ -2231 

+ -0706 

•53 

•55 

+ -3007 

+ -0378 

•57 

+ -3207 

•58 

•5917 

+ -3236 

•0000 

•6 

+ -3226 

- -0115 

•62 

+ -3121 

•6406 

•65 

+ -2737 

- -0619 

•7 

+ *1502 

- -1129 

•7415 

•0000 

•75 

- -0342 

- -1458 

•7694 

- -1490 

•7695 

i 

•8 

- -2307 

- -1390 

•82 

- -3134 

•85 

- -3913 

- -0634 

•86 

- -4054 

•8717 

- -4117 

•0000 

•88 

- -4082 

•9 

- -3678 

+ -1183 

•92 

- -2713 



•93 

•9491 

•0000 



•95 

+ -0112 

+ -4533 

•97 

+ -3165 

+ -6421 

•98 

+ -5115 

+ *7517 

•99 

+ *7384 

+ -8706 

1-00 

+ 1-0000 

+ 1-0000 

w®?’ 

j ^0.7 
™ d/z'J  • 

- -0781 

- -0719 

- -0522 

- -0341 

•0000 
+ -0153 
+ -0290 
+ -0394 

•0000 
+ -0153 
+ -0287 
+ -0385 



- -0056 

+ -0451 

+ -0433 

+ -0459 

+ -0243 
+ -0515 
+ -0717 

+ -0452 
+ -0391 
+ -0268 

+ -0424 
+ -0356 
+ -0235 

+ -0814 

+ -0084 

+ -0074 





+ -0782 
+ -0611 

+ -0315 

•0000 

- -0132 

- -0371 

•0000 

- -0105 

- -0278 

- -0366 

- -0415 

•0000 
- -0092 

- -0758 

- -0415 

- -0485 

i l 

o o : : 

OD  n*.  • • 

O 

05  l-» 

- -0809 

- -0806 
- -0666 

- -0465 

- -0340 

- -0964 

- -0254 

- -0111 

- -0834 

•0000 
+ -0529 

•0000 
+ -0190 

- -0334 

+ -1801 

+ ‘0500 

•0000 

+ -0515 

+ -3698 

+ -0723 

+ -5276 

+ -0712 

+ -1413 
+ -1563 
+ -1458 
+ -1230 
•0000 

+ -6373 
+ -7699 

+ -9190 
! +1-0000 

+ -0621 
+ -0455 

+ -0184 
•0000 

Polar  har- 
monics of 
seventh 
order. 


350 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[784. 


Polar  har- 
monics of 
seventh 
order. 


M- 

w ©;3). 

i diQy 

mTF  d/l4- 

B©'4). 

1 , d°Q7 

™371S  dfj? ' 

-B  ©75). 

— 

©;6>. 

•o 

+ -0375 

+ -0375 

•0000 

•0000 



•0833 

- -0833 

•0000 

•05 

+ -0355 

•0353 

- -0148 

- -0147 

- 

•0806 

- -0801 

+ '0496 

•1 

+ -0294 

•0290 

- -0287 

- -0281 

— 

•0725 

- -0707 

+ '0970 

•15 

+ -0198 

•0192 

- -0406 

- -0387 

- 

•0590 

- -0557 

+ T401 

•2 

•2261 

+ -0074 
•0000 

•0068 

•0000 

- -0496 

- -0457 

— 

•0400 

- -0361 

+ T769 

•25 

- -0071 

- -0064 

- -0544 

- -0478 

— 

•0156 

- -0133 

+ -2059 

•2773 

- -0555 

•0000 

•0000 

•3 

- -0225 

- -0195 

- -0549 

- -0454 

+ 

■0142 

+ -0112 

+ -2260 

•35 

- -0367 

- -0302 

- -0493 

- -0378 

+ 

•0494 

+ -0356 

+ -2364  i 

•4 

- -0487 

- -0375 

- -0368 

- -0260 

+ 

•0900 

+ -0582 

+ -2369 

•45 

•4804 

- -0563 

- -0577 

- -0400 

- -0165 
•0000 

- -0104 
•0000 

+ 

•1361 

+ '0773 

+ -2281 

•5 

- -0570 

- -0370 

+ -0125 

+ -0070 

+ 

•1875 

+ -0913 

+ -2110 

•55 

- -0485 

- -0282 

+ -0513 

+ -0248 

+ 

•2564 

+ -1041 

+ T859 

•6 

- -0278 

- -0142 

+ -0708 

+ -0412 

+ 

•3067 

+ T004 

+ -1573 

•6406 

•0000 

•0000 

•65 

+ -0080 

+ -0035 

+ -1620 

+ -0540 

+ 

•3744 

+ -0948 

+ 1252 

•7 

+ -0624 

+ -0227 

+ -2359 

+ -0613 

+ 

•4475 

+ -0831 

+ -0928 

•75 

+ -1390 

+ -0401 

+ -3234 

+ -0619 

4" 

•5260 

+ -0665 

+ -0627 

•8 

+ -2417 

+ -0521 

+ -4256 

+ -0551 

4" 

•6100 

+ -0474 

+ -0373 

•85 

+ -3745 

+ -0546 

+ -5434 

+ -0418 

+ 

•6994 

+ -0283 

+ -0181 

•9 

+ *5420 

+ -0448 

+ -6777 

+ -0244 

+ 

•7942 

+ -0132 

+ -0065 

•92 

+ -6197 

+ .0373 

+ -7363 

+ -0170 

+ -0033 

•95 

+ -7489 

+ -0227 

+ -8732 

+ -0083 

4* 

•8944 

+ -0026 

+ -0087  j 

•97 

+ -8062 

+ -0116 

+ -9230 

+ -0032 

+ -0002 

•98 

+ -9564 

+ -0076 

•99 

1-00 

1-0000 

•0000 

+ 1-0000 

•0000 

+ 1-0000 

•0000 

•0000 

STATICS. 


351 


785.] 


785.  A short  digression  here  on  the  theory  of  the  potential,  ^Theoryof 
and  particularly  on  equipotential  surfaces  differing  little  from  potential, 
concentric  spheres,  will  simplify  the  hydrostatic  examples  which 
follow.  First  we  shall  take  a few  cases  of  purely  synthetical 
investigation,  in  which,  distributions  of  matter  being  given, 
resulting  forces  and  level  surfaces  (§  487)  are  found ; and  then 
certain  problems  of  Green’s  and  Gauss’s  analysis,  in  which,  from 
data  regarding  amounts  of  force  or  values  of  potential  over 
individual  surfaces,  or  shapes  of  individual  level  surfaces,  the 
distribution  of  force  through  continuous  void  space  is  to  be 
determined.  As  it  is  chiefly  for  their  application  to  physical  Sea  level, 
geography  that  we  admit  these  questions  at  present,  we  shall 
occasionally  avoid  circumlocutions  by  referring  at  once  to  the 
Earth,  when  any  attracting  mass  with  external  equipotential 
surfaces  approximately  spherical  would  answer  as  well.  We 
shall  also  sometimes  speak  of  “ the  sea  level  ” (§§  750,  754) 
merely  as  a “level  surface,”  or  “surface  of  equilibrium”  (§  487) 
just  enclosing  the  solid,  or  enclosing  it  with  the  exception  of 
comparatively  small  projections,  as  our  dry  land.  Such  a sur- 
face will  of  course  be  an  equipotential  surface  for  mere  gravita- 
tion, when  there  is  neither  rotation  nor  disturbance  due  to 
attractions  of  other  bodies,  such  as  the  moon  or  sun,  and  due 
to  change  of  motion  produced  by  these  forces  on  the  Earth  ; but  Level  sur- 
it  may  be  always  called  an  equipotential  surface,  as  we  shall  see  tiveiyto* 

(§  793)  that  both  centrifugal  force  and  the  other  disturbances  Centrifugal 
referred  to  may  be  represented  by  potentials.  force' 


786.  To  estimate  how  the  sea  level  is  influenced,  and  how  Disturbance 
much  the  force  of  gravity  in  the  neighbourhood  is  increased  or  by  denser 
diminished  by  the  existence  within  a limited  volume  under-  age  matter 
ground  of  rocks  of  density  greater  or  less  than  the  average,  let  us  ground, 
imagine  a mass  equal  to  a very  small  fraction,  1 /n,  of  the  earth’s 
whole  mass  to  be  concentrated  in  a point  somewhere  at  a depth 
below  the  sea  level  which  we  shall  presently  suppose  to  be 
small  in  comparison  with  the  radius,  but  great  in  comparison 
with  l/*Jn  of  the  radius.  Immediately  over  the  centre  of  dis- 
turbance, the  sea  level  will  be  raised  in  virtue  of  the  disturbing 
attraction,  by  a height  equal  to  the  same  fraction  of  the  radius 


352 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Disturbance 
of  sea  level 
by  a denser 
than  aver- 
age matter 
under- 
ground. 

Intensity 
and  direc- 
tion of 
gravity 
altered  by 
under- 
ground 
local  ex- 
cess above 
average 
density. 


[786. 


that  the  distance  of  the  disturbing  point  from  the  chief  centre 
is  of  n times  its  depth  below  the  sea  level  as  thus  disturbed. 
The  augmentation  of  gravity  at  this  point  of  the  sea  level 
will  be  the  same  fraction  of  the  whole  force  of  gravity  that  n 
times  the  square  of  the  depth  of  the  attracting  point  is  of  the 
square  of  the  radius.  This  fraction,  as  we  desire  to  limit  our- 
selves to  natural  circumstances,  we  must  suppose  to  be  very 
small.  The  disturbance  of  direction  of  gravity  will,  for  the 
sea  level,  be  a maximum  at  points  of  a circle  described  from 
A as  centre,  with  D/\J 2 as  radius ; D being  the  depth  of  the 
centre  of  disturbance.  The  amount  of  this  maximum  deflec- 
tion will  be  %/\/3a2/nDz  of  the  unit  angle  of  57° ’296  (§  41),  a 
denoting  the  earth’s  radius. 


Let  C be  the  centre  of  the  chief  attracting  mass  (1  — w-1),  and 

B that  of  the  disturbing  mass  (1  /n),  the 
two  parts  being  supposed  to  act  as  if 
collected  at  these  points.  Let  P be  any 
point  on  the  equipotential  surface  for 
which  the  potential  is  the  same  as  what  it 
would  be  over  a spherical  surface  of  radius 
a,  and  centre  C if  the  whole  were  collected 
in  G.  Then  (§491) 


/ 1\  1 1 _1 1 

v n)  ■ CP  + n'  BP  a ’ 


which  is  the  equation  of  the  equipotential  surface  in  question. 
It  gives 

s wp(CP-BP^ 

This  expresses  rigorously  the  positive  or  negative  elevation  of 
the  disturbed  equipotential  at  any  point  above  the  undisturbed 
surface  of  the  same  potential.  For  the  point  A,  over  the  centre 
of  disturbance,  it  gives 


CA-a=-°^.CB, 
n . BA 


which  agrees  exactly  with  the  preceding  statement : and  it  prov  es 
the  approximate  truth  of  that  statement  as  applied  to  the  sea 
level  when  we  consider  that  when  BP  is  many  times  BA,  CP  — a 


STATICS. 


353 


786.] 


is  many  times  smaller  than  its  value  at  A.  We  leave  the  proof 
of  the  remaining  statements  of  this  and  the  following  sections 
(§§  787. ..792)  as  an  exercise  for  the  student. 

787.  If  p be  the  general  density  of  the  upper  crust,  and  a 
the  earth’s  mean  density,  and  if  the  disturbance  of  § 786  be  ^°vdee^try 
due  to  there  being  matter  of  a different  density,  p,  throughout  °“ds^11d[.el* 
a spherical  portion  of  radius  b,  with  its  centre  at  a depth  D ^mdty  of 
below  the  sea  level,  the  value  of  n will  be  cra5/(p'—  p)b3 ; and  gravity: 
the  elevation  of  the  sea  level,  and  the  proportionate  augmenta- 
tion of  gravity  at  the  point  right  over  it,  will  be  respectively 


(p-pW 

craD 


. b,  and 


(p-pW 

aaD 2 ' 


The  actual  value  of  a is  about  double  that  of  p.  And  let  us  example. 

suppose,  for  example,  that  Z>  = & = 1000  feet,  or  yTooo  ^he 
earth’s  radius,  and  p to  be  either  equal  to  2 p or  to  zero.  The 
previous  results  become 

± iz  of  a foot,  and  ± of  gravity, 

which  are  therefore  the  elevation  or  depression  of  sea  level,  and 
the  augmentation  or  diminution  of  gravity,  due  to  there  being 
matter  of  double  or  zero  density  through  a spherical  space  2000 
feet  in  diameter,  with  its  centre  1000  feet  below  the  surface. 

The  greatest  deviation  of  the  plummet  is  at  points  of  the  circle 
of  707  feet  radius  round  the  point;  and  it  amounts  to  1091000 
of  the  radian,  or  nearly  2". 


788.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that,  to  set  off  against  the  in- 
crease in  the  amount  of  gravity  due  to  the  attraction  of  the 
disturbing  mass,  which  we  have  calculated  for  points  of  the  sea 
level  in  its  neighbourhood,  there  is  but  an  insensible  deduc- 
tion on  account  of  the  diminution  of  the  attraction  of  the  chief 
mass,  owing  to  increase  of  the  distance  of  the  sea  level  from  its 
centre,  produced  by  the  disturbing  influence.  The  same  remark 
obviously  holds  for  disturbances  in  gravity  due  to  isolated 
mountains,  or  islands  of  small  dimensions,  and  it  will  be  proved 
(§  794)  to  hold  also  for  deviations  of  figure  represented  by 
harmonics  of  high  orders.  But  we  shall  see  (§  789)  that  it  is 
otherwise  with  harmonic  deviations  of  low  orders,  and  conse- 
vol.  II.  23 


354 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[788. 


Harmonic 

spheroidal 

levels. 


quently  with  wide-spread  disturbances,  such  as  are  produced 
by  great  tracts  of  elevated  land  or  deep  sea.  We  intend  to 
return  to  the  subject  in  Yol.  II..  under  Properties  of  Matter, 
when  we  shall  have  occasion  to  examine  the  phenomenal  and 
experimental  foundations  of  our  knowledge  of  gravity ; and  we 
shall  then  apply  §§  477  ( b ) (c)  (d),  478,  479,  and  solutions  of 
other  allied  problems,  to  investigate  the  effects  on  the  magnitude 
and  direction  of  gravity,  and  on  the  level  surfaces,  produced  by 
isolated  hills,  mountain-chains,  large  table  lands,  and  by  cor- 
responding depressions,  as  lakes  or  circumscribed  deep  places 
in  the  sea,  great  valleys  or  clefts,  large  tracts  of  deep  ocean. 

789.  All  the  level  surfaces  relative  to  a harmonic  spheroid 
(§  779)  of  homogeneous  matter  are  harmonic  spheroids  of  the 
same  order  and  type.  That  one  of  them,  which  lies  as  much 
inside  the  solid  as  outside  it,  cuts  the  boundary  of  the  solid  in 
a line  (or  group  of  lines) — the  mean  level  line  of  the  surface  of 
the  solid.  This  line  lies  on  the  mean  spherical  surface,  and 
therefore  (§  780)  it  constitutes  the  nodes  of  each  of  the  two 
harmonic  spheroidal  surfaces  which  cut  one  another  in  it.  If  i 
be  the  order  of  the  harmonic,  the  deviation  of  the  level  spheroid 
is  (§§  545,815)  just  3/(2i  + l)  of  the  deviation  of  the  bounding 
spheroid,  each  reckoned  from  the  mean  spherical  surface. 

Thus  if  i = 1,  the  level  coincides  with  the  boundary  of  the 
solid:  the  reason  of  which  is  apparent  when  it  is  considered 
that  any  spherical  harmonic  deviation  of  the  first  order  from  a 
given  spherical  surface  constitutes  an  equal  spherical  suiface 
round  a centre  at  some  infinitely  small  distance  from  the  centre 
of  the  given  surface. 

If  i = 2,  the  level  surface  deviates  from  the  mean  sphere 
by  § of  the  deviation  of  the  bounding  surface.  This  is  the 
case°  of  an  ellipsoidal  boundary  differing  infinitely  little  from 
spherical  figure.  It  may  be  remarked  that,  as  is  proved  readily 
from  § 522,  those  of  the  equipotential  surfaces  relative  to 
a homogeneous  ellipsoid  which  lie  wholly  within  it  are  exact 
ellipsoids,  but  not  so  those  which  cut  its  boundary  or  lie  wholly 
without  it:  these  being  approximately  ellipsoidal  only  when 
the  deviation  from  spherical  figure  is  very  small. 


790.] 


STATICS. 


355 


790.  The  circumstances  for  very  high  orders  are  sufficiently  Harmonic 

# jo  . j spheroidal 

illustrated  if  we  confine  our  attention  to  sectorial  harmonics  [e.vtla  of, 

high  orders. 

(§  781).  The  figure  of  the  line  in  which  a sectorial  harmonic 
spheroid  is  cut  by  any  plane  perpendicular  to  its  polar  axis  is 
[§781  (1)],  as  it  were,  a harmonic  curve  (§  62)  traced  from  a 
circular  instead  of  a straight  line  of  abscissas.  Its  wave  length 
(or  double  length  along  the  line  of  abscissas  from  one  zero  or 
nodal  point  to  the  next  in  order)  will  be  1 /i  of  the  circumference 
of  the  circle.  And  when  i is  very  great,  the  factor  sin'#  makes 
the  sectorial  harmonic  very  small,  except  for  values  of  6 differ- 
ing little  from  a right  angle,  and  therefore  a sectorial  harmonic 
spheroid  of  very  high  order  consists  of  a set  of  parallel  ridges 
and  valleys  perpendicular  to  a great  circle  of  the  globe,  of 
nearly  simple  harmonic  form  in  the  section  by  the  plane  of 
this  circle  (or  equator),  and  diminishing  in  elevation  and 
depression  symmetrically  on  the  two  sides  of  it,  so  as  to  be 
insensible  at  any  considerable  angular  distance  (or  latitude) 
from  it  on  either  side.  The  level  surface  due  to  the  attraction 
of  a homogeneous  solid  of  this  figure  is  a figure  of  the  same 
kind,  but  of  much  smaller  degree  of  elevations  and  depressions, 
that  is,  as  we  have  seen,  only  3/(27+  1)  of  those  of  the  figure  : 
or  approximate^  three  times  the  same  fraction  of  the  inequali- 
ties of  figure  that  the  half-wave  length  is  of  the  circumference 
of  the  globe.  It  is  easily  seen  that  when  i is  very  large  the 
level  surface  at  any  place  will  not  be  sensibly  affected  by  the 
inequalities  in  the  distant  parts  of  the  figure. 

791.  Thus  we  conclude  that,  if  the  substance  of  the  earth  Undulation 
weie  homogeneous,  a set  of  several  parallel  mountain-chains  to  parallel6 
and  valleys  would  produce  an  approximately  corresponding  un-  riffand 
dulation  of  the  level  surface  in  the  middle  district : the  height  Va‘leyS' 

to  which  it  is  raised,  under  each  mountain-crest,  or  drawn  down 
below  the  undisturbed  level,  over  the  middle  of  a valley,  being 
thiee  times  the  same  fraction  of  the  height  of  mountain  above 
or  depth  of  valley  below  mean  level,  that  the  breadth  of  the 
mountain  or  of  the  valley  is  of  the  earth’s  circumference. 

792.  If  the  globe  be  not  homogeneous,  the  disturbance  in 
magnitude  and  direction  of  gravity,  due  to  any  inequality  in 

23—2 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Practical 
conclusions 
as  to  dis- 
turbances of 
sea-level, 
and  amount 
and  direc- 
tion of 
gravity. 


Determin- 
ateness of 
potential 
through 
space  from 
its  value 
over  every 
point  of  a 
surface. 


[702. 


the  figure  of  its  bounding  surface',  will  (§  787)  be  p/a  of  wbat  it 
would  be  if  the  substance  were  homogeneous;  and  further,  it 
may  be  remarked  that,  as  the  disturbances  are  supposed  to  be 
small,  we  may  superimpose  such  as  we  have  now  described,  on 
any  other  small  disturbances,  as,  for  instance,  on  the  general 
oblateiiess  of  the  earth’s  figure,  with  which  we  shall  be  occupied 
presently. 

Practically,  then,  as  the  density  of  the  upper  crust  is  some- 
where about  | the  earth’s  mean  density,  we  may  say  that  the 
effect  on  the  level  surface,  due  to  a set  of  parallel  mountain- 
chains  and  valleys,  is,  of  the  general  character  explained  in 
§ 791,  but  of  half  the  amounts  there  stated.  Thus,  for  instance, 
a set  of  several  broad  mountain-chains  and  valleys  twenty 
nautical  miles  from  crest  to  crest,  or  hollow  to  hollow,  and  of 
several  times  twenty  miles  extent  along  the  crests  and  hollows, 
and  7,200  feet  vertical  height  from  hollow  to  crest,  would 
raise  and  lower  the  level  by  2|  feet  above  and  below  what 
it  would  be  were  the  surface  levelled  by  removing  the  elevated 
matter  and  filling  the  valleys  with  it. 

793.  Green’s  theorem  [App.  A.  (e)]*  and  Gauss’s  theorem 
(§  497)  show  that  if  the  potential  of  any  distribution  of  matter, 
attracting  according  to  the  Newtonian  law,  be  given  for  every 
point  of  a surface  completely  enclosing  this  matter,  the  poten- 
tial, and  therefore  also  the  force,  is  determined  throughout  all 
space  external  to  the  bounding  surface  of  the  matter,  whether 
this  surface  consist  of  any  number  of  isolated  closed  surfaces, 
each  simply  continuous,  or  of  a single  one.  It  need  scarcely 
be  said  that  no  general  solution  of  the  problem  has  been  ob- 
tained. But  further,  even  in  cases  in  which  the  potential  has 
been  fully  determined  for  the  space  outside  the  surface  over 
which  it  is  given,  mathematical  analysis  has  hitherto  faded  to 
determine  it  through  the  whole  space  between  this  surface  and 
the  attracting  mass  within  it.  We  hope  to  return,  m later 


* First  apply  Green’s  theorem  to  the  surface  over  which  the  potential  is 
given.  Then  Gauss’s  theorem  shows  that  there  cannot  be  two  distributions  of 
potential  agreeing  through  all  space  external  to  this  surface,  but  differing  for 
any  part  of  the  space  between  it  and  the  bounding  surface  of  the  matter. 


STATICS. 


357 


’93.] 


volumes,  to  the  grand  problem  suggested  by  Gauss’s  theorem 
of  § 497.  Meantime,  we  restrict  ourselves  to  questions  practi- 
cally useful  for  physical  geography. 


Example  (1) — Let  the  enclosing  surface  be  spherical,  of  radius 
a ) and  let  F (0,  <f>)  be  the  given  potential  at  any  point  of  it, 
specified  in  the  usual  manner  by  the  polar  co-ordinates  0,  cf). 
Green’s  solution  [§  499  (3)  and  App.  B.  (46)]  of  his  problem  for 
the  spherical  surface  is  immediately  applicable  to  part  of  our 
present  problem,  and  gives 

J_  r2*n r (r3—a*)F(6',  <ft')r3sinflW<fo' 

4tt  aj0  Jo  fr*-  2ar  [cos  6 cos  6'+  sin  6 sin  & cos  (<f>- cf}')]  +a2}^ 

for  the  potential  at  any  point  (r,  0,  cf>)  external  to  the  spherical 
surface.  But  inasmuch  as  Laplace’s  equation  \/2u  — 0 is  satisfied 
through  the  whole  internal  space  as  well  as  the  whole  external 
space  by  the  expression  (46)  of  App.  B.,  and  in  our  present  pro- 
blem v2L=  0 is  only  satisfied  [§  491  (c)]  for  that  part  of  the  in- 
ternal space  which  is  not  occupied  by  matter,  the  expression  (3) 
gives  the  solution  for  the  exterior  space  only.  When  F (6,  <£)  is 
such  that  an  expression  can  be  found  for  the  definite  integral  in 
finite  terms,  this  expression  is  necessarily  the  solution  of  our  pro- 
blem through  all  space  exterior  to  the  actual  attracting  body.  Or 
when  F(0,  (f>)  is  such  that  the  definite  integral,  (3),  can  be  trans- 
formed into  some  definite  integral  which  varies  continuously  across 
the  whole  or  across  some  part  of  the  spherical  surface,  this  other 
integral  will  cany  the  solution  through  some  part  of  the  interior 
space : that  is,  through  as  much  of  it  as  can  be  reached  without 
discontinuity  (infinite  elements)  of  the  integral,  and  without 
meeting  any  part  of  the  actual  attracting  mass.  To  this  subject 
we  hope  to  return  later  in  connexion  with  Gauss’s  theorem 
(§  497) ) but  for  our  present  purpose  it  is  convenient  to  expand 
(3)  in  ascending  powers  of  a/r,  as  before  in  App.  B.  (s).  The 
result  [App.  B.  (51)]  is 

m *)  + *)  + (“)>,(«,  *)  + etc.  (3  bis) 

where  F0(6,  <f>),  Fx{6 , <£),  etc.,  are  the  successive  terms  of  the 
expansion  [App.  B.  (52)]  of  F (0,  cf))  in  spherical  surface  har- 


Determina- 
tion  of 
potential 
from  its 
value  over 
a spherical 
surface  en- 
closing the 
mass. 


358 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[793. 


Determina- 
tion of 
potential 
from  its 
value  over 
a spherical 
surface  en- 
closing the 
mass. 


Determina- 
tion of 
potential 
from  the 
form  of  an 
approxi- 
mately 
spherical 
equipoten- 
tial  surface 
round  the 
mass. 


monies ; the  general  term  being  given  by  the  formula 


^(0,  *)  = 


2 i+  1 

4-7T 


QiF{Q <f/)  svn6,d0'd<ji....(i)i 


where  Qt  is  the  function  of  (6,  <f>)  ( 6 ',  <j>')  expressed  by  App 
B.  (61). 


In  any  case  in  which  the  actual  attracting  matter  lies  all  within 
an  interim  concentnc  spherical  surface  of  radius  a! , the  harmonic 
expansion  of  F (0,  cf>)  must  be  at  least  as  convergent  as  the 
geometrical  series 


a 

a 


etc. ; 


and  therefore  (3  bis)  will  be  convergent  for  every  value  of  r 
exceeding  a',  and  will  consequently  continue  the  solution  into 
the  interior  at  least  as  far  as  this  second  spherical  surface. 


Example  (2) — Let  the  attracting  mass  be  approximately 
centrobaric  (§  534),  and  let  one  equipotential  surface  completely 
enclosing  it  be  given.  It  is  required  to  find  the  distribution  of 
force  and  potential  through  all  space  external  to  the  smallest 
spherical  surface ‘that  can  be  drawn  round  it  from  its  centre  of 
gravity  as  centre.  Let  a be  an  approximate  or  mean  radius ; 
and,  taking  the  origin  of  co-ordinates  exactly  coincident  with 
the  centre  of  inertia  (§  230),  let 

r = a[l+F(6,  <£)] (5) 

be  the  polar  equation  of  the  surface ; F being  for  all  values  of 
6 and  so  small  that  we  may  neglect  its  square  and  higher 
powers.  Consider  now  two  proximate  points  (r,  0,  4>)  (a,  6,  cf>). 
The  distance  between  them  is  aF  (0,  <£)  and  is  in  the  direction 
through  0,  the  origin  of  co-ordinates.  And  if  M be  the  whole 
mass,  the  resultant  force  at  any  point  of  this  line  is  approximately 
equal  to  Mfa2  and  is  along  this  line.  Hence  the  difference  of  po- 
tentials (§  486)  between  them  is  MF  (0,  <f>)/a.  And  if  a be  the 
proper  mean  radius,  the  constant  value  of  the  potential  at  the 
given  surface  (5)  will  be  precisely  M/a.  Hence,  to  a degree  of 
approximation  consistent  with  neglecting  squares  of  F (6,  cf>),  the 
potential  at  the  point  (a,  6,  cf>)  will  be 


STATICS. 


350 


93.] 


Hence  the  problem  is  reduced  to  that  of  the  previous  example  . 
and  remarking  that  the  part  of  its  solution  depending  on  the  terra  potential 
M/a  of  (6)  is  of  course  simply  M/r,  we  have,  by  (3  bis),  for  the  form^of  an 
potential  now  required, 


U=M^  + ^Fx(d,  4>)  + ^Fs(e’  4>)  + etc-} (7) 


approxi- 
mately 
spherical 
equi  poten- 
tial surface 
round  the 
mass. 


where  Fi  is  given  by  (4).  Fn  is  zero  in  virtue  of  a being  the 
proper  mean  radius;  the  equation  expressing  this  condition 

being  JJF(9,  (f>)  sin  9d9d(f>  = 0 (8). 

If  further  0 be  chosen  in  a proper  mean  position,  that  is  to  say, 
such  that  ff  Q^F  ( 9 , 0)  sin  9d9d<\>  = 0 (9) 

F1  vanishes  and  [§  539  (12)]  0 is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
attracting  mass;  and  the  harmonic  expansion  of  F (6,  </>)  becomes 

F(9,  *)  = F2  (9,  <f>)  + F 3 (9,  <f>)  + F4  (9,  <f>)  + etc (10). 


If  a be  the  radius  of  the  smallest  spherical  surface  having  0 for 
centre  and  enclosing  the  whole  of  the  actual  mass,  the  series  (7) 
necessarily  converges  for  all  values  of  9 and  <£,  at  least  as  rapidly 
as  the  geometrical  series 


+ etc. 


(11) 


for  every  value  of  r exceeding  a.  Hence  (7)  expresses  the 
solution  of  our  present  particular  problem.  It  may  carry  it  even 
further  inwards  ; as  the  given  surface  (6)  may  be  such  that  the 
harmonic  expansion  (10)  converges  more  rapidly  than  the  series 


a faV  ( a\ 

-1 1-  ( - ) + ( — ) + etc. 

a \aj  \aj 


The  direction  and  magnitude  of  the  resultant  force  are  of  Resultant 

force* 

course  [§§  486,  491]  deducible  immediately  from  (7)  throughout 
the  space  through  which  this  expression  is  applicable,  that  is  all 
space  through  which  it  converges  that  can  be  reached  from  the 
given  surface  without  passing  through  any  part  of  the  actual 
attracting  mass.  It  is  important  to  remark  that  as  the  resultant 
force  deviates  from  the  radial  direction  by  angles  of  the  same 
order  of  small  quantities  as  F (9,  <f>),  its  magnitude  will  differ 
from  the  radial  component  by  small  quantities  of  the  same  order 
as  the  square  of  this:  and  therefore,  consistently  with  our  degree 


3fi0 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[793. 


Resultant 

force. 


of  approximation,  if  R denote  the  magnitude  of  the  resultant  force 


F2{6,  <£)  4-  4 


For  the  resultant  force  at  any  point  of  the  spherical  surface 
agreeing  most  nearly  with  the  given  surface  we  put  in  this  for- 
mula r — a,  and  find 


+ <f>)  + Wa(°>  4>)+etc.} (13). 

And  at  the  point  ( r , 0,  <f>)  of  the  given  surface  we  have  r = a 
nearly  enough  for  our  approximation,  in  all  terms  except  the 
first,  of  the  series  (12):  but  in  the  first  term,  Mir 2,  we  must  put 
r = a {1  + F (6,  <£)};  so  that  it  becomes 


M _ M 
r 2 ~ a2{l  + F (6,  <£)}2 


M M 

= -2{!  - 2 F(0,  <f>)}  = -2  {1  - 2 [Fs  (6,  Q + etc.]}.. .(14), 


Resultant 
force  at  any 
point  of  ap- 
proximately 
spherical 
level  sur- 
face, for 
gravity 
alone. 


and  we  find  for  the  normal  resultant  force  at  the  point  (6,  <£)  of 
the  given  approximately  spherical  equipotential  surface 

M 

{1  + («,  ■*•)  + 2-F, (0,  *)  + 3 Ft(0,  i>)+...} (15). 

Taking  for  simplicity  one  term,  F{,  alone,  in  the  expansion  of 
F,  and  considering,  by  aid  of  App.  B.  (38),  (40),  ( p ),  and 
§§  77 9... 78 4,  the  character  of  spherical  surface  harmonics,  we 
see  that  the  maximum  deviation  of  the  normal  to  the  surface 


r = a{l  + ^.(0,  <£)}  (16) 

from  the  radial  direction  is,  in  circular  measure  (§  404),  just  i 
times  the  half  range  from  minimum  to  maximum  in  the  values  of 
Ft  (6,  <£)  for  all  harmonics  of  the  second  order  (case  i = 2),  and 
for  all  sectorial  harmonics  (§781)  of  every  order;  and  that 
it  is  approximately  so  for  the  equatorial  regions  of  all  zonal 
harmonics  of  very  high  order.  Also,  for  harmonics  of  high 
order  contiguous  maxima  and  minima  are  approximately  equal. 
We  conclude  that 


794.  If  a level  surface  (§  487),  enclosing  a mass  attracting 
according  to  the  Newtonian  law,  deviate  from  an  approximately 
spherical  figure  by  a pure  harmonic  undulation  (§  779)  of  order 
i;  the  amount  of  the  force  of  gravity  at  any  point  of  it  will  ex- 
ceed the  mean  amount  by  i — 1 times  the  very  small  fraction  by 


STATICS. 


SGI 


704.] 


which  the  distance  of  that  point  of  it  from  the  centre  exceeds 
the  mean  radius.  The  maximum  inclination  of  the  resultant 
force  to  the  true  radial  direction,  reckoned  in  fraction  of  the 
unit  angle  570,3  (§  404)  is,  for  harmonic  deviations  of  the 
second  order,  equal  to  the  ratio  which  the  whole  range  from 
minimum  to  maximum  bears  to  the  mean  magnitude.  For 
the  class  described  above  under  the  designation  of  sectorial 
harmonics,  of  whatever  order,  i,  the  maximum  deviation  in 
direction  bears  to  the  proportionate  deviation  in  magnitude 
from  the  mean  magnitude,  exactly  the  ratio  i/(i—  1) ; and 
approximately  the  ratio  of  equality  for  zonal  harmonics  of  high 
orders. 


Example,  (3). — The  attracting  mass  being  still  approximately 
centrobaric,  let  it  rotate  with  angular  velocity  a>  round  OZ,  and 
let  one  of  the  level  surfaces  (§  487)  completely  enclosing  it  be 
expressed  by  (5),  § 793.  The  potential  of  centrifugal  force 
(§§  800,  813),  will  be  >2(x2+y2),  or,  in  solid  spherical  har- 
monics, (*s  + y2  — 2z2). 

This  for  any  point  of  the  given  surface  (5)  to  the  degree  of  Resultant 
J 1 v ' force  at  any 

approximation  to  which  we  are  bound,  is  equal  to  point  of  ap- 

proximately 

-ara"  + \ui2a2  (-g-  — COS"  6 ) ) level  surface 

for  gravity 

which,  added  to  the  gravitation  potential  at  each  point  of  this  fugailorce. 
surface,  must  make  up  a constant  sum.  Hence  the  gravitation 
potential  at  ( 9 , c fi)  of  the  given  surface  (5)  is  equakto 


(z~co&2  0); 

Go 

and  therefore,  all  other  circumstances  and  notation  being  as  in 
Example  2 (§  793),  we  now  have  instead  of  (6)  for  gravitation 
potential  at  ( a , 6,  <f>),  the  following : 


M M 

. — 4-  — 
a a 


F (6,  cf>)  - - cos s6) 


(16). 


Hence,  choosing  the  position  of  0,  and  the  magnitude  of  a,  ac- 
cording to  (9)  and  (8),  we  now  have,  instead  of  (7),  for  the 
potential  of  pure  gravitation,  at  any  point  (r,  6,  <£), 


v-uh  + 


^ IT 2 (0.  0)  - (£  - °os20)]  + ^ Fs  (6,  0)  + ...  j (17), 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[794. 


362 


where  m denotes  M/M,  or  the  ratio  of  centrifugal  force  at  the 
equator,  to  pure  gravity  at  the  mean  distance  a.  The  force  of 
pure  gravity  at  the  point  (0,  cf>)  of  the  given  surface  (5)  is  conse- 
quently expressed  by  the  following  formula  instead  of  (15): 

fugal  force.  M 

^{1  + Fa(0,  <f>)  - 3 (i  - cos2  6)  + 2 Fa  (6,  <j>)  + 3 F4(6,  </>)  + ...}...(18). 

4iom  this  must  be  subtracted  the  radial  component  of  the  centri- 
fugal force,  which  is  (in  harmonics) 

f oj2a  + to 2 ci  Q-  - cos20), 

to  find  the  whole  amount  of  the  resultant  force,  g (apparent 
gravity),  normal  to  the  given  surface:  and  therefore 
M 

9 = tf{1-*™+FM$)-^-cos26)  + 2F3(d,cf>)+3Fi(0,cj>)  + ...}(l9). 

If  in  a particular  case  we  have 

Ft  (#,  </>)  = 0,  except  for  i = 2 ; and  F2  ( 6 , <£)  = e (£  - cos20) : 
this  becomes 

M 

9 — ~^2  { 1 — %'M'  ~ (‘2^®  ~ e)  (^  — cos"  0)[ (20). 


Resultant 
force  at  any 
point  of  ap- 
proximately 
spherical 
level  surface 
for  gravity 
and  centri- 


Clairaut’s 

theorems. 


795.  Hence  if  outside  a rotating  solid  the  lines  of  resultant 
force  of  gravitation  and  centrifugal  force  are  cut  at  right  angles 
by  an  elliptic  spheroid*  symmetrical  round  the  axis  of  rotation, 
the  amount  of  the  resultant  differs  from  point  to  point  of  this 
surface  as  the  square  of  the  sine  of  the  latitude:  and  the  excess 
of  the  polar  resultant  above  the  equatorial  bears  to  the  whole 
amount  of  either  a ratio  which  added  to  the  ellipticity  of  the 
figure  is  equal  to  two  and  a half  times  the  ratio  of  equatorial 
centrifugal  force  to  gravity. 

For  the  case  of  a rotating  fluid  mass,  or  solid  with  density 
distributed  as  if  fluid,  these  conclusions,  of  which  the  second 
is  now  generally  known  as  Clairaut’s  theorem,  were  first  dis- 
covered by  Clairaut,  and  published  in  1743  in  his  celebrated 
treatise  La  Figure  de  la  Terre.  Laplace  extended  them  by 
proving  the  formula  (19)  of  § 794  for  any  solid  consisting 


* Following  the  best  French  writers,  we  use  the  term  spheroid  to  designate 
any  surface  differing  very  little  from  spherical  figure.  The  commoner  English 
usage  of  confining  it  to  an  ellipsoid  symmetrical  round  an  axis,  and  of  extend- 
ing it  to  such  figures  though  not  approximately  spherical  is  bad. 


STATICS. 


363 


795.] 


of  approximately  spherical  layers  of  equal  density.  Ulti- 
mately  Stokes*  pointed  out  that,  only  provided  the  surfaces  of 
equilibrium  relative  to  gravitation  alone,  and  relative  to  the 
resultant  of  gravitation  and  centrifugal  force,  are  approximately 
spherical ; whether  the  surfaces  of  equal  density  are  approxi- 
mately spherical  or  not,  the  same  expression  (19)  holds.  A 
most  important  practical  deduction  from  this  conclusion  is  that,  Fjsure  of^ 
irrespectively  of  any  supposition  regarding  the  distribution  of  determm- 
the  earth’s  density,  the  true  figure  of  the  sea  level  can  be  ™^r0ef' 
determined  from  pendulum  observations  alone,  without  any  gravity; 
hypothesis  as  to  the  interior  condition  of  the  solid. 


Let,  for  brevity, 

ff{l+lm(%-cosz6)}=f(d,  cf>)  (21) 

where  m (§  801)  is  --q-,  and  g is  known  by  observation  in  differ- 
ent localities,  with  reduction  to  the  sea  level  according  to  the 
square  of  the  distance  from  the  earth’s  centre  (not  according  to 
Young’s  rule).  Let  the  expansion  of  this  in  spherical  surface 
harmonics  be 


f(8,  <£)  =/0  +/»  (0,  4>)  +A  (0,  <t>)  + etc (22)- 

We  have,  by  (19), 

Ft(e,4,)  = l^^ (23), 

and  therefore  the  equation  (5)  of  the  level  surface  becomes 

r = « I1  + j (0,  4)  +■  if, b (e>  <f>)  + etc-]}  (24)- 

Confining  our  attention  for  a moment  to  the  first  two  terms  we 
have  for  f2,  by  App.  B.  (38),  explicitly 

/2  ( 0 , <f>)  = A 0 (cos20  - $)  4-  (A1  cos  <p  + B1  sin  (p)  sin  0 cos  0 + (.42  cos  2 <p  + B„  sin  2 <f>)  sins0...  (25). 

Substituting  in  (24)  squared,  putting 

cos  6 — - , sin  6 cos  <f>  = - , sin  6 sin  <b  — — , 
r r r 

and  reducing  to  a convenient  form,  we  find 


(/o  + hAo  - At)^+  (fo  + iA  0 + Az)y‘1+  ifo  - Uo)  & - B\VZ  - Aiz*  - 2 B2xy  =/0a3..(26). 


“On  the  Variation  of  Gravity  at  the  surface  of  the  Earth.” — Trans,  of  the 
Camb.  Phil.  Soc.,  1849. 


364 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


if  ellipsoid 
with  three 
unequal 
axes  must 
have  oue  of 
them  coin- 
cident with 
axis  of 
revolution. 


[795. 


Now  from  §§  539,  534,  we  see  that,  if  OX,  OY,  OZ  are 
principal  axes  of  inertia,  the  terms  of  fa  which,  expressed  in 
rectangular  co-ordinates,  involve  the  products  yz,  zx,  xy  must 
disappear:  that  is  to  say,  we  must  have  Bx  = 0,  d,  = 0,  B =0. 
But  whether  B2  vanishes  or  not,  if  OZ  is  a principal  axis  we 
must  have  both  Ax  = 0 and  Bx  = 0;  which  therefore  is  the  case, 
to  a very  minute  accuracy,  if  we  choose  for  OZ  the  average 
axis  of  the  earth’s  rotation,  as  will  be  proved  in  Yol.  il,  on  the 
assumption  rendered  probable  by  the  reasons  adduced  below, 
that  the  earth  experiences  little  or  no  sensible  disturbance  in  its 
motion  from  want  of  perfect  rigidity.  Hence  the  expansion  (22) 
is  reduced  to 


/( 6,  <f>)  = /0 + A 0 (cos2  0 - \)  + (.4  2 cos  2 <£  + Bz  sin  2 cj>)  sin2  6 +/3  (0,  cf>) + etc. . . . (2  7 ) . 

If  f3  (0,  <f>)  and  higher  terms  are  neglected  the  sea  level  is  an 
ellipsoid,  of  which  one  axis  must  coincide  with  the  axis  of  the 
earth’s  rotation.  And,  denoting  by  e the  mean  ellipticity  of 
meridional  sections,  e the  ellipticity  of  the  equatorial  section, 
and  I the  inclination  of  one  of  its  axes  to  OX,  we  have 


e = 


, + 
6 /. 


/ = ^ tan 


In  general,  the  constants  of  the  expansion  (22);  f0  (being  the 
mean  force  of  gravity),  A0,  A2,  B2,  the  seven  coefficients  in 
f3(0,  <f>),  the  nine  in  f4(0,  </>),  and  so  on;  are  to  be  determined 
from  sufficiently  numerous  and  wide-spread  observations  of  the 
amount  of  gravity. 

Figure  of  796.  A first  approximate  result  thus  derived  from  pendu- 
d«tennin-Ve*  lum  observations  and  confirmed  by  direct  geodetic  measure- 
measure-  ments  is  that  the  figure  of  the  sea  level  approximates  to  an 

gravity;  oblate  spheroid  of  revolution  of  ellipticity  about  Both 

methods  are  largely  affected  by  local  irregularities  of  the 
solid  surface  and  underground  density,  to  the  elimination  of 
which  a vast  amount  of  labour  and  mathematical  ability  ha\e 
been  applied,  with  as  yet  but  partial  success.  Considering  the 
general  disposition  of  the  great  tracts  of  land  and  ocean,  we 
can  scarcely  doubt  that  a careful  reduction  of  the  numeious 
accurate  pendulum  observations  that  have  been  made  in  locali- 


STATICS. 


365 


796.] 


ties  widely  spread  over  the  earth*  will  lead  to  the  determine 
tion  of  an  ellipsoid  with  three  unequal  axes  coinciding  more  determm- 
nearly  on  the  whole  with  the  true  figure  of  the  sea  level  than  measure- 
does  any  spheroid  of  revolution.  Until  this  has  been  either  ac- 
complished  or  proved  impracticable  it  would  be  vain  to  specu- 
late  as  to  the  possibility  of  obtaining,  from  attainable  data,  a lanties- 
yet  closer  approximation  by  introducing  a harmonic  of  the  thiid 
order  [/3(0,  <j>)  in  (27)].  But  there  is  little  probability  that 
harmonics  of  the  fourth  or  higher  orders  will  ever  be  found 
useful : and  local  quadratures,  after  the  example  fiist  set  by 
Maskelyne  in  his  investigation  of  the  disturbance  produced  by 
Schehallien,  must  be  resorted  to  in  order  to  interpret  irregulari- 
ties in  particular  districts ; whether  of  the  amount  of  gravity 
shown  by  the  pendulum  ; or  of  its  direction,  by  geodetic  observa- 
tion. We  would  only  remark  here,  that  the  problems  presented 
by  such  local  quadratures  with  reference  to  the  amount  of  gravity 
seem  about  as  much  easier  and  simpler  than  those  with  refer- 
ence to  its  direction  as  pendulum  observations  are  than  geodetic 
measurements : and  that  we  expect  much  more  knowledge  re- 
garding the  true  figure  of  the  sea  level  from  the  former  than 
from  the  latter,  although  it  is  to  the  reduction  of  the  latter 
that  the  most  laborious  efforts  have  been  hitherto  applied.  We 
intend  to  return  to  this  subject  in  Yol.  II.  in  explaining,  under 
Properties  of  Matter,  the  practical  foundation  of  our  knowledge 
of  gravity. 


797.  Since  1860  geodetic  work  of  extreme  importance  has  Results  of 

” geodesy* 

been  in  progress,  through  the  co-operation  of  the  Govern- 
ments of  Prussia,  Russia,  Belgium,  France,  and  England,  in 
connecting  the  triangulation  of  France,  Belgium,  Russia,  and 
Prussia,  which  were  sufficiently  advanced  for  the  purpose  in 
1860,  with  the  principal  triangulation  of  Great  Britain  and 


* In  1672,  a pendulum  conveyed  by  Richer  from  Paris  to  Cayenne  first 
proved  variation  of  gravity.  Captain  Eater  and  Dr  Thomas  Young,  Trans.  R.  S., 
1819.  Biot,  Arago,  Mathieu,  Bouvard,  and  Chaix ; Base  du  Systeme  Metrique, 
Vol.  in.,  Paris,  1821.  Captain  Edward  Sabine,  R.E.,  “Experiments  to  deter- 
mine the  Figure  of  the  Earth  by  means  of  the  Pendulum;”  published  for  the 
Board  of  Longitude,  London,  1825.  Stokes  “On  the  Variation  of  Gravity  at  the 
Surface  of  the  Earth.” — Camb,  Phil.  Trans.,  1849. 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


366 


[797. 


Ireland,  which  had  been  finished  in  1851.  With  reference 
to  this  work,  General  Sir  Henry  James  made  the  following 
remarks “ Before  the  connexion  of  the  triangulation  of  the 
“ several  countries  into  one  great  network  of  triangles  extend- 
ing across  the  entire  breadth  of  Europe,  and  before  the  dis- 
covery of  the  Electric  Telegraph,  and  its  extension  from 
“ Valentia  (Ireland)  to  the  Ural  mountains,  it  was  not  possible 
to  execute  so  vast  an  undertaking  as  that  which  is  now  in 
“progress.  It  is,  in  fact,  a work  which  could  not  possibly 
“have  been  executed  at  any  earlier  period  in  the  history 
“of  the  world.  The  exact  determination  of  the  Figure  and 
Dimensions  of  the  Earth  has  been  one  great  aim  of  astrono- 
“mers  for  upwards  of  two  thousand  years;  and  it  is  fortunate 
that  we  live  in  a time  when  men  are  so  enlightened  as  to 
combine  their  labours  to  effect  an  object  which  is  desired  by  all, 
and  at  the  first  moment  when  it  was  possible  to  execute  it.” 


For  yet  a short  time,  however,  we  must  be  contented  with 
the  results  derived  from  the  recent  British  Triangulation,  with 
the  separate  measurements  of  arcs  of  meridians  in  Peru,  France, 
Prussia,  Russia,  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  India.  The  investiga- 
tion of  the  ellipsoid  of  revolution  agreeing  most  nearly  with 
the  sea  level  for  the  whole  Earth,  has  been  carried  out  with 
remarkable  skill  by  Captain  (now  Colonel)  A.  B.  Clarke,  RE., 
and  published  in  1858,  by  order  of  the  Master  General  and 
Board  of  Ordnance  (in  a volume  of  780  pages,  quarto,  almost 
every  page  of  which  is  a record  of  a vast  amount  of  skilled 
labour).  The  following  account  of  conclusions  subsequently 
worked  out  regarding  the  ellipsoid  of  three  unequal  axes  most 
nearly  agreeing  with  the  sea  level,  is  extracted  from  the  preface 
to  another  volume  recently  published  as  one  item  of  the  great 
work  of  comparison  with  the  recent  triangulations  of  other 
countries  * : — 


“In  computing  the  figures  of  the  meridians  and  of  the 


* “ Comparisons  of  the  Standards  of  Length  of  England,  France,  Belgium, 
Prussia,  Russia,  India,  Australia,  made  at  the  Ordnance  Survey  Office,  South- 
ampton, by  Captain  A.  R.  Clarke,  R.E.,  under  the  direction  of  Colonel  Sir 
Henry  James,  R.E.,  F.R.  S.”  Published  by  order  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for 
War,  1806. 


STATICS. 


367 


707.] 


“equator  for  the  several  measured  arcs  of  meridian,  it  is  found  ^suitsof 
“that  the  equator  is  slightly  elliptical,  having  the  longer 
“diameter  of  the  ellipse  in  15°  34'  east  longitude.  In  the 
“eastern  hemisphere  the  meridian  of  15°  34'  passes  through 
“ Spitzbergen,  a little  to  the  west  of  Vienna,  through  the  Straits 
“ of  Messina,  through  Lake  Chad  in  North  Africa,  and  along 
“ the  west  coast  of  South  Africa,  nearly  corresponding  to  the 
“ meridian  which  passes  over  the  greatest  quantity  of  land  in 
“that  hemisphere.  In  the  western  hemisphere  this  meridian 
“ passes  through  Behring’s  Straits  and  through  the  centre  of  the 
“Pacific  Ocean,  nearly  corresponding  to  the  meridian  which 
“passes  over  the  greatest  quantity  of  water  of  that  hemi- 
“ sphere. 

“The  meridian  of  105°  34'  passes  near  North-East  Cape,  in 
“ the  Arctic  Sea,  through  Tonquin  and  the  Straits  of  Sunda,  and 
“'corresponds  nearly  to  the  meridian  which  passes  over  the 
“ greatest  quantity  of  land  in  Asia ; and  in  the  western  herni- 
“ sphere  it  passes  through  Smith’s  Sound  in  Behring’s  Straits, 

“near  Montreal,  near  New  York,  between  Cuba  and  St  Do- 
“ mingo,  and  close  along  the  western  coast  of  South  America, 

“ corresponding  nearly  to  the  meridian  passing  over  the  greatest 
“ amount  of  land  in  the  western  hemisphere. 

“ These  meridians,  therefore,  correspond  with  the  most  re- 
“ markable  physical  features  of  the  globe. 

• . Feet. 

“ The  longest  semi-diameter  of  the  equatorial  ellipse  is  20926350 

“ And  the  shortest  20919972 

“Giving  an  ellipticity  of  the  equator  equal  to  S__  • 


Fourteen  years  later  Colonel  Clarke  corrected  this  result  in 
the  following  statement*:  “But  these  are  affected  by  the  error 

* Extracted  from  pages  308,  309  of  “Geodesy,”  by  Col.  A.  R.  Clarke,  C.B. 
Oxford.  1880. 


“ The  polar  semi-diameter  is  equal  to  

“ The  maximum  and  minimum  polar  compressions 


20853429 


are  


“ Or  a mean  compression  of  very  closely 


i » 

300  ' 


368 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


1r 


\ 


I 


Results  of 
geodesy. 


[797. 

“ in  the  southern  half  of  the  old  Indian  arc.  A revision  of  this 
“ calculation,  based  on  the  revision  and  extension  of  the  Indian 
“ geodetic  operations,  is  to  be  found  in  the  Philosophical  Macja- 
“ zine  for  August,  1878,  resulting  in  the  following  numbers : 

“ Major  semi-axis  of  equator  (long.  8°.15'  W.)  a = 20926629 
“Minor  semi-axis  „ (long.  81°.45'  W.)  6 = 20925105 
“ Polar  semi-axis  „ c = 20854477 

“ The  meridian  of  the  greater  equatorial  diameter  thus  passes 
“ through  Ireland  and  Portugal,  cutting  off  a small  bit  of  the 
“north-west  corner  of  Africa:  in  the  opposite  hemisphere  this 
meridian  cuts  off  the  north-east  corner  of  Asia  and  passes 
through  the  southern  island  of  New  Zealand.  The  meridian 
containing  the  smaller  diameter  of  the  equator  passes  through 
Ceylon  on  the  one  side  of  the  earth  and  bisects  North 
America  on  the  other.  This  position  of  the  axes,  brought  out 
by  a very  lengthened  calculation,  certainly  corresponds  very 
remarkably  with  the  physical  features  of  the  globe — the  dis- 
tribution of  land  and  water  on  its  surface.  On  the  ellipsoidal 
theory  of  the  earth’s  figure,  small  as  is  the  difference  between 
the  two  diameters  of  the  equator,  the  Indian  longitudes  are 
much  better  represented  than  by  a surface  of  revolution.  But 
it  is  nevertheless  necessary  to  guard  against  an  impression 
that  the  figure  of  the  equator  is  thus  definitely  fixed,  for  the 
available  data  are  far  too  slender  to  warrant  such  a con- 
clusion.” 

Colonel  Clarke  had  previously  found  (“  Account  of  Principal 
Triangulation,”  1858)  for  the  spheroid  of  revolution  most  nearly 
representing  the  same  set  of  observations,  the  following  : — 

Equatorial  semi-axis  = a = 20926062  feet, 

Polar  semi-axis  = c = 20855121  feet ; 

a — c 1 


, c 293-98  > 
whence  - - 2y4.y8  > 


and  ellipticity  = 


a 


294-98  ‘ 


Colonel  Clarke’s  twenty-two  years’  labours,  from  1858  to 
1880,  have  led  him  to  but  very  small  corrections  on  these 
results.  In  his  “Geodesy,”  page  319,  he  gives  the  following  as 


797.] 


STATICS. 


3G9 

the  most  probable  lengths  of  the  polar  semi-axis  and  of  the  Results  of 

A ^ ^ . geodesy. 

mean  equatorial  semi-axis  of  the  terrestrial  spheroid  so  far  as 
all  observations  and  comparisons  of  standards  up  to  1880  have 
allowed  him  to  judge  : 

a = 20926202, 
c = 20854895, 

and  their  ratio 


c _ 292'465 
a 293465 


, and  ellipticity 


1 

293-465  * 


798.  As  an  instructive  example  of  the  elementary  principles  Hydrostatic 
of  fluid  equilibrium,  useful  also  because  it  includes  the  cele-  resumed, 
brated  hydrostatic  theories  of  the  Tides  and  of  the  Figure  of 
the  Earth,  let  us  suppose  a finite  mass  of  heterogeneous  incom- 
pressible fluid  resting  on  a rigid  spherical  shell  or  solid  sphere, 
under  the  influence  of  mutual  gravitation  between  its  parts, 
and  of  the  attraction  of  the  core  supposed  symmetrical ; to  be 
slightly  disturbed  by  any  attracting  masses  fixed  either  in  the 
core  or  outside  the  fluid ; or  by  force  fulfilling  any  imaginable 
law,  subject  only  to  the  condition  of  being  a conservative 
system ; or  by  centrifugal  force. 

First  we  may  remark  that  were  there  no  such  disturbance 
the  fluid  would  come  to  rest  in  concentric  spherical  layers 
of  equal  density,  the  denser  towards  the  centre,  this  last 
characteristic  being  essential  for  stability,  which  clearly  re- 
quires also  that  the  mean  density  of  the  nucleus  shall  be  not 
less  than  that  of  the  layer  of  fluid  next  it ; otherwise  the 
nucleus  would,  as  it  were,  float  up  from  the  centre,  and  either 
piotrude  from  the  fluid  at  one  side,  or  (if  the  gradation  of 
density  in  the  fluid  permits)  rest  in  an  eccentric  position 
completely  covered;  fulfilling  in  either  case  the.  condition 
(§  /62)  for  the  equilibrium  of  floating  bodies. 

799.  The  effect  of  the  disturbing  force  could  be  at  cnce  No  mutual 
found  without  analysis  if  there  were  no  mutual  attraction  tween  por- 
between  parts  of  the  fluid,  so  that  the  influence  tending  to  £? the 
maintain  the  spherical  figure  would  be  simply  the  symmetrical 
attraction  of  the  fixed  core.  For  the  equipotential  surfaces 
^ II-  24 


No  mutual 
force  be- 
tween por- 
tions of  the 
liquid: 


Example(l). 


370  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [790. 

would  then  be  known  (as  directly  implied  by  the  data),  and 
the  fluid  would  (§  750)  arrange  itself  in  layers  of  equal  density 
defined  by  these  surfaces. 


800.  Examples  o/§  799. — (1)  Let  the  nucleus  act  according 
to  the  Newtonian  law,  and  be  either  symmetrical  round  a point, 
or  (§  534)  of  any  other  centrobaric  arrangement ; and  let  the 
disturbing  influence  be  centrifugal  force.  In  Vol.  II.  it  will 
appear,  as  an  immediate  consequence  from  the  elementary 
dynamics  of  circular  motion,  that  kinetic  equilibrium  under 
centrifugal  force  in  any  case  will  be  the  same  as  the  static 
equilibrium  of  the  imaginary  case  in  which  the  same  material 
system  is  at  rest,  but  influenced  by  repulsion  from  the  axis  in 
simple  proportion  to  distance. 


If  z be  the  axis  of  rotation,  and  oj  the  angular  velocity,  the 
components  of  centrifugal  force  (§§  32,  35a,  259)  are  o)2x  and 
<i/>/.  Hence  the  potential  of  centrifugal  force  is 

K (x2  + y% 


reckoned  from  zero  at  the  axis,  and  increasing  in  the  direction 
of  the  force,  to  suit  the  convention  (§  485)  adopted  for  gravita- 
tion potentials.  The  expression  for  the  latter  (§§  491,  534  a.)  is 

E 


J {x2  + y2  + s?) 

where  E denotes  the  mass  of  the  nucleus,  and  the  co-ordinates 
are  reckoned  from  its  centre  of  gravity  (§  534)  as  origin.  Hence 
the  ‘‘level  surfaces”  (§  487)  external  to  the  nucleus  are  given 
by  assigning  different  values  to  C in  the  equation 


E 


J(x2  + y2  + z2) 


+V  (x2  + y2)  = C 


•(lb 


and  the  fluid  when  in  equilibrium  has  its  layers  of  equal  density 
and  its  outer  boundary  in  these  surfaces.  If  p be  the  density 
and  p the  pressure  of  the  fluid  at  any  point  of  one  of  these 
surfaces,  regarded  as  functions  of  C,  we  have  (§  <60) 

«=  fnfin (2). 


Unless  the  fluid  be  held  in  by  pressure  applied  to  its  bounding 
surface,  the  potential  must  increase  from  this  surface  inwards 
(or  the  resultant  of  gravity  and  centrifugal  force,  perpendicular 


800.] 


STATICS. 


871 


{is  it  is  to  the  surface,  must  be  directed  inwards),  as  negative 
pressure  is  practically  inadmissible.  The  student  will  find  it  an 
interesting  exercise  to  examine  the  circumstances  under  which 
this  condition  is  satisfied ; which  may  be  best  done  by  tracing 
the  meridional  curves  of  the  series  of  surfaces  of  revolution 
given  by  equation  (1). 

* Let  a and  a(l  - e)  be  the  equatorial  and  polar  semidiameters 
of  one  of  these  surfaces.  We  have 


E 2 E 

- + a = — r , 

a a ( 1 — e) 


whence 


e=_t 


ufa 


m 


El  a2  + o' a 2 + m 


•(3), 


where  m denotes  the  ratio  of  centrifugal  force  at  its  equator 
to  pure  gravity  at  the  same  place.  (Contrast  approximately 
agreeing  definition  of  m,  § 794.)  From  this,  and  the  form  of 
(1),  we  infer  that 


801.  In  the  case  of  but  small  deviation  from  the  spherical 
figure,  which  alone  is  interesting  with  reference  to  the  theory 
of  the  earth’s  figure  and  internal  constitution,  the  bounding 
surface  and  the  surfaces  of  equal  density  and  pressure  are  very 
approximately  oblate  ellipsoids  of  revolution*;  the  ellipticity  f 
of  each  amounting  to  half  the  ratio  of  centrifugal  force  in  its 
largest  circle  (or  its  equator,  as  we  may  call  this)  to  gravity  at 
any  part  of  it ; and  therefore  increasing  from  surface  to  surface 
outwards  as  the  cubes  of  the  radii.  The  earth’s  equatorial  radius 
is  20,926,000  feet,  and  its  period  (the  sidereal  day)  is  86,164 
mean  solar  seconds.  Hence  in  British  absolute  measure  (§  225) 
the.  equatorial  centrifugal  force  is  (2tt/86164)2  x 20.926000,  or 
'11127.  This  is  ^ of  32T58 ; or  very  approximately  the  same 
fraction  of  the  mean  value,  32T4,  of  apparent  gravity  over  the 


Airy  has  estimated  24  feet  as  the  greatest  deviation  of  the  bounding  surface 
from  a true  ellipsoid. 

+ A term  used  by  writers  on  the  figure  of  the  earth  to  denote  the  ratio  which 
the  difference  between  the  two  axes  of  an  ellipse  bears  to  the  greater.  Thus  if  e 
be  the  ellipticity,  and  e the  eccentricity  of  an  ellipse,  we  have  t2  = 2e-  e2.  Hence, 
when  the  eccentricity  is  small,  the  ellipticity  is  a small  quantity  of  the  same 

order  as  its  square ; and  the  former  is  equal  approximately  to  the  square  root  of 
twice  the  latter. 


No  mutual 
force  be- 
tween por- 
tions of  the 
liquid: 

Example(l). 


24—2 


No  mutual 
force  be- 
tween por- 
tions of  the 
liquid: 

Example  (1). 


•372  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [801. 

whole  sea  level,  as  determined  by  pendulum  observations.  It  is 
therefore  [§  794  (20)]  or  approximately  of  the  mean 

value  of  true  gravitation.  Hence,  if  the  solid  earth  attracted 
merely  as  a point  of  matter  collected  at  its  centre,  and  there 
were  no  mutual  attraction  between  the  different  parts  of  the  sea, 
the  sea  level  would  be  a spheroid  of  ellipticity  ^j.  In  reality, 
we  find  by  observation  that  the  ellipticity  of  the  spheroid 
of  revolution  which  most  nearly  coincides  with  the  sea  level  is 
about  ¥4j“jr.  The  difference  between  these,  or  must  therefore 
be  due  to  deviation  of  true  terrestrial  gravity  from  spherical 
symmetry.  Thus  the  whole  ellipticity  of  the  actual  sea.  level, 
-jyig,  may  be  regarded  as  made  up  of  two  nearly  equal  parts; 
of  which  the  greater,  is  due  directly  to  centrifugal  force, 
and  the  less,  to  deviation  of  solid  and  fluid  attracting 
mass  from  any  truly  centrobaric  arrangement  (§  534).  A little 
later  (§§  820,  821)  we  shall  return  to  this  subject. 

802.  The  amount  of  the  resultant  force  perpendicular  to 
the  free  surface  of  the  fluid  is  to  be  found  by  compounding- 
the  force  of  gravity  towards  the  centre  with  the  centrifugal 
force  from  the  axis ; and  it  will  be  approximately  equal  to 
the  former  diminished  by  the  component  of  the  latter  along 
it,  when  the  deviation  from  spherical  figure  is  small.  And 
as  the  former  component  varies  inversely  as  the  square  of 
the  distance  from  the  centre,  it  will  be  less  at  the  equator  than 
at  either  pole  by  an  amount  which  bears  to  either  a ratio  equal 
to  twice  the  ellipticity,  and  which  is  therefore  (§  801)  equal  to 
the  centrifugal  force  at  the  equator.  Thus  in  the  present  case 
half  the  difference  of  apparent  gravity  between  poles  and 
equator  is  due  to  centrifugal  force,  and  half  to  difference  of 
distance  from  the  centre.  The  gradual  increase  of  apparent 
gravity  in  going  from  the  equator  towards  either  pole  is  readily 
proved  to  be  as  the  square  of  the  sine  of  the  latitude;  and 
this  not  only  for  the  result  of  the  two  combined  causes  of 
variation,  but  for  each  separately.  These  conclusions  needed, 
however,  no  fresh  proof,  as  they  constitute  merely  the  appli- 
cations to  the  present  case,  of  Olairaut’s  general  theorems 
demonstrated  above  (§  795). 


802.] 


STATICS. 


373 


Analytically,  for  the  present  case,  we  have 

dV 
9 = ~Tr 


if  g denote  the  magnitude  of  the  resultant  of  true  gravity  and 


No  mutual 
force  be- 
tween por- 
tions of  the 
liquid: 

Example  (l). 


centrifugal  force; 


d_ 

dr 


[as  in  App.  B.  (#)]  rate  of  variation  per 


unit  of  length  along  the  direction  of  r ; and  V the  first  member 
of  (1)  § 800.  Hence  taking  z3  = r3  cos3 0,  and  x3  + y3  = r2 sin20  we 
find 

g = ~a~  coV  sin2  6 (4). 


On  the  hypothesis  of  infinitely  small  deviation  from  spherical 
figure  this  becomes 

g = —a  (1  — 2 u)  - (D3a  sin2  6 • (5), 

if  in  the  small  term  we  put  a,  a constant,  for  r,  and  in  the  other 
r = a (1  + u).  By  (1)  we  see  that  E/C  is  an  approximate  value 
for  r,  and  if  we  take  it  for  a,  that  equation  gives 

u = sin3  6 (6); 

and  using  this  in  (5)  we  have 

9 = J (x  ~ 2 ^ sin^)  = ^ (!  - 2w  sin20) (7), 

where,  as  before,  m denotes  the  ratio  of  equatorial  centrifugal 
force  to  gravity. 


803.  Examples  of  § 799  continued. — (2)  The  nucleus  being  Example (2). 
held  fixed,  let  the  fluid  on  its  surface  be  disturbed  by  the 
attraction  of  a very  distant  fixed  body  attracting  according  to 
the  Newtonian  law. 


Let  r,  6 be  polar  co-ordinates  referred  to  the  centre  of  gravity  of 
the  nucleus  as  origin,  and  the  line  from  it  to  the  disturbing  body 
as  axis ; let,  as  before,  E be  the  mass  of  the  nucleus  ; lastly,  let 
M be  the  mass  of  the  disturbing  body,  and  D its  distance  from 
the  centre  of  the  nucleus.  The  equipotentials  have  for  their 
equation 

E M 

~r  + JsT7)"const (8)- 


374 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[803. 


No  mutual 
force  be- 
tween por- 
tions of  the 
liquid : 

Example(2). 


which,  for  very  small  values  of  r/D,  becomes  approximately 
E M(  r \ 

— + -jj  ( 1 + cos  6 \ = const (9). 


And  if,  as  in  corresponding  cases,  we  put  r = a(  1 +u)  where  a 
is  a proper  mean  value  of  r,  and  u is  an  infinitely  small 
numerical  quantity,  a function  of  0,  we  have  finally 

t<'  = (10). 

This  is  a spherical  surface  harmonic  of  the  first  order,  and 
(§  789)  we  conclude  that 


The  fluid  will  not  be  disturbed  from  its  spherical  figure,  but 
it  will  be  drawn  towards  the  disturbing  body,  so  that  its  centre 
will  deviate  from  the  centre  of  the  nucleus  by  a distance 
amounting  to  the  same  fraction  of  its  radius  that  the  attraction 
of  the  disturbing  body  is  of  the  attraction  of  the  nucleus,  on  a 
point  of  the  fluid  surface.  This  fraction  is  about  '30-oVoo  (being 
i ) for  the  earth  and  moon,  as  the  moon’s  distance  is  60 

83x60x60' 

times  the  earth’s  radius,  and  her  mass  about  fg  of  the  earth  s. 
Hence  if  the  earth’s  and  moon’s  centres  were  both  held  fixed, 
there  would  be  a rise  of  level  at  the  point  nearest  to  the  moon, 
and  fall  of  level  at  the  point  farthest  from  it,  each  equal  to 
of  the  earth’s  radius,  or  about.  70  feet.  Or  if  we  con- 
sider the  sun’s  influence  under  similar  unreal  circumstances, 
we  should  have  a tide  of  12,500  feet  rise  on  the  side  next 
the  sun,  and  the  same  fall  on  the  remote  side  ; 12,500  feet 
being  (§  812)  — 6 of  the  sun’s  distance. 


Example  for 
tides. 


804.  Examples  of  § 799  continued—  (3)  With  other  con- 
ditions, the  same  as  in  Example  (2)  (§  803),  let  one-half  of 
the  disturbing  body  be  removed  and  fixed  at  an  equal  distance 


on  the  other  side. 

The  equation  of  the  equipotentials,  instead  of  (8),  is  now 


E ... 

— 4*  .>  il/ 

o*  ** 


J^D'-ZrDcosd+r2)  + J(D*+2rDcos6+r*) 


= const — (11), 


STATICS. 


375 


804.] 


and  as  the  first  approximation  when  r/D  is  treated  as  very  small,  ^g“plefor 
instead  of  (9),  we  now  have 

1 + I (3  cos20  - 1)J  = const (12)i 

whence  finally,  instead  of  (10),  with  corresponding  notation ; 

(13). 


, Ma3  2 a 

w = i^(3cos  0_1) 


This  is  a spherical  sui'face  harmonic  of  the  second  order,  and 
Ma3}ED3  is  one-quarter  of  the  ratio  that  the  difference  between 
the  moon’s  attraction  on  the  nearest  and  farthest  parts  of  the 
earth  bears  to  terrestrial  gravity.  Hence 


The  fluid  will  be  disturbed  into  a prolate  ellipsoidal  figure,  result a^s 
with  its  long  axis  in  the  line  joining  the  two  disturbing  bodies,  nwreqm- 
and  with  ellipticity  (§  801)  equal  to  f of  the  ratio  which  the  theory, 
difference  of  attractions  of  one  of  the  disturbing  bodies  on  the 
nearest  and  farthest  points  of  the  fluid  surface  bears  to  the 
surface  value  of  the  attraction  of  the  nucleus.  If,  for  instance, 
we  suppose  the  moon  to  be  divided  into  two  halves,  and  these 
to  be  fixed  on  opposite  sides  of  the  earth  at  distances  each 
equal  to  the  true  moon’s  mean  distance ; the  ellipticity  of  the 
disturbed  terrestrial  level  would  be  3 , or  ; result*  of : 

2X60X300000’  1 2,0 0 0.0 00  ’ Ordinary 

and  the  whole  difference  of  levels  from  highest  to  lowest  would  equilibrium 

' theory. 

be  about  If  feet.  We  shall  have  much  occasion  to  use  this 
hypothesis  in  Vol.  II.,  in  investigating  the  kinetic  theory  of  the 
tides.  We  shall  see  that  it  (or  some  equivalent  hypothesis)  is 
essential  to  Laplace’s  evanescent  diurnal  tide  on  a solid  spheroid 
covered  with  an  ocean  of  equal  depth  all  over;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  we  find  presently  (§814)  that  it  agrees  very  closely 
with  the  actual  circumstances  so  far  as  the  foundation  of  the 
equilibrium  theory  is  concerned. 


805.  The  rise  and  fall  of  water  at  any  point  of  the  earth’s 
surface  we  may  now  imagine  to  be  produced  by  making  these 
two  disturbing  bodies  (moon  and  anti-moon,  as  we  may  call 
them  for  brevity)  revolve  round  the  earth’s  axis  once  in  the 
lunar  twenty-four  hours,  with  the  line  joining  them  always 
inclined  to  the  earth’s  equator  at  an  angle  equal  to  the  moon’s 
declination.  If  we  assume  that  at  each  moment  the  condition 


37G 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[805. 


of  hydrostatic  equilibrium  is  fulfilled ; that  is,  that  the  free 
liquid  surface  is  perpendicular  to  the  resultant  force,  we  have 
what  is  called  the  “ equilibrium  theory  of  the  tides.” 

Correction^  806.  But  even  on  this  equilibrium  theory,  the  rise  and  fall 

equilibrium  at  any  place  would  be  most  falsely  estimated  if  we  were  to  take  it, 
as  we  believe  it  is  generally  taken,  as  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  sphe- 
roidal surface  that  would  bound  the  water,  if  none  of  the  solid 
were  uncovered,  that  is  if  there  were  no  dry  land.  To  illustrate 
this  statement,  let  us  imagine  the  ocean  to  consist  of  two  circular 
lakes  A and  B,  with  their  centres  90°  asunder,  on  the  equator, 
communicating  with  one  another  by  a narrow  channel.  In  the 
course  of  the  lunar  twelve  hours  the  level  of  lake  A would 
rise  and  fall,  and  that  of  lake  B would  simultaneously  fall  and 
rise  to  maximum  deviations  from  the  mean  level.  If  the  areas 
of  the  two  lakes  were  equal,  their  tides  would  be  equal,  and 
would  amount  in  each  to  about  one  foot  above  and  below  the 
mean  level ; but  not  so  if  the  areas  were  unequal.  Thus,  if 
the  diameter  of  the  greater  be  but  a small  part  of  the  earth’s 
quadrant,  not  more,  let  us  say,  than  20°,  the  amounts  of  the 
rise  and  fall  in  the  two  lakes  will  be  inversely  as  their  areas 
to  a close  degree  of  approximation.  For  instance,  if  the  dia- 
meter of  B be  only  0f  the  diameter  of  A,  the  rise  and  fall  in 
A will  be  scarcely  sensible ; while  the  level  of  B will  rise  and 
fall  by  about  two  feet  above  and  below  its  mean ; just  as  the 
rise  and  fall  of  level  in  the  open  cistern  of  an  ordinary  barometer 
is  but  small  in  comparison  with  the  fall  and  rise  in  the  tube. 
Or,  if  there  be  two  large  lakes  A,  A'  at  opposite  extremities 
of  an  equatorial  diameter,  two  small  ones  B,  B'  at  two  ends  of 
the  equatorial  diameter  perpendicular  to  that  one,  and  two 
small  lakes  0,  O'  at  two  ends  of  the  polar  axis,  the  largest  of 
these  being,  however,  still  supposed  to  extend  over  only  a 
small  portion  of  the  earth’s  surface,  and  if  all  the  six  lakes 
communicate  with  one  another  freely  by  canals,  01  undei- 
ground  tunnels,  there  will  be  no  sensible  tides  in  the  lakes 
A and  A' ; in  B and  B'  there  will  be  high  water  of  two  feet 
above  mean  level  when  the  moon  or  anti-moon  is  in  the 
zenith,  and  low  water  of  two  feet  below  mean  when  the  moon 


800.] 


STATICS. 


377 


is  rising  or  setting ; and  at  G and  C'  there  will  be  tides  rising 
and  falling  one  foot  above  and  below  the  mean,  the  time  of  *g“J^num 
low  water  being  when  the  moon  or  anti-moon  is  in  the  meii- 
elian  of  A,  and  of  high  water  when  they  are  on  the  horizon  of 
A.  The  simplest  way  of  viewing  the  case  for  the  extreme 
circumstances  we  have  now  supposed  is,  first,  to  consider  the 
spheroidal  surface  that  would  bound  the  water  at  any  moment  if 
there  were  no  dry  land,  and  then  to  imagine  this  whole  surface 
lowered  or  elevated  all  round  by  the  amount  required  to  keep 
the  height  at  A and  A'  invariable.  Or,  if  there  be  a large  lake 
A in  any  part  of  the  earth,  communicating  by  canals  with  small 
lakes  over  various  parts  of  the  surface,  having  in  all  but  a 
small  area  of  water  in  comparison  with  that  of  A,  the  tides  in 
any  of  these  will  be  found  by  drawing  a spheroidal  surface  of 
two  feet  difference  between  greatest  and  least  radius,  and,  with- 
out disturbing  its  centre,  adding  or  subtracting  from  each  radius 
such  a length,  the  same  for  all,  as  shall  do  away  with  rise  or 
fall  at  A. 

807  It  is  however,  only  on  the  extreme  supposition  we  have  The  tides, 
made,  of  one  water  area  much  larger  than  all  the  others  taken  tractionof 
together,  but  yet  itself  covering  only  a small  part  of  the  negated: 
earth’s  curvature,  that  the  rise  and  fall  can  be  nearly  altogether  of  the  ordi- 
obliterated  in  one  place,  and  doubled  in  another  place.  1 along  libnmn 
the  actual  figure  of  the  earth’s  sea-surface,  we  must  subtract  a 
certain  positive  or  negative  quantity  a from  the  radius  of  the 
spheroid  that  would  bound  the  water  were  there  no  land,  a 
being  determined  according  to  the  moon’s  position,  to  fulfil 
the  condition  that  the  volume  of  the  water  remains  unchanged, 
and  being  the  same  for  all  points  of  the  sea,  at  the  same  time. 

Many  writers  on  the  tides  have  overlooked  this  obvious  and 
essential  principle;  indeed  we  know  of  only  one  sentence* 
hitherto  published  in  which  any  consciousness  of  it  has  been 
indicated. 

808.  The  quantity  a is  a spherical  harmonic  function  of  the 
second  order  of  the  moon’s  declination,  and  hour-angle  from 


* “Rigidily  of  the  Earth,”  § 17,  Phil.  Tram.,  1862. 


378 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[808. 


mutual*8*  the  meridian  of  Greenwich,  of  which  the  five  constant  co- 
theTaters0f  efficients  dePend  merely  on  the  configuration  of  land  and  water, 
corrected : and  may  be  easily  estimated  by  necessarily  very  laborious 
theory.rium  quadratures,  with  data  derived  from  the  inspection  of  good 
maps. 

Let  as  above 

r = a(l+u) (14) 

be  the  spheroidal  level  that  would  bound  the  water  were  the 
whole  solid  covered;  u being  given  by  (13)  of  § 804.  Thus,  if 
JJda-  denote  surface  integration  over  the  whole  surface  of  the 
sea,  a f fudcr  expresses  the  addition  (positive  or  negative  as  the 
case  may  be)  to  the  volume  required  to  let  the  water  stand  to 
this  level  everywhere.  To  do  away  with  this  change  of  volume 
we  must  suppose  the  whole  surface  lowered  equally  all  over  by 
such  an  amount  a (positive  or  negative)  as  shall  equalize  it. 
Hence  if  O be  the  whole  area  of  sea,  we  have 

a = (15). 


And  r = r - a = a |l  uda  j ■. 


•(16), 


is  the  corrected  equation  of  the  level  spheroidal 
sea.  Hence 


h-  a 


surface  of  the 

(17), 


where  h denotes  the  height  of  the  surface  of  the  sea  at  any 
place,  above  the  level  which  it  would  take  if  the  moon  were 
removed. 


To  woi’k  out  (15),  put  first,  for  brevity, 

3 Ma? 

t~*edz 


(18): 


and  (13)  becomes 

u = r (cos2  6 - I) (19). 

Now  let  l and  X be  the  geographical  latitude  and  west  longitude 
of  the  place,  to  which  u corresponds ; and  i p and  S the  moon’s 
hour-angle  from  the  meridian  of  Greenwich,  and  her  declination. 
As  6 is  the  moon’s  zenith  distance  at  the  place  (corrected  for 
parallax),  we  have  by  spherical  trigonometry 

cos  6 = cos  l cos  8 cos  (X  — \p)  + sin  l sin  8 ; 


808.] 


STATICS. 


379 


which  gives 

3eos20  - 1 = 3cos2teos25cos2(\ - i//)+GsinZcosZsin5cos5cos(\  -'/')  + $(3siu25  “ 1)(3sm‘i  “ i)!20)* 

Hence  if  we  take  % ID,  ©,  33,  © to  denote  five  integrals  depend-  TheMes, 
ing  solely  on  the  distribution  of  land  and  water,  expressed  as  Jtte^tionof 
follows:  ' 

equilibrium 

theory. 

nJJ ' O'” 


&=  - //cos2 1 cos  2A cla,  ® = cos2 1 sin  2AcZcr’ 


= - [ ‘/sin  l cos  l cos  \da,  W = ^ //sin  Z cos  Z sin  A da, 


n 

U?  = j-ff  ( 3 sin2 1 - 1 ) dcr , 

where  of  course  da  — cos  IdldX, 
we  have 


(21), 


a = -f fuda  = \ar  { fcos25(tacos2i//  + 33sin2i p)  + 6sin5cos5(Ccosi/'  + Qsin^)  + |0r(3sin25- 1) } (22). 


This,  used  with  (19)  and  (20)  in  (17),  gives  for  the  full  conclu- 
sion of  the  equilibrium  theory, 

h = $cit  [(cos2 1 cos  2A  - SI)  cos  2«/r  + (cos2 1 sin  2A  - 23)  sin  2 if/]  cos2  8 
+ 2«t  [(sin  l cos  l cos  X - @)  cos  i p + (sin  l cos  l sin  A - 33 ) sin  i/]  sin  8 cos  8 « ( ■ 2 ) » 


+ \aT  (3  sin2 1- 1 - G)  (3  sin2  8-1) 

in  which  the  value  of  t may  be  taken  from  (18)  for  either  the 
moon  or  the  sun : and  8 and  if/  denote  the  declination  and 
Greenwich  hour-angle  of  one  body  or  the  other,  as  the  case  may 
be.  In  this  expression  we  may  of  course  reduce  the  semi- 
diurnal terms  to  the  form  A cos  ( 2\J/  — e),  and  the  diurnal  terms 
to  A'  cos  (if/  — e').  Interpreting  it  we  have  the  following  conclu- 
sions : — 


809.  In  the  equilibrium  theory,  the  whole  deviation  of 
level  at  any  point  of  the  sea,  due  to  sun  and  moon  acting  jointly, 
is  expressed  by  the  sum  of  six  terms,  three  for  each  body. 

(1)  The  lunar  or  solar  semi-diurnal  tide  rises  and  falls  in  Lunar  or 
proportion  to  a simple  harmonic  function  of  the  hour- angle  from  diurnal  tide, 
the  meridian  of  Greenwich,  having  for  period  180°  of  this  angle 
(or  in  time,  half  the  period  of  revolution  relatively  to  the  earth), 
with  amplitude  varying  in  simple  proportion  to  the  square  of 
the  cosine  of  the  declination  of  the  sun  or  moon,  as  the  case 
may  be,  and  therefore  varying  but  slowly,  and  through  but  a 
small  entire  range. 


380 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[809. 


Lunar  or 
solar  di- 
urnal tide. 


Lunar  fort- 
nightly tide 
or  solar 
semi-annual 
tide. 


Explana- 
tion of  the 
lunar  fort- 
nightly and 
solar  semi- 
annual 
tides. 


(2)  1 he  lunar  or  solar  diurnal  tide  varies  as  a simple  har- 

monic function  of  the  hour-angle  of  period  360°,  or  twenty-four 
hours,  with  an  amplitude  varying  always  in  simple  proportion 
to  the  sine  of  twice  the  declination  of  the  disturbing  body,  and. 
t eiefore  changing  from  positive  maximum  to  negative,  and 
back  to  positive  maximum  again,  in  the  tropical*  period  of 
either  body  in  its  orbit. 

(?)  . The  lunar  fortnightly  or  solar  semi-annual  tide  is  a 
variation  on  the  average  height  of  water  for  the  twenty-four 
unar  or  the  twenty- four  solar  hours,  according  to  which  there 
is  on  the  whole  higher  water  all  round  the  equator  and  lower 
water  at  the  poles,  when  the  declination  of  the  disturbing  body 
is  zero,  than  when  it  has  any  other  value,  whether  north  or 
south;  and  maximum  height  of  water  at  the  poles  and  lowest 
at  the  equator,  when  the  declination  has  a maximum,  whether 
noith  or  south.  Gauss’s  way  of  stating  the  circumstances  on 
which  secular  variations  in  the  elements  of  the  solar  system 
depend  is  convenient  for  explaining  this  component  of  the 
tides. . Let  the  two  parallel  circles  of  the  north  and  south  de- 
clination of  the  moon  and  anti-moon  at  any  time  be  drawn  on 
a geocentric  spherical  surface  of  radius  equal  to  the  moon’s 
distance,  and  let  the  moon’s  mass  be  divided  into  two  halves 
and  distributed  over  them.  As  these  circles  of  matter  gradu- 
ally vaiy  each  fortnight  from  the  equator  to  maximum  declina- 
tion and  back,  the  tide  produced  will  be  solely  and  exactly  the 
“ fortnightly  tide.” 


810.  In  the  equilibrium  theory  as  ordinarily  stated  there 
is,  at  any  place,  high  water  of  the  semi-diurnal  tide,  precisely 
when  the  disturbing  body,  or  its  opposite,  crosses  the  meridian 
of  the  place ; and  its  amount  is  the  same  for  all  places  in  the 
same  latitude ; being  as  the  square  of  the  cosine  of  the  latitude, 
and  therefore,  for  instance,  zero  at  each  pole.  In  the  corrected 


The  tropical  period  is  the  interval  of  time  between  two  successive  passages 
of  the  tide-raising  body  through  the  intersection  of  the  orbit  of  that  body 
with  the  earth  s equator.  In  the  case  of  the  moon  this  intersection  oscillates, 
with  a period  of  18J  years,  through  about  13°  on  each  side  of  the  first  point  of 
Aries,  as  the  nodes  of  the  lunar  orbit  regrede  on  the  ecliptic  (see  § 818  a,  b).  In 
the  case  of  the  sun  the  intersection  is  the  first  point  of  Aries,  which  completes 
its  revolution  in  20,000  years. 


STATICS. 


881 


810.] 


equilibrium  theory,  high  water  of  the  semi-diurnal  tides  may  The  tides,_ 
be  either  before  or  after  the  disturbing  body  crosses  the  meri-  tmcUonof 
dian,  and  its'amount  is  very  different  at  different  places  in  the 
same  latitude,  and  is  certainly  not  zero  at  the  poles.  In  the 
ordinarily  stated  equilibrium  theory,  there  is,  precisely  at  the  ^ue^t. 
time  of  transit,  high  water  or  low  water  of  diurnal  tides  in  nightiyand 
the  northern  hemisphere,  according  as  the  declination  of  the  nual  tldes- 
body  is  north  or  south  ; and  the  amount  of  the  rise  and  fall  is 
in  simple  proportion  to  the  sine  ot  twice  the  latitude,  and  there- 
fore vanishes  both  at  the  equator  and  at  the  poles.  In  the 
corrected  equilibrium  theory,  the  time  of  high  water  may  be 
considerably  either  before  or  after  the  time  of  transit,  and  its 
amount  is  very  different  for  different  places  in  the  same  lati- 
tude, and  certainly  not  zero  at  either  equator  or  poles.  In  the 
ordinary  statement  there  is  no  lunar  fortnightly  or  solar 
semi-annual  tide  in  the  latitude  35°  16/  (being  sin  1 l/\/ 3), 
and  its  amount  in  other  latitudes  is  in  proportion  to  the  devia- 
tions of  the  squares  of  their  sines  from  the  value  i.  In  the 
corrected  equilibrium  theory  each  of  these  tides  is  still  the 
same  in  the  same  latitude,  and  vanishes  at  a certain  latitude, 
and  in  any  other  latitudes  is  in  simple  proportion  to  the  devia- 
tion of  the  squares  of  their  sines  from  the  square  of  the  sine  of 
that  latitude.  But  the  latitude  where  there  is  no  tide  of  this  Latitude  of 

evauescent 

class  is  not  sin"1  but  sin-1[V^  (1  + (£)],  where  is  the  ^mghtly 

mean  value  of  3sin2£—  1,  for  the  whole  covered  portion  of  the 
earth’s  surface.  In  § 848  c below  will  be  found  an  approximate 
evaluation  by  means  of  quadratures  of  the  function  (£,  contri- 
buted by  Mr  G.  H.  Darwin  to  our  present  edition.  The  uncer- 
tainty as  to  the  amount  of  land  in  arctic  and  antarctic  regions 
renders  this  evaluation  to  some  degree  uncertain  ; but  it  appears 
in  any  case  that  the  distribution  of  the  land  is  such  that  the 
latitude  of  evanescent  fortnightly  tide  is  only  removed  a little 
to  the  southward  of  35°  10'.  The  computations  show,  in  fact, 
that  this  latitude  is  34° 40'  or  34° 57',  according  to  the  assumptions 
made  as  to  the  amount  of  polar  land. 

As  the  fortnightly  and  semi-annual  tides  have  been  supposed 
by  Laplace*  to  follow  in  reality  very  nearly  the  equilibrium 
* In  our  first  edition  we  undoubtingly  accepted  this  supposition. 


382 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[810. 


law,  the  determination  of  the  latitude  of  evanescent  tide  is  a 
matter  of  great  importance.  It  is  moreover  possible  that  careful 
determination  of  the  fortnightly  and  semi-annual  tides  at  various 
places,  by  proper  reductions  of  tidal  observations,  may  contribute 
to  geographical  knowledge  as  to  the  amount  of  water-surface  in 
the  hitherto  unexplored  districts  of  the  arctic  and  antarctic 
regions. 


reapTided  811.  Tlie  superposition  of  the  solar  semi-diurnal  on  the 
and^'Uagg”  lunar  semi-diurnal  tide  has  been  investigated  above  as  an 
lng”  example  of  the  composition  of  simple  harmonic  motions;  and 
the  well-known  phenomena  of  the  “ spring- tides ” and  “neap- 
tides,”  and  of  the  “ priming  ” and  “ lagging  ” have  been  ex- 
plained (§  60).  We  have  now  only  to  add  that  observation 
proves  the  proportionate  difference  between  the  heights  of 
Discrepancy  spring-tides  and  neap-tides,  and  the  amount  of  the  priming 


served  re- 
sidts,  due 
to  inertia 
of  water. 


Lunar  and 
solar  in- 
fluence on 
apparent 
terrestrial 
gravity. 


and  lagging  to  be  much  less  in  nearly  all  places  than  estimated 
in  § 60  on  the  equilibrium  hypothesis ; and  to  be  very  different 
in  different  places,  as  we  shall  see  in  Vol.  ii.  is  to  be  expected 
from  the  kinetic  theory. 

812.  The  potential  expressions  used  in  the  preceding  in- 
vestigation are  immediately  applicable  (§§  802,  804)  to  the 
hydrostatic  problem.  But  it  is  interestiug,  in  connexion  with 
this  problem,  to  know  the  amount  of  the  disturbing  influence  on 
apparent  terrestrial  gravity  at  any  point  of  the  earth’s  surface, 
produced  by  the  lunar  or  solar  influence.  We  shall  therefore 
— still  using  the  convenient  static  hypothesis  of  § 804 — deter- 
mine convenient  rectangular  components  for  the  resultant  of  the 
two  approximately  equal  and  approximately  opposed  disturbing 
forces  assumed  in  that  hypothesis.  First,  we  may  remark  that 
these  two  forces  are  approximately  equivalent  to  a force  equal 
to  their  difference  in  a line  parallel  to  that  of  the  centres  of 
the  earth  and  moon,  compounded  with  another  perpendicular 
to  this  and  equal  to  twice  either,  multiplied  into  the  cosine 
of  half  the  obtuse  angle  between  them. 

Resolving  each  of  these  components  along  and  perpendicular 
to  the  earth’s  radius  through  the  place,  we  obtain,  by  a process, 
the  details  of  which  we  leave  to  the  student,  the  following  results, 


which  are  stated  in  gravitation  measure: — 


812.] 


STATICS. 


383 


Med 


Vertical  component,  upwards  = cos2  ^ “ *)  • • * )• 


J/aa 


* Horizontal  component  = 3 "77773  s^u  ^ cos  ^ )• 


Lunar  anti 
solar  in- 
fluence on 
apparent 
terrestrial 
gravity. 


The  direction  of  this  component  is  towards  the  point  of  the 
horizon  under  the  moon  or  anti-moon. 


Here,  as  before,  E and  M denote  tlie  masses  of  the  earth  and 
moon,  D the  distance  between  their  centres,  a the  earth  s radius, 
and  6 the  moon’s  zenith  distance. 

cl  , d 

Or  from  the  potential  expression  (12),  by  taking  and 


we  find  the  same  expressions. 

The  vertical  component  is  a maximum  upwards,  amounting  to 

Ma’ 

Elf’ 

when  the  moon  or  anti-moon  is  overhead;  and  a maximum 
downwards  of  half  this  amount  when  the  moon  is  on  the 
horizon.  The  horizontal  component  has  its  maximum  value, 
amounting  to  Ma 3 

7 ED3  ’ 

when  the  moon  or  anti-moon  is  45°  above  the  horizon.  Similar 
statements,  of  course,  apply  to  the  disturbing  influence  of  the 
sun.  For  the  moon  Ma3/ED 3 is  probably  equal  to  about  ^ 

or  x - 2^-iq-  : and  the  corresponding  measure  of  the  sun’s  influ- 
ence  is  very  approximately  (1  + £)  (fSjP'ijfe,  or 
Hence,  considering  the  lunar  influence  alone,  we  see  that  as 
the  moon  or  anti-moon  rises  from  the  horizon  to  the  zenith 
of  any  place  on  the  earth’s  surface,  the  intensity  of  apparent 
gravity  is  diminished  by  about  one  six-millionth  part : and 
the  plummet  is  deflected  towards  the  point  of  the  horizon 
under  either  moon  or  anti-moon,  by  an  amount  which  reaches 
its  maximum  value,  of  the  unit  angle  (570,3),  or  0"017, 

when  the  altitude  is  45°.  The  corresponding  effects  of  solar 
influence  are  of  nearly  half  these  amounts. 


Taking  the  notation  of  § 808  above,  and  using  the  expansion 
(20)  of  that  section,  we  find,  from  (23')  of  the  present,  the  ver- 
tical component  erpial  to 


384 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[812. 


Lunar  and 
solar  in- 
fluence on 
apparent 
terrestrial 
gravity. 


Ma3 


f {cos7  cos2  8 cos  2 (A  - 1 f/)  + sin  21  sin  28  cos  (A  - 1 p) 

+ (£-  sin2/)  (1-3  sin2  8)} (23'"). 

Further  remarking  that  dhladl  and  dh/a  cos  Idk  are  respectively 
the  northward  and  the  westward  components  of  the  iuclina- 
tion  of  the  apparent  level  to  the  undisturbed  terrestrial  level, 
we  find  for  the  southward  and  eastward  components  of  the 
horizontal  disturbing  force,  as  given  in  (23"),  the  following 
expressions  : 

Ma3 

Southward  component  = f-  s {sin  21  cos2  8 cos  2 (A  - 1 j/) 

— cos  21  sin  28  cos  (A  — if/) 

+ sin  2^  (1  — 3 sin2  8)} (23iv) ; 

Ma 3 

Eastward  component  = prjp  {cos  l cos2  8 sin  2 (A  - if/) 

- sin  l sin  28  sin  (A  — if’)} (23T). 

I 

These  formulas  show  how  in  any  one  place  the  three  com- 
ponents of  the  lunar  disturbing  force  vary  in  the  course  of  the 
24  hours.  They  also  show  how  the  lunar  disturbing  force  varies 
in  longer  periods  when  we  consider  them  as  affected  by  the 
monthly  and  fortnightly  variations  of  8 and  D. 

Actual  tide-  813.  Examples  of  § 799  continued. — (4)  All  other  circum- 
mflumce8  stances  remaining  as  in  Example  (2),  let  the  two  bodies  be  not 
byPmethod  fixed,  but  let  them  revolve  in  circles  round  their  common  centre 
fugai  force,  of  inertia,  with  angular  velocity  such  as  to  give  centrifugal  force 
to  each  just  equal  to  the  force  of  attraction  it  experiences 
from  the  other. 

Let  the  centre  of  the  earth  be  origin  of  rectangular  co  ordi- 
nates, and  OZ  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  circular  orbits, 
and  let  OX  revolve  so  as  always  to  pass  through  the  disturbing 
body.  Then,  dealing  with  centrifugal  force  by  the  potential 
method,  as  in  § 794;  for  the  equation  of  a series  of  surfaces 
cutting  everywhere  at  right  angles  the  resultant  of  gravity  and 
centrifugal  force,  we  find 

^ + — Tpr  + io)2  [(6  — x)3  + y2]  = const....(24), 

J(x’+y°  + z')\l[{D-x)’  + y‘  + 2’]  ’ 

where  <u  denotes  the  angular  velocity  of  revolution  of  the  two 


STATICS. 


385 


813.] 


bodies  round  their  centre  of  inertia,  and  b the  distance  of  this 

point  from  the  earth’s  centre: — so  that  explained 

UJj1  by  method 

M{D  - b)  m9  = E W .(25).  fugal’force. 


Hence 


Mx 

-jyz  -i obx  — 0. 


Using  this  in  (24),  expanded  and  dealt  with  generally  as  (12)  in 
Example  (3),  we  see  that  the  first  power  of  x disappears;  and, 
omitting  terms  of  third  and  higher  orders,  we  have 

~ + jj  (‘  + i ^-)  + const. (26). 

To  reduce  to  spherical  harmonics  we  have 


x 


+r= 


_2«3 


ij 


■o. 


and  therefore,  as  according  to  our  approximation  we  may  take 
wrci2  for  mV2,  we  find  [with  the  notation  r = a (1  + u)  as  above] 


Mi a 3x2  — r* 


a 


U~*ED  D 2 ~ ^ ~ r2)’ 

or  in  polar  co-ordinates 


Ma3 


c o2a 3 


“ = i (3  sin’fl  cos!<(,  - 1)  - i (3  cos'fl  - 1) 
This  interpreted  is  as  follows : — 


....(27). 


The  surface  of  the  fluid  will  be  a harmonic  spheroid  of  the 
second  order  [that  is  (§  799),  an  ellipsoid  differing  infinitely 
little  from  a sphere],  which  we  may  regard  as  the  result  of 
superimposing  on  the  deviation  from  spherical  figure  investi- 
gated in  § 804,  another  consisting  of  the  oblateness  due  to 
rotation  with  angular  velocity  w round  the  diameter  of  the 
earth  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  disturbing  body’s  orbit. 
We  may  prove  this  conclusion  with  less  analysis  by  supposing 
the  purely  static  system  of  Example  (3),  § 804,  to  rotate,  first 
with  any  angular  velocity  w,  about  any  diameter  of  the  earth 
perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  through  its  centre  in  which  the 
disturbing  bodies  are  placed ; and  then  supposing  this  angular 
velocity  to  be  just  such  as  to  balance  the  earth’s  attraction  on 
the  two  disturbing  bodies,  so  that  the  holdfasts  by  which  they 
weie  prevented  from  falling  together  may  be  removed.  Then 

VOL.  ii.  o t 


38G 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[813. 


it  is  easy  to  prove  analytically  that  the  effect  of  carrying  either 
disturbing  body  to  the  other  side,  and  uniting  the  two,  will  be 
a small  disturbance  in  the  figure  of  the  fluid  amounting  to 
some  such  fraction  of  the  deviation  investigated  in  Example  (3) 
as  the  earth’s  radius  is  of  the  distance  of  the  disturber. 


814.  The  purely  static  system  of  Example  (3),  § 804,  gives 
the  simplest  and  most  symmetrical  foundation  for  the  equili- 
brium theory  of  the  tides.  The  kinetic  system  of  Example  (4), 
§ 813,  is  indeed  not  less  purely  static  in  relation  to  the  earth, 
and  is  equivalent  to  an  absolutely  static  ideal  system  in 
which  repulsion  from  a fixed  line,  on  parts  of  a non-rotating 
system,  is  substituted  for  the  centrifrugal  force  of  the  rotating 
system.  But  it  is  complicated  by  the  oblateness  of  the  fluid 
surface  produced  by  the  centrifugal  force  or  repulsion.  This 
oblateness,  as  we  see  from  § 801,  would  amount  to  as  much  as 
A—  x -1- , or  — A — , being  about  27‘8  times  the  ellipticity  of 
the  lunar  tide-level  for  the  case  of  the  earth  and  moon.  For  the 
case  of  the  sun  and  earth,  the  corresponding  oblateness  amounts 


only  to  -A—  x 

J 3 6 62 


58  0 ' 


or 


77,700,000 


which  is  only  of  the  ellip- 


ticity of  the  solar  tide-level. 


Augmenta-  815.  When  the  attraction  of  the  fluid  on  itself  is  sensible, 
by  rnutuai^  the  disturbance  in  its  distribution  gives  rise  to  a counter  dis- 
ofthe  dis-1  turbing  force,  which  increases  the  deviation  of  the  equipotential 
water!1  surfaces  from  the  spherical  figure.  The  general  hydrostatic 
condition  (§  750),  that  the  surfaces  of  equal  density  must  still 
coincide  with  the  equipotential  surfaces,  thus  presents  an 
exquisite  problem  for  analysis.  It  has  called  forth  from 
Legendre  and  Laplace  an  entirely  new  method  in  mathematics, 
commonly  referred  to  by  English  writers  as  “ Laplace  s co- 
efficients” or  “ Laplace’s  Functions.”  The  principles  have  been 
sketched  in  the  second  Appendix  to  our  first  Chapter;  from 
which,  and  the  supplementary  investigations  of  §§  778 — 784, 
we  have  immediately  the  solution  for  the  case  in  which  the 
fluid  is  homogeneous,  and  the  nucleus  (being  a solid  ot  any 
shape,  and  with  any  internal  distribution  of  density,  subject 
only  to  the  condition  that  its  external  equipotential  surfaces 
are  approximately  spherical)  is  wholly  covered  by  the  fluid. 


STATICS. 


387 


815.] 


The  conclusion  may  be  expressed  thus: — Let  p be  the  density 
of  the  fluid,  and  let  cr  be  the  mean  density  of  the  whole  mass, 
fluid  and  solid.  Let  the  disturbing  influence,  whether  of  ex- 
ternal disturbing  masses,  or  of  deviation  from  accurate  centro- 
baric  (§  534)  quality  in  the  nucleus,  or  of  centrifugal  force  due 
to  rotation,  be  such  as  to  render  the  level  surfaces  harmonic 
spheroids  of  order  i,  when  the  liquid  is  kept  spherical  by  a 
rigid  envelope  in  contact  with  it  all  round.  The  tendency  of 
the  liquid  surface  would  be  to  take  the  figure  of  that  one  of 
these  level  surfaces  which  encloses  the  proper  volume.  But 
in  changing  its  figure,  if  permitted,  it  would  increase  the 
deviation  of  this  level  surface.  The  result  is,  that  if  the  con- 
straint be  removed,  the  level  surface  of  the  liquid  in  equilibrium 

will  be  a harmonic  spheroid  of  the  same  type,  but  of  deviation 

from  sphericity  augmented  in  the  ratio  of  1 to  1 - . 

1 J ° (2i  + l)<x 


Let  the  potential  at  or  infinitely  near  the  bounding  surface  be 


47 Tcra3  ~ 

— + $ 
3 r 4 


(1) 


when  the  liquid  is  held  fixed  in  shape  by  a spherical  envelope,  of 
radius  a.  In  these  circumstances 


i + M.) 

intra2) 


(2) 


is  the  equipotential  surface  of  mean  radius  a.  If  now  the  bound- 
ing surface  of  the  liquid  be  changed  into  the  harmonic  spheroid 

r = a(  1 + cS{) (3)^ 

the  potential  (§  543)  becomes  changed  from  (1)  to 


47rcraJ 


47 rpca2\ 

Yi+  i) 


Si.u 


• k t 


and  the  equipotential  surface  becomes,  instead  of  (2) 


a 


{1+(1  + 


47rpc«2\  3$/ 
2i  + 1 / 4 Trcra s 


.(5). 


Hence  that  the  boundary  (3)  of  the  liquid  may  be  an  equi- 
potential surface, 

/..  47rpc«2\  3 

c “ l1  + aiTT ) ’ 


Augmenta- 
tion of  result 
by  mutual 
gravitation 
of  the  dis- 
turbed 
water. 


25—2 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[815 


Augmenta- 
tionof  result 
by  mutual 
gravitation 
of  the  dis- 
turbed 
water. 


Stability  of 
the  ocean. 


Augmenta- 
tions of 
results  by 
mutual 
gravitation 
of  water  cal 
culated  for 
examples  of 
§ 709. 


888 


which  gives 


Airca2  - - 


O’  — 


li+  1 


whence 


1 + 


Air  pea2 
2i+l 


1 - 


3 p 


( 2i  + 1)  cr 


(G). 


Using  this  in  (5),  and  comparing  with  (2),  we  prove  the  pro- 
position. 


816.  The  instability  of  the  equilibrium  in  the  case  in  which 
the  density  of  the  liquid  is  greater  than  the  mean  density 
of  the  nucleus,  already  remarked  as  obvious,  is  curiously 
illustrated  by  the  present  result,  which  makes  the  deviation 
infinite  when  i = 1 and  or  — p.  But  it  is  to  be  remarked  that 
it  is  only  when  the  nucleus  is  completely  covered  that  the 
equilibrium  would  be  unstable.  However  dense  the  liquid 
may  be,  there  would  be  a position  of  stable  equilibrium  with 
the  nucleus  protruding  on  one  side;  and  if  the  bulk  of  the 
liquid  is  either  very  small  or  very  large  in  comparison  with 
that  of  the  nucleus,  the  figure  of  its  surface  in  stable  equi- 
librium would  clearly  be  approximately  spherical.  Excluding 
the  case  of  a very  small  nucleus  of  lighter  specific  gravity 
(which  would  become  merely  a small  floating  body,  not  sensibly 
disturbing  the  general  liquid  globe),  we  have,  in  the  apparently 
simple  question  of  finding  the  distribution  of  a small  quantity 
of  liquid  on  a symmetrical  spherical  nucleus  of  less  specific 
gravity,  a problem  which  utterly  transcends  mathematical  skill 
as  hitherto  developed. 

817.  The  cases  of  i — 1 and  i=  2 give  the  solutions  of  the 
several  examples  of  § 799  when  the  attraction  of  the  liquid  on 
itself  is  taken  into  account,  provided  always  that  the  solid  is 
wholly  covered.  Thus  [§  799,  Example  (2)]  if  the  earth  and 
moon  were  stopped,  and  each  held  fixed,  the  moon’s  attraction 
would  still  not  disturb  the  figure  of  the  liquid  surface  from 
true  sphericity,  but  would  render  it  eccentric  to  a greater 
degree  than  that  previously  estimated,  in  the  ratio  of  1 to 
1 — p/cr.  For  the  earth  and  sea,  pja  is  about  T2r,  and  therefore 
the  spherical  liquid  surface  would  be  drawn  towards  the  moon 


STATICS. 


389 


8-17.] 


by  8G  feet,  being  times  the  amount  of  70  feet  found  above 
(§  803).  And  the  tidal  and  rotational  ellipticities  estimated 
in  §§  800,  814,  813  would,  on  the  supposition  now  made,  be 
augmented  each  in  the  ratio  of  1 to  1 — f crjp ; or  55  to  49  for 
the  case  of  earth  and  sea.  The  true  correction  for  the  attrac- 
tion of  the  sea,  as  altered  by  tidal  disturbance,  in  the  equi- 
librium theory  of  the  tides,  must  be  less  than  this,  as  the  liquid 
does  not  cover  more  than  about  §•  of  the  surface  of  the  solid. 
To  find  the  true  amount  of  the  correction  for  the  attraction  of 
the  water  on  itself  when  the  whole  solid  is  not  covered,  even 
if  the  arrangement  of  dry  land  and  sea  were  quite  symmetrical 
and  simple  (as,  for  instance,  one  circular  continent  and  the  rest 
ocean),  belongs  to  the  transcendental  problem  already  referred 
to  (§  81 G).  It  can  be  practically  solved,  if  necessary,  by 
laborious  methods  of  approximation ; but  the  irregular  bound- 
aries of  land  and  sea  on  the  real  earth,  and  the  true  kinetic 
circumstances  of  the  tides,  are  such  as  to  render  nugatory  any 
labours  of  this  kind.  Happily  the  error  committed  in  neglect- 
ing altogether  the  correction  in  question  may  be  safely  esti- 
mated as  less  than  10  per  cent.  '(£-$  being  12  3 per  cent.),  and 
may  be  neglected  in  our  present  uncertainty  as  to  absolute 
values  of  causes  and  effects  in  the  theory  of  the  tides. 


818.  But  although  the  influence  on  the  tides  produced 
by  the  attraction  of  the  water  itself  as  it  rises  and  falls  is 
not  considerable  even  in  any  one  place ; it  is  a manifest, 
though  not  an  uncommon,  error  to  suppose  that  the  moon’s 
disturbing  influence  on  terrestrial  gravity  is  everywhere  in- 
sensible. It  was  pointed  out  long  ago  by  Robison*  that  the 
great  tides  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy  should  produce  a very  sensible 
deflection  on  the  plummet  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  that 
observation  of  this  effect  might  be  turned  to  account  for 
determining  the  earth’s  mean  density.  But  even  ordinary 
tides  must  produce,  at  places  close  to  the  sea  shore,  deviations 
in  the  plummet  considerably  exceeding  the  greatest  direct 
effect  of  the  moon,  which,  as  we  have  seen  (§  812),  amounts 
t0  i2,ooo.ooo  of  the  imit  anSle  (57°*3).  Thus,  at  a point  on 

Mechanical  Philosophy,  1804.  See  also  Forbes,  Proc.  R.S.E.,  April,  1849. 


Augmenta- 
tions of 
results  by 
mutual 
gravitation 
of  water  cal- 
culated for 
examples  of 
§ 709. 


Local  influ- 
ence of  high 
water  on 
direction 
of  gravity. 


390 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Attraction 
of  high 
water  on  a 
plummet 
at  the  sea- 
side. 


Vertical 
section 
through  O- 


Horizontal 
section 
through  O. 


[81 8. 


or  not  many  feet  above  the  mean  sea  level,  and  100  yards 
from  low-water  mark,  a deflection,  amounting  to  more  than 
8i00^00-  of  the  unit  angle  on  each  side  of  the  mean  verti- 
cal, will  be  produced  by  tides  of  five  feet  rise  and  fall  on  each 
side  of  the  mean,  if  the  line  of  coast  does  not  deviate  very 
much  from  one  average  direction  for  50  miles  on  either  side, 
and  if  the  rise  and  fall  is  approximately  simultaneous  and 
equal  for  50  miles  out  to  sea.  For,  a point  placed  as  O in  the 


sketch  will,  as  the  water  rises  from  low  tide  to  high  tide,  ex- 
perience the  attraction  of  a plate  of  water  indicated  in  section 
by  HKK'L' L.  If  we  neglect  the  small  part  of  the  whole  effect 
due  to  the  long  bar  (extending  along  the  coast)  shown  in  section 
by  HKL,  we  have  only  to  find  the  attraction  of  the  rectangular 
plate  of  water  by  hypothesis  of  50  miles’  breadth  from  KL, 

100  miles’  length  parallel  to  the  coast, 
and  10  feet  thickness  (KL).  This  will 
not  be  sensibly  altered  if  0 is  precisely 
in  the  continuation  of  the  middle  plane 
EE'  (instead  of  a few  feet  above  it,  as  - 
would  generally  be  the  case  in  a con- 
venient sea-side  gravitation  observatory), 
and  the  whole  matter  of  the  plate  were 
condensed  into  its  middle  plane.  But 
the  attraction  of  a uniform  rectangular  plate  on  a point  0 has, 
for  component  parallel  to  OE, 


/ 

E 

B 


Br 


■(7), 


, f ( OA+AE)(OB  + BE)OE 2] 
pt[og  }((U'  + A'E')  (OB'  + BE')  OE*] 

where  p denotes  the  density  of  the  water,  and  t the  thickness 
of  the  plate,  by  hypothesis  a small  fraction  of  OE.  (We  leave 
the  proof  as  an  exercise  to  the  student.)  Now,  taking  the 
nautical  mile  as  2000  yards,  we  have,  according  to  the  assumed 
data,  very  approximately 

OA_AE=OK  niO£^im 

OE  OE  OE  ’ OE 


818.] 


STATICS. 


391 


and  B,  B'  are  to  be  taken  as  at  the  same  distances  on  one  side  Attraction 
of  OE'  as  AA'  on  the  other.  Hence  the  preceding  expression  water  on  a 

. „ plummet  at 

becomes  the  sea- 

side. 


-pt  log  20  ~ 
1 6l+V2 


which  is  equal  to  13 '44  x pt. 


The  ratio  of  this  to  |7 rcrr,  the  earth’s  whole  attraction  on  0,  is 
3 x 13‘4p£  4nrar:  which  (as  t/r  is  -...-t-  ..  by  hyjiothesis,  and  p/a 

is  about  A)  amounts  to  — — 1_ — . The  plummet  will  therefore, 

at  high  tide,  be  disturbed  from  the  position  it  had  at  low 
tide,  by  a horizontal  force  of  somewhat  more  than  1 

4.000.000 

of  the  vertical  force ; and  its  deviation  will  of  course  be  this 
fraction  of  57°'3,  the  unit  angle. 


818'.  Since  the  publication  of  our  first  edition  the  British  Gravita- 
Association  has  endeavoured  to  promote  the  existence  of  practical  SjrvatSJ' 
gravitational  observatories  by  the  appointment  of  a committee 
for  determining  experimentally  the  lunar  disturbance  of  gravity- 
The  Reports  for  the  years  1881  and  1882  contain  accounts  of 
the  work  which  has  been  done  hitherto.  In  § 818  we  did  not 
mean  to  suggest  the  seaside  as  a proper  site  for  a gravitational 
observatory,  and  the  investigation  of  that  section  renders  it 
evident  that  for  the  purposes  in  view  of  the  committee  it  is 
essential  that  the  observatory  should  be  remote  from  the  sea- 
coast. 

• 

The  object  of  the  experimenters  for  the  committee,  Mr 
George  and  Mr  Horace  Darwin,  being  to  measure,  if  possible, 
the  attraction  ol  the  moon,  and  thus  to  throw  light  on  the 
elastic  yielding  of  the  earth’s  mass  (see  § 837  et  seq.),  care  was 
taken  by  them  to  eliminate  as  far  as  possible  the  effects  of 
tremors,  either  local  and  seismic.  The  experiments  were,  and 
are  still  being,  carried  out  at  Cambridge,  but  notwithstanding 
all  the  precautions  taken  to  shield  the  instrument  (a  pendulum 
hung  in  fluid)  from  disturbance,  it  was  found  that  the  agitation 
of  the  soil  was  incessant.  There  is  strong  evidence  that  this 
agitation  is  wholly  independent  of  the  tremors  produced  by 
traffic  in  the  town,  for  (amongst  other  proofs)  it  appeared  that 
there  were  periods,  lasting  during  several  days,  of  abnormal 


Gravita- 
tional Ob- 
servatory. 


392  ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS.  [818'. 

agitation  and  of  abnormal  quiescence.  The  experimenters 
found  that  superposed  on  this  minute  agitation  there  is  a 
diurnal  oscillation  of  level  of  some  regularity ; and  that  super- 
posed on  that  again  there  are  continuous  changes  of  level 
lasting  over  many  weeks.  The  experiments  afford  no  evidence 
as  to  the  extent  of  land  over  which  these  changes  range  ; and  as 
the  work  is  still  in  progress,  we  should  have  made  no  allusion 
to  it  here,  but  that  the  subject  has  been  attacked  from  an 
entirely  different  point  of  view,  and  at  earlier  dates,  by  a 
number  of  other  observers.  The  general  character  of  the  dis- 
turbances noted  by  these  other  observers  agrees  in  every  par- 
ticular with  what  is  described  by  the  Darwins,  and  thus  we  are 
compelled  to  believe  that  none  of  them  were  noting  a purely  local 
effect.  As  most  of  the  other  experimenters  have  had  in  view 
the  observation  of  minute  earthquakes,  their  instruments  have 
in  general  been  made  excessively  sensitive  to  tremor,  and  the 
selection  of  appropriate  sites  has  been  rendered  very  difficult. 

We  may  mention  the  following  instances  of  observations 
which  agree  in  character  with  those  of  which  we  have 
spoken,  viz.  by  D’Abbadie  in  Brazil  and  Ethiopia  with  spirit 
levels,  and  on  the  Pyrenees  by  reflexion  from  mercury ; by 
Plantamour  at  Geneva  with  spirit-levels ; by  Zollner  at  Leipsig 
with  “ a horizontal  pendulum  ” ; by  Bouquet  de  la  Grye  at 
Campbell  Island  in  the  S.  Pacific  Ocean,  with  a pendulum. 
But  the  observations  to  which  we  would  especially  draw  at- 
tention are  those  of  the  Italians,  who  have  far  excelled  in  zeal 
all  the  other  nations  combined.  This  has  probably  been  due 
to  the  presence  in  their  country  of  active  volcanoes,  so  that 
attention  has  been  drawn  to  the  science  of  earthquakes.  In 
Italy  we  find  liossi,  Bertelli,  Palmieri,  Mocenigo,  Malvasia, 
Agostini,  Galli  and  many  others  making  continuous  obser- 
vations in  many  parts  of  the  country  for  some  years  past. 
Their  results  are  being  recorded  in  the  Bulletino  del  Vidcanismo 
Italiano*.  Milne,  Ewing,  and  Gray  have  worked  in  Japan  in 
the  same  field, — but  to  note  all  those  who  have  attended  to 
Seismology  would  be  beyond  the  scope  of  our  present  remarks. 

* One  of  the  most  interesting  points  is  the  use  of  the  microphone  for  the 
detection  of  telluric  disturbance. 


STATICS. 


393 


818'.] 


We  here  only  wish  to  draw  attention  to  the  subject  of  the  Gravita- 

J # . . . . - , tional  Ob- 

slower  changes  in  the  direction  of  gravity  relatively  to  the  earth  s scrvatory. 

surface,  and  tb  shew  that  although  such  results  ol  gravitational 

observation,  as  were  contemplated  by  the  British  Association  in 

the  appointment  of  a Committee,  may  probably  be  impossible, 

yet  an  important  method  appears  to  be  initiated  for  discovery 

with  regard  to  the  mechanical  constitution  of  the  upper  strata 

of  the  earth.  For  this  end  it  is  essential  that  instruments 

should  be  improved,  for  which  there  is  much  scope,  and  that, 

following  the  Italian  example,  the  observations  should  be 

simultaneous  over  large  tracts  of  country. 

819.  Recurring  to  the  case  of  p = cr,  we  learn  from  8 817  ApP'icf^ion 

° . . . ...  . ° of  § 817  to 

that  a homogeneous  liquid  in  equilibrium  under  the  influence  thSth’a 
of  centrifugal  force,  or  of  tide-generating  action,  has  2b  times  fiKure- 
as  much  ellipticit}7’  as  it  would  have  if  mutual  attraction  between 
the  parts  of  the  fluid  were  done  away  with  (§  800),  and  gravity 
were  towards  a fixed  interior  centre  of  force.  For  a homogeneous 
liquid  of  the  same  mean  density  as  the  earth,  rotating  in  a time 
equal  to  the  sidereal  day,  the  ellipticity  is  therefore  being 
2|-  times  the  result,  which  we  found  in  § 801.  This 
agrees  with  the  conclusion  for  the  case  of  approximate  spheri- 
city, which  we  derived  (§  775)  from  the  theorem  of  § 771, 
regarding  the  equilibrium  of  a homogeneous  rotating  liquid. 

But  even  for  this  case  Laplace’s  spherical  harmonic  analysis  is 
most  important,  as  proving  that  the  solution  is  unique,  when 
the  figure  is  approximately  spherical;  so  that  neither  an 
ellipsoid  with  three  unequal  axes,  nor  any  other  figure  than 
the  oblate  elliptic  spheroid  of  revolution,  can  satisfy  the  hydro- 
static conditions,  when  the  restriction  to  approximate  sphericity 
is  imposed.  Our  readers  will  readily  appreciate  this  item  of 
the  debt  we  owe  to  the  great  French  naturalist,  when  we  tell 
them  that  one  of  us  had  actually  for  a time  speculated  on  three 
unequal  axes  as  a possible  figure  of  terrestrial  equilibrium. 

820.  As  another  example  of  the  result  of  § 817  for  the  case 
i=  2,  let  us  imagine  the  earth,  rotating  with  the  actual  angular 
velocity,  to  consist  of  a solid  centrobaric  nucleus  covered  with 
a thin  liquid  layer  of  density  equal  to  the  true  density  of  the 


394 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[820. 


ofP§P8iC7atto°n  Upper  crustj  that  is>  we  may  say,  half  the  mean  density  of  the 
fheTarth’s  nucleus‘  Thc  ellipticity  of  the  free  surface  would  be 

figure. 

1 ^ 1 1 
580  X 1-ixi’  01  406  ' 

Or,  lastly , let  it  be  lequned  to  find  the  density  of  a super- 
ficial liquid  layer  on  a centrobaric  nucleus  which,  with  the 
actual  angulai  velocity  of  rotation,  would  assume  a spheroidal 
figure  with  ellipticity  equal  to  ^ , the  actual  ellipticity  of  the 
sea  level.  We  should  have 


I _ 580 

1-1^-295' 

which  gives  p — '819  x or. 

821.  Bringing  together  the  several  results  of  §§  801,  817,  819, 
for  a centrobaric  nucleus  revolving  with  the  earth’s  angular 
velocity,  and  covered  with  a thin  layer  of  liquid  of  density  p, 
the  mean  density  of  the  whole  being  <x,  we  have — 


(1) 

for  - = 

< T 

0, 

e ~ 

(2) 

P _ 

)> 

a 

2 

T~T> 

e = 5T7> 

(3) 

p _ 

a 

1 

2 5 

e 406  5 

(4) 

p _ 
a 

•819, 

p — 1 

e 2 9 5 5 

(5) 

q i~o 
II 

1, 

p — _i__ 
e 2 3 2 5 

where  e denotes  the  ellipticity  of  the  free  bounding  surface  of 
the  liquid.  The  density  of  the  earth’s  upper  crust  may  be 
roughty  estimated  as  the  mean  density  of  the  entire  mass, 
and  is  certainly  in  every  part  less  than  ‘819  of  this  mean 
density.  The  ellipticity  of  the  sea  level  does  not  differ  from 
Jp-  by  more  than  2 or  3 per  cent.,  and  is  therefore  decidedly 
too  great  to  be  accounted  for  by  centrifugal  force,  and  ellipticity 
in  the  upper  crust  alone,  on  the  hypothesis  that  there  is  a rigid 
centrobaric  nucleus,  covered  by  only  a thin  upper  crust  with 


STATICS. 


395 


821.] 


surface  on  the  whole  agreeing  in  ellipticity  with  the  free  liquid 
surface.  It  is  therefore  quite  certain  that  there  must  be  on  the  Observation 

k i _ shows  so 

whole  some  degree  of  oblateness  in  the  lower  strata,  in  the  an^ 
same  direction  as  that  which  centrifugal  force  would  produce  ®^at  ti/ero1 
if  the  mass  were  fluid.  There  is,  as  we  shall  see  in  later  i™“eSness of' 
.volumes,  a great  variety  of  convincing  evidence  in  support  of no®oniy in 
the  common  geological  hypothesis  that  the  upper  crust  was  sm^acelbu? 
at  one  time  all  melted  by  heat.  This  would  account  for  the  terioHayers 
general  agreement  of  the  houndary  of  the  solid  with  that  of  density' 
fluid  equilibrium,  though  largely  disturbed  by  upheavals,  and 
shrinkings,  in  the  process  of  solidification  which  (App.  D.)  has 
probably  been  going  on  for  a few  million  years,  but  is  not  yet 
quite  complete  (witness  lava  flowing  from  still  active  volcanoes). 

The  oblateness  of  the  deeper  layers  of  equal  density  which  we 
now  infer  from  the  figure  of  the  sea  level,  the  observed  density 
of  the  ujDper  crust,  and  Cavendish’s  weighing  of  the  earth  as 
a whole,  renders  it  highly  probable  that  the  earth  has  been  at 
one  time  melted  not  merely  all  round  its  surface,  but  either 
throughout,  or  to  a great  depth  all  round. 


822.  We  therefore,  as  our  last  hydrostatic  example,  proceed  Equilibrium 
to  investigate  the  conditions  of  a heterogeneous  liquid  resting  spheroid  of 
on  a rigid  spherical  centrobaric  core  or  nucleus,  and  slightly  ou^iiqmci^ 
disturbed,  as  explained  in  § 815,  by  attracting  masses  fixed  gated.1* 
either  externally  or  in  the  core  (among  which,  of  course,  must 
be  included  deviations,  if  any,  from  a rigorously  centrobaric 
distribution  in  the  matter  of  the  core). 


Tor  any  point  (r,  $,  d>)  in  space  let 

y be  the  potential  due  to  the  core, 

V >>  „ undisturbed  fluid, 

Q ,,  „ disturbing  force, 

U u ,,  disturbance  in  the  distribu- 

tion of  the  fluid. 


I.lms  the  whole  potential  at  the  point  in  question  is  W + V when 
the  fluid  is  undisturbed,  and  N+Q+V+U  when  the  disturbing 
force  is  introduced  and  equilibrium  supervenes.  Let  also  p be 
the  density  of  the  undisturbed  fluid  at  (r,  6,  </>)  (which  of  course 
would  vanish  if  the  point  in  question  were  situated  in  any  other 


39  G 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Equilibrium 
of  rotating 
spheroid  of 
heterogene- 
ous liquid, 
investi- 
gated. 


[822. 


Part  of  sPace  than  that  occupied  by  the  fluid);  aud  let  p + & be 
the  altered  density  at  the  same  point  (r,  0,  <£)  when  the  fluid 
rests  under  the  disturbing  influence.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that 
N,  V,  p are  functions  of  r alone;  while  Q,  U,  w are  functions  of 
r,  6,  4>. 


Spheroidal 
surface 
of  equal 
density. 


Expression 
of  incom- 
pressibility. 


Let  now  Sr  be  an  infinitely  small  variation  of  r. 

of  the  liquid  at  the  point  (r  4-  Sr,  6,  <£)  will  be  p + + 

or  simply  (]p 

p + w + — Sr, 
dr 


The  density 
d 

dM^Sr’ 


as  zs  is  infinitely  small 
have 


by  hypothesis. 

zb  + ~ Sr  = 0 
dr 


If  we  equate  this  to  p we 


and  deduce 


Sr  = — 


ZB 


dp!  dr 


(1) 


for  the  equation  expressing  the  deviation  from  the  spherical 
surface  ol  radius  r,  of  the  spheroidal  surface  over  which  the 
density  in  the  disturbed  liquid  is  p.  The  liquid  being  incom- 
pressible, the  volume  enclosed  by  this  spheroidal  surface  must  be 
equal  to  that  enclosed  by  the  spherical  surface,  and  therefore, 
if  dcr  denote  an  element  of  the  spherical  surface,  and  | J integra- 
tion over  the  whole  of  it, 

f/Srdcr  = 0 (2). 


Hence,  by  (1),  as  ^ is  independent  of  6,  <£, 

f fzudcr  = 0 


.(3). 


Now,  as  before  for  density,  we  have  for  the  disturbed  potential 
at  (r  + Sr,  ft,  <£) 

N+Q  + V+U+y^N+-Q  + V + U)  Sr, 


or,  because  Q + U is  infinitely  small, 

N+Q  + V+U  + j (N  + V)  Sr. 

And,  therefore,  to  express  that  the  spheroidal  surface  correspond- 
ing to  (1),  with  r constant,  is  an  equipotential  surface  in  the 
disturbed  liquid,  we  have 


STATIC'S. 


nor 


i(jv+ f> 

Q + U-~ — 7 v + N+  V=F(r ) 

dp 

dr 


■(4), 


Hydrostatic 

equation. 


which  (§  750)  is  the  equation  of  hydrostatic  equilibrium.  In  this 
equation  we  must  suppose  N and  p to  be  functions  of  r,  and  Q a 
function  of  r,  6 , <£;  all  given  explicitly:  and  from  p we  have,  by 
putting  7 = 0,  in  (15)  and  (16)  of  § 542, 


V=  4 7 r(  f rpdr  + - [ rapdr\ (5),  Equilibrium 

\ L r L ' J v of  rotating 

• r * “ spheroid 

of  hetero- 

where  p is  the  value  of  p at  distance  r'  from  the  centre,  and  x geneous 

r r ’ liquid. 

the  radius  of  the  outer  bounding  surface  of  the  undisturbed  fluid, 
and  a that  of  the  fixed  spherical  surface  of  the  core  on  which  it 
rests.  To  find  V + U,  following  strictly  the  directions  of  § 545, 
we  add  the  potential  of  a distribution  of  matter  with  density  p + vs 
through  the  space  between  the  spherical  surfaces  of  radii  a and 
x to  that  of  the  shell  B of  positive  and  negative  matter  there 
defined.  Let  the  thickness  of  the  latter  at  the  point  (r,  0,  <f>)  be 
called  h,  being  the  value  of  Sr  at  the  surface;  and  let  q denote 
its  density,  being  the  surface  value  of  p.  Then,  subtracting  the 
undisturbed  potential  V,  we  have 


U = 


da' dr'  + 


(0), 


if  as  usual  I)  denote  the  distance  between  the  points  ( r , 6,  cj>), 

(r,  6',  <£'),  and  the  accented  letters  denote  the  values  of  the 
corresponding  elements  in  the  latter ; and  if  [ ] denote  surface 
values  and  integration. 

Let  us  now  suppose  the  required  deviation  of  the  surfaces  of  Part  of  the 
equal  pressure  density  and  potential  to  be  expressed  as  follows  SEoob- 
in  surface  harmonics,  of  which  the  term  R0  disappears  because  lateness: 
of(2):- 

for  the  interior  of  the  fluid,  Sr  = 7?,  + R2  + R ,s  + etc.,  ) 

and  for  the  outer  bounding  surface,  h = li]  + li,  + + etc.  j 

OT  = -^(7?1  + 7?2  + 7?  a + etc-) 


Hence  by  (1) 


(«)• 


398 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[822. 


developed  in 
harmonics. 


V 


Harmonic 
develop- 
ment of 
disturbing 
potential 


Equation  of 
equilibrium 
for  general 
harmonic 
term: 


Using  this  in  (G)  according  to  §§  544,  542,  536,  we  have 


QO 

4tt  S 

1 2i  + l 


w.,8.  :.(*), 


where  H'  denotes  the  value  of  R{  from  the  point  (r'}  6,  d>)  instead 
of  (r,  0,  +). 


To  complete  the  expansion  of  the  hydrostatic  equation  (4)  we 
may  suppose  the  harmonic  expression  for  Q to  be  either  directly 
given,  or  be  found  immediately  by  Appendix  B.  (52),  or  by 
(8)  of  § 539,  according  to  the  form  in  which  the  data  are  pre- 
sented. Thus  let  us  have 


t=00  *=j 


Q — 'S*  2 M.wcos  sd>  + i5(!l)sins<4)  ®(,) (10) 

i= 0 <= 0 1 '*  i V /’ 


according  to  the  notation  of  App.  B.  (37)  and  (38),  Aw,  B,] 

denoting  known  functions  of  r.  Using  now  this  and  (S)  in  (4), 
we  have 


Igww + ,$<!>”+ B A (i v+  V) 


— — (V  f 

2i  + 1 V Jr 


,{  fXr'-i+l  dp  T>> 


+ ^iol  + iV+  V=F(r) (11). 


Hence  : first,  for  the  terms  of  zero  order 

A™  + N- f V=F(r) (12), 

which  merely  shows  the  value  of  F(r),  introduced  temporarily  in 
(4)  and  not  wanted  again  : and,  by  terms  of  order  i, 


1 

2i  + l 


^B/dr'+r-^f  rw 
dr'  J a 


dp' 


dr 


?w-' 


= 2 (^4)s)cos  scfi  + B(‘]  sin  scf>)  ®!4) * . , (13). 


Lastly,  expanding  Ri  (as  above  for  the  i term  of  Q ) by  App.  B. 
(37),  let  us  have 

% (u{‘]  cos  scjj  + v|s)  sin  scpi)  0)*1 (14), 

8-0 

where  u(s) , vls)  are  functions  of  r,  to  the  determination  of  which  the 
problem  is  reduced.  Hence  equating  separately  the  coefficients 
of  ®.(s)  cos  scf>,  etc.j  on  the  two  sides,  and  using  u.  to  denote  any 


STATICS. 


399 


822.] 


one  of  the  required  functions  it)*1,  v'*\  and  At  any  of  the  given  equation^^ 
functions  ti'f,  and  u’n  U4  the  values  of  m,  for  r = r and  r = r ^efficient 

respectively,  we  have 


u„  regarded 
as  a func- 
tion of  r. 


-«.*<»+  m 2"i  [-.(is). 

or,  as  it  will  be  convenient  sometimes  to  write  it,  for  brevity,  o\(w4)  = A ( j 


where  cri  denotes  a determinate  operation,  performed  on  u any 
function  of?*,  continuous  or  discontinuous.  To  reduce  (15)  to  a 
differential  equation,  divide  by  r\  differentiate,  multiply  by  r2,+“, 
and  differentiate  again.  If,  for  brevity,  we  put 


(1C), 


the  result  is 


Tr {r"'"  Tr (’•""«}  - 4«-'“  ~£  = Jr 


equili- 
brium of 
rotating 
spheroid  of 
hetero- 
geneous 
liquid. 


a linear  differential  equation,  of  the  second  order,  for  un  with  Differential 

. - equation  to 

coefficients  and  independent  terms  known  functions  of  r.  lhebeinte- 

. grated. 

general  solution,  as  is  known,  is  of  the  form 

u.  = CP  + C'P,  + a (18), 

where  a is  a function  of  r satisfying  the  integral  equation 

ov  (a)  = A ( (19)  [(15)  repeated]; 

C and  C'  are  two  arbitrary  constants,  and  P and  P'  are  two 
distinct  functions  of  r. 

Equation  (15)  requires  that  (7  = 0 and  C’  — 0 ; in  other  words, 
u0  if  satisfying  it,  is  fully  determinate.  This  is  best  shown  by 
remarking  that  if,  instead  of  (15),  we  take 

o-.  (u)  = A{  + AV  + K'r "‘-1  . . , (20) 


where  Ar,  1C  are  any  two  constants,  these  constants  disappear  in 
the  differentiations,  and  we  have  still  the  same  differential 
equation,  (17) : and  that  the  two  arbitrary  constants  C and  C'  petermina- 
of  the  general  solution  (18)  of  this  are  determined  by  (20)  when  stunts  to 
any  two  values  are  given  for  A and  1C.  In  fact,  the  expression  thompUred 
(18),  used  for  uit  reduces  (20)  to  solution. 

CVt.  (P)  + CV(  (F)  = Kr‘  + K'r-1'1 (21), 

which  shows  that  o-,(P)  and  crt.(P')  cannot  either  of  them  be 


400 


Determina- 
tion of  con- 
stants to 
complete 
the  required 
solution. 


Introduc- 
tion of  the 
Newtonian 
law  of  force. 


Simplifica- 
tion by  in- 
troducing 
the  New- 
tonian law 
of  force. 


dr * 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS,  [822. 

zero,  and  that  they  must  be  distinct  linear  functions  of  r*  and 
r~l~\  and  determines  C and  C . 

Thus  we  see  that  whatever  be  At  we  have,  in  the  integration 
of  the  differential  equation  (19),  and  the  determination  of  the 
arbitrary  constants  to  satisfy  (15),  the  complete  solution  of  our 
problem. 

Unless  it  is  desired,  as  a matter  of  analytical  curiosity,  or  for 
some  better  reason,  to  admit  the  supposition  that  N is  any 
arbitrary  function  of  r,  it  is  unnecessary  to  retain  both  if/  and  p 
as  two  distinct  given  functions.  For  the  external  force  of  the 
nucleus,  or  that  part  of  it  of  which  A is  the  potential,  being  by 
hypothesis  symmetrical  relatively  to  the  centre,  it  must  in 
nature  vary  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  from  this 

point ; that  is  to  say,  dN  _ p. 

dr  r2 

fx  being  a constant,  measuring  in  the  usual  unit  (§  459)  the 
mass  of  the  nucleus.  And  by  (5) 

dV  4tt  fr  , ,g 

- rj’--'1'-  (23>- 

From  this,  with  (22)  and  (17),  we  have 

* = 7?f',vw  + ? C-’4)^ 

which  gives  4?rp  = ^ an(l  ^7r  = r + 4 (25). 

Using  this  last  in  (17),  and  reducing  by  differentiation,  we  have 

^+2(|rlog*+?)^-<^ 

Another  form,  convenient  for  cases  in  which  the  disturbing 
force  is  due  to  external  attracting  matter,  or  to  centrifugal  force 
of  the  fluid  itself,  if  rotating,  is  got  by  putting,  in  (17), 

r~i+1ui  = ei (27), 

and  reducing  by  differentiation.  Thus 

With  this  notation  the  intermediate  integral,  obtained  from  (15) 


STATICS. 


401 


822.] 


by  the  first  step  of  the  process  of  differentiating  executed  in  the 
order  specified,  gives 


de{  d . , _a(_2  [rf  dty  . d\f/\ 

-<  + e,-loS^-r  -)(r(bt+  idr) 


r~i+]ei  dr 


..(29). 


DifTerentinl 
equation  for 
proportion- 
ate devia- 
tion from 
sphericity. 


Important  conclusions,  readily  drawn  from  these  forms,  are  Equili-^ 

that  if  Q is  a solid  harmonic  function  (as  it  is  when  the  rotating 
. . . . . spheroid 

disturbance  is  due  either  to  disturbing  bodies  in  the  core,  or  m of  hetero- 

treneous 

the  space  external  to  the  fluid,  or  to  centrifugal  force  of  the  liquid. 

fluid  rotating  as  a solid  about  an  axis) ; then  (1)  eif  regarded  as  Layers  of 

, . greatest  and 

positive,  and  as  a function  of  r,  can  have  no  maximum  value,  least  pro- 

although  it  might  have  a minimum ; and  (2)  if  the  disturbance  deviation0 

is  due  to  disturbing  masses  outside,  or  to  any  other  cause  (as  city? splieri 

centrifugal  force)  which  gives  for  potential  a solid  harmonic  of 

order  i with  only  the  r'  term,  and  no  term  r-i_1,  can  have  no 

minimum  except  at  the  centre,  and  must  increase  outwards 

throughout  the  fluid. 

To  prove  these  conclusions,  we  must  first  remark  that  if/ 
necessarily  diminishes  outwards.  To  prove  this,  let  n denote 
the  excess  of  the  mass  of  the  nucleus  above  that  of  an  equal 
solid  sphere  of  density  s equal  to  that  of  the  fluid  next  the 
nucleus.  Then  we  may  put  (24)  under  the  form 


'A  = I775 - fa  (s~ p) r'2dr'  + ^ (30). 

For  stability  it  is  necessary  that  n and  s — p be  each  positive; 
and  therefore  the  last  term  of  the  second  member  is  positive, 
and  diminishes  as  r increases,  while  the  second  term  of  the  same 
is  negative,  and  in  absolute  magnitude  increases,  and  the  first 
term  is  constant.  Hence  i b diminishes  as  r increases.  Atrain 
when  the  force  is  of  the  kind  specified,  we  must  [App.  B.  (58)] 

have  A.  = Kr'  + K'r'*-'  (31), 

and  therefore  the  second  member  of  (28)  vanishes.  Hence  if, 
for  any  value  of  r,  dejdr  = 0, 

for  the  same,  — = i L e.  — log  i]/, 

dr  r ‘ dr  ° r> 

and  is  therefore  positive,  which  proves  (1).  Lastly,  when  the 
force  is  such  as  specified  in  (2),  we  have  At  = AV  simply,  and 
VOL.  II.  9r; 


402 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[822. 


Proportion- 
ate devia- 
tion for  case 
of  centri- 
fugal force, 
or  of  forco 
from  with- 
out. 


therefore  the  second  member  of  (29)  vanishes.  This  equation 
then  gives,  for  values  of  r exceeding  a by  infinitely  little, 


dr 


d . 

~ &l  clr  log 


which  is  positive.  Hence  e.  commences  increasing  from  the 
nucleus.  But  it  cannot  have  a minimum  (1),  and  therefore  it 
increases  throughout,  outwards. 


Case  of 

centrifugal 

force. 


823.  When  the  disturbance  is  that  due  to  rotation  of  the 
liquid,  the  potential  of  the  disturbing  force  is  h co2  (x2  + y2) , which 
is  equal  to  a solid  harmonic  of  the  second  degree  with  a con- 
stant added.  From  this  it  follows  [§§  822,  779]  that  the  sur- 
faces of  equal  density  are  concentric  oblate  ellipsoids  of  revolu- 
tion, with  a common  axis,  and  with  ellipticities  diminishing 
from  the  surface  inwards. 


We  have,  in  (10)  of  last  section, 

e=K(^+ jo =*«■*■•  (ey+o. 

This  gives  by  (7)  and  (14), 


or  = ujvo . 


Hence 


r + Sr  = ?•(!+  — ©!,0) ) = t 


u 


1 + -?  (^  - cos2  0) 


*>*•') ■' (1)> 


neglecting  terms  of  the  second  order  because  w,  and  therefore 
also  ujr,  are  very  small. 

Thus  the  sphere,  whose  radius  was  r,  has  become  an  oblate 
ellipsoid  of  revolution  whose  ellipticity  [§  822  (27)]  is 


(2). 


Its  polar  diameter  is  diminished  by  the  fraction  -j  ujr  or  e2, 
and  its  equatorial  diameter  is  increased  by  ^e2;  the  volume 
remaining  unaltered. 

In  order  to  find  the  value  of  u2,  we  must  have  data  or 
assumptions  which  will  enable  us  to  integrate  equation  (15). 
These  may  be  given  in  many  forms ; but  one  alone,  to  which  we 
proceed,  has  been  worked  out  to  practical  conclusions. 


824.] 


STATICS. 


403 


824.  To  apply  the  results  of  the  preceding  investigation  to  Laplace’s 
the  determination  of  the  law  of  ellipticity  of  the  layers  olcai  iawof 
equal  density  within  the  earth,  on  the  hypothesis  of  its  within  the 
original  fluidity,  it  is  absolutely  essential  that  we  commence 
with  some  assumption  (in  default  of  information)  as  to  the 
law  which  connects  the  density  with  the  distance  from  the 
earth’s  centre.  For  we  have  seen  (§  821)  how  widely  different 
are  the  results  obtained  when  we  take  two  extreme  suppo- 
sitions, viz.,  that  the  mass  is  homogeneous;  and  that  the  density 
is  infinitely  great  at  the  centre.  In  few  measurements  hitherto 
made  of  the  Compressibility  of  Liquids  (see  Yol.  II.,  Properties 
of  Matter)  has  the  pressure  applied  been  great  enough  to 
produce  condensation  to  the  extent  of  one-half  per  cent.  The 
small  condensations  thus  experimented  on  have  been  found, 
as  might  be  expected,  to  be  very  approximately  in  simple 
proportion  to  the  pressures  in  each  case  ; but  experiment  has 
not  hitherto  given  any  indication  of  the  law  of  compressibility 
for  any  liquid  under  pressures  sufficient  to  produce  considerable 
condensations.  In  default  of  knowledge,  Laplace  assumed,  as  an 
hypothesis,  the  law  of  compressibility  of  the  matter  of  which, 
before  its  solidification,  the  earth  consisted,  to  be  that  the 
increase  of  the  square  of  the  density  is  proportional  to  the  in-  Assumed 
crease  of  pressure.  This  leads,  by  the  ordinary  equation  of  tween  den- 
hydrostatic  equilibrium,  to  a very  simple  expression  for  the  law  pressure, 
of  density,  which  is  still  further  simplified  if  we  assume  that 
the  density  is  everywhere  finite. 

Neglecting  the  disturbing  forces,  we  have  (§§  822,  752) 


dp  = Pd(V+N), 


But,  by  the  hypothesis  of  Laplace,  as  above  stated,  Jc  being  some 


constant 

Hence 


dp  = Jcpdp  . . 
Tcp  + 0=  V+N 


(2). 


or,  by  § 822  (5), 


Multiplying  by  r,  and  differentiating,  we  get 


2G — 2 


404 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[824. 


Laplace’s 
hypotheti- 
cal law  of 
density 
within  the 
earth. 


Law  of 
density. 


and 


d3  . . 47T 

^ ( rP ) = --TrP- 


dr3  vr/  k 

If  wo  write  = 1/k",  the  integral  may  be  thus  expressed — 


rp 


= Fsin  Q 


+ G . 


If  we  suppose  the  whole  mass  to  be  liquid,  i.e.,  if  there  be  no 
solid  core,  or,  at  all  events,  the  same  law  of  density  to  hold  from 
surface  to  centre,  G must  vanish,  else  the  density  at  the  centre 
would  be  infinite.  Hence,  in  what  follows,  we  shall  take 


F . r 
p = — sin  -. 
r k 


.(3). 


With  this  value  of  p it  is  easy  to  see  that 


I 


V2p'cZr'  = - kV2  ^ . 

o dr 


■(4), 


the  common  value  of  these  quantities  being 


Determina- 
tion of  ellip- 
ticities  of 
surfaces 
of  equal 
density. 


t-,  2 / . r r r\ 

Fk  ( sm cos  - ) . 

\ K K K/ 

We  are  now  prepared  to  find  the  value  of  u2  in  § 823,  upon 
which  depends  the  ellipticity  of  the  strata.  For  (15)  of  § 822 
becomes,  by  (23)  of  that  section  and  the  late  equation  (4), 


(^'  - **  %)  - ■ * If  [**  jl  V % * + ’'V  % *]  - T * ¥ = » "V  - ' (5) 


where  p'  is  the  mass  of  fluid,  following  the  density  law  (3),  which 
is  displaced  by  the  core  p,  and  q is  the  surface  density.  In  the 
terrestrial  problem  we  may  assume  p'  - p,  and  of  course  a = 0. 
For  simplicity  put 

rC^u2  = v (6), 

then  divide  by  r2  and  differentiate,  and  we  have 


d_ 

dr 


Multiply  by  rc,  and  again  differentiate;  the  result  is 


STATICS. 


405 


824.] 


The  integral  of  this  equation  is  known  to  bo 


so  that  ua  is  known  from  (6).  Now  we  have  already  proved  that 
ua  increases  from  the  centre  outwards,  so  that  we  must  have 
C'  — 0,  for  otherwise  u„  would  be  infinite  at  the  centre.  Thus, 
dropping  the  suffix  „ to  the  symbol  e for  brevity,  we  liave 


K K 


Now  let 


(91). 


We  may  thus  write  (9)  as  follows  : 

3 1 

S’2  1-3-  cot 

The  constants  are,  of  course,  to  be  determined  by  the  known 
values  of  the  ellipticity  of  the  surface  and  of  the  angular  velocity 
of  the  mass. 


Fk‘  t 


Now  (5)  becomes,  at  the  surface, 

y l*pradr  + jV  ~ u2  dr  = £ rV+  ±irq\XaX.. . (10). 


We  may  next  eliminate  p,  dpi  dr,  and  q,  being  the  surface  value 
of  p,  by  means  of  (3)  (4),  (6),  and  (8),  and  substitute  everywhere 
re  for  u2.  Also,  if  m be  the  ratio  of  centrifugal  force  to 

gravity  at  the  equator,  co  is  to  be  eliminated  by  means  of  the 
equation 


from  which  p is 
substitutions  (10) 


m = 


ro/ 


4tt  fr 

1J  Pr 
t JO 


dr 


to  be  removed  by  (3).  By  the  help  of  these 
becomes  transformed  as  follows: — 


4 ttFz  [i  . r 4tt(7  ft  3 f /3  1\  . r 3 r]  , 

— r sin  - * 1 r fl>  - - - cos  -J  dr  . 

. 4:irmF  ft  . r T 47 tF  , r 

= — o — I rsm  - dr  +— — re  sin - 
2 x Jo  K 5 K 

If  we  put  tan  t/k  = t,  and  x/k  = 6,  so  that  6 is  the  surface  valu 

of  $,  the  integrated  expression,  divided  by  jTtF(ks  cos  6jx,  wit] 


Laplace’s 
hypotheti- 
cal law  of 
density 
within  tho 
earth. 

Conse- 
quences 
as  regards 
ellipticitics 
of  surfaces 
of  equal 
density. 


40G 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[824. 


Laplace’s 
hypotheti- 
cal law  of 
density 
within  the 
earth. 

Ratio  of 
ellipticity  of 
surface  to 
the  fraction 
expressing 
centrifugal 
force  at 
equator  in 
terms  of  sur- 
face gravity. 


Ellipticity 
of  internal 
stratum. 


C eliminated  by  (9n),  becomes 

5 - (3-<of-3<?  I1 1 5 <‘  - *> + 0’ - - ^ (« - *>  + »t. 

Hence  at  once 

5m  6*  + 6H  + 6Ha  - 2 t263 

2e  “ («-0)[(3-0a)«-V0] ( ■ 1 1 )* 

$ 

If  we  put  l—s  for  -,  i.  e.,  for  — , this  becomes  somewhat 

c tan  r/K 

simpler,  and  may  be  written 

5m  0*  - 3z#2  + 2202  20*  02 

Tc  ” 3 (33-  o2Y~  = 3^o2  “ * ; (12)- 

The  mean  density  of  the  sphere  comprised  within,  the  radius 
r is 


j’ 

Jo_ 

f 

Jo 


pr2dr 


r2dr 


jp  2 {sin  (t/k)  - (t/k)  cos  (r/#e)}  3F  f sin  S - b cos  S) 

* ' • “VI  y ■]• 


A-i'3 


Let  p0  be  the  mean  density  of  the  sphere  comprised  within  this 
radius  r,  and  p,  as  before,  the  density  at  the  stratum  defined  by 
the  radius  r.  It  may  be  noted  in  passing  that  qQ  and  q are  the 
values  of  p0  and  p corresponding  to  r = x. 

Then, 

32?  ( sin  £r  — £r  cos  .&•■)  „ . 

Po=V  { y / (12l)> 

F . F sin  3" 

p = — sm  -S-  = — — - — . 

1 r k 


If  we  put  f for  the  ratio  of  the  mean  density  of  this  sphere  to 
the  density  at  its  bounding  surface,  we  have 


/=  cp  (1  - cot  $) 


■(in 


Substituting  in  (9h) 


~ Fk- y \ /)■ 

Then  wilting  for  % its  value  t/k,  we  have 


e = — 


3 Cl 
Fra 


Since  3C/Fis  constant,  it  follows  that  (er*)/(l  - 1//)  is  the  same 
for  all  the  strata  of  equal  density.  If  therefore  f be  the  surface 


STATICS. 


407 


824.] 


value  of  f that  is  to  say  the  ratio  qjq  of  the  mean  density  to  the  Laplace's^ 
surface  density  of  the  whole  earth,— a quantity  which  may  be 
determined  by  experiment, 


er 


,2 


Cl 


,(12ui). 


i-i//  i - i/t 

This  formula  gives  the  ellipticity  of  any  internal  stratum  accord- 
ing to  the  Laplacian  theory. 

It  may  be  also  reduced  to  another  form  which  is  perhaps 
rather  curious  than  important,  as  follows  : — 

Differentiate  (12*)  logarithmically  with  regard  to  h,  and  we 
•d  $ 3 

d$l°Sp  o"!  _$cot$  St’ 


within  the 
earth. 
Ellipticity 
of  internal 
stratum. 


have 

Then  by  (12n) 


And  since 


dSt 

T'' 


dr 

r 


r3  ( 1 /)  ’ * rdr  ^°g  * d (ra) log  Po' 


Hence  (12**1)  shows  that  e varies  as 

d 


d (O 


logPo- 


Thus  we  may  state  verbally  that  the  ellipticity  of  any  internal 
stratum  varies  as  the  rate  of  decrease,  per  unit  increase  of  area 
of  the  stratum,  of  the  logarithm  of  the  mean  density  of  the. 
sphere  comprised  within  that  stratum*. 

The  formula  (12)  for  5m/2c  may  now  be  more  simply  ex- 
pressed. Attributing  to  f and  h their  surface  values  f and  6 , 
we  have  from  (12fi) 

^ (13). 


f=|s(l-0cot0)  = 3*  6 


td*  e2  

From  this  equation  6 may  be  found  by  approximation,  and  then 
(12)  gives  c in  terms  of  known  quantities.  In  fact,  it  becomes 

{0a  3 

-f (14). 


Ratio  of 
mean  to 
surface 
density. 


om 

2e 


3(f-l) 


This  and  the  preceding  mode  of  expressing  the  ellipticity  of  an  internal 
stratum  are  taken  (with  changed  notation)  from  a paper  by  Mr  G.  H.  Darwin 
in  the  Messenger  of  Mathematics  (Vol.  vi.),  1877,  p.  109. 


408 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[824. 


Laplace’s 
hypotheti- 
cal law  of 
density 
within  the 
earth. 


Ellipticity 
of  strata 
of  equal 
density. 


From  (13)  and  (14)  the  numbers  in  columns  iv.  and  v.  of  the 
following  table  are  easily  calculated.  Column  vii.  shows  the 
ratio  of  the  moment  of  inertia  about  a mean  diameter,  on  the 

assumed  law  of  density,  to  what  it  would  be  if  the  earth  were 
homogeneous : — 


n. 


in. 


iv. 


VI. 


1 - - . 
t 

©* 

o 

QO 

tH 

1 k 

e. 

f. 

t. 

<E-% 
C * 

C 

IMx*' 

3-91 

140° 

2-444 

1-966 

1 

292 

•00335 

•843 

4-24 

142°-5 

2-487 

2-057 

1 

295 

•00330 

•836 

4-61 

145° 

2-531 

2-161 

1 

299 

•00325 

•826 

5-04 

147°-5 

2-574 

2-282 

1 

302-5 

•00321 

•818 

5-53 

160° 

2-618 

2-423 

1 

306^5 

•00315 

•810 

6-11 

152°-5 

2-662 

2-589 

1 

311 

•00309 

•801 

6-80 

155° 

2-705 

2-788 

1 

315 

■00304 

•792 

824'*.  The  table  given  in  § 824  is  principally  of  interest  for 
application  to  the  case  of  the  earth,  because  it  embraces  those 
values  of  6 which  correspond  with  values  of  f nearly  equal  to  2; 
and  expei iment  has  shown  that  the  mean  density  of  the  earth 
is  about  twice  that  of  superficial  rocks.  But  the  march  of  the 
functions  6 and  f,  as  we  pass  from  the  hypothesis  of  the 
homogeneity  of  the  planet  to  that  of  infinitely  small  surface 
density,  will  afford  an  interesting  illustration  of  the  Laplacian 
theory,  and  will  besides  afford  the  means  of  application  with 
some  degree  of  probability,  to  some  of  the  other  planets. 

When  6 is  small  we  have 

f = 1 + A 6 2 

A o 


5 m 

2c 


= 2 + A*" 


•(1), 


* This  section  (§  824')  is  derived  from  a paper  by  Mr  Darwin  in  the  Monthly 
Notices  of  the  It.  Ast.  Soc.,  Dec.  1876. 


824'.] 


STATICS. 


409 


and  when  0 is  infinitely  nearly  equal  to  180° 


f = 


3 

7r  (7 r—  6) 


TT  (jr  — 6)  (5 


1 

~5 


IT 


2)} 


J 


Ellipticity 
of  strata 
of  equal 
density. 


(2). 


We  see  from  (1)  and  (2)  that  as  6 ranges  from  zero  to  180°,  f 
increases  from  unity  to  infinity,  and  5??i/2e  from  2 to  ^7r3. 

Intermediate  values  of  these  functions,  computed  from  the 
formulae  of  § 824,  are  given  in  the  following  table  : — • 


^ or  0 
in  degrees. 



/ or  f. 

5m 

W 

O 

0 

1-0000 

2-000 

40 

1-0341 

2-029 

50 

1-0548 

2-046 

60 

1-0817 

2-067 

70 

1-1161 

2-094 

80 

1-1600 

2-126 

90 

1-2159 

2-165 

100 

1-2879 

2-213 

110 

1-3827 

2-270 

120 

1-5109 

2-338 

130 

1-6922 

2-422 

140 

1-9657 

2-525 

150 

2-4225 

2-652 

160 

3-3363 

2-813 

170 

6-0750 

3-019 

180 

00 

3-290 

The  numbers  here  given  are  applicable  in  two  ways,  viz.  for 
determining  the  ellipticity  of  any  internal  stratum  of  the  earth, 
and  for  application  to  the  cases  of  the  external  figures  of  the 
other  planets  as  above  stated. 


410 


Ellipticity 
of  strata 
of  equal 
density. 


The  distri- 
bution of 
density  in 
•Tupiter  and 
Saturn. 


abstract  dynamics. 


[824'. 


To  determine  the  ellipticity  of  an  internal  stratum  »e  write 
(1l  ')  § 824  in  the  following  form  : — 

e = (i\*  1 ~ !// 

c W 1-1/t  (3)- 

We  must  in  (3)  take  $ as  the  same  fraction  of  6,  as  r,  the 
radius  of  the  stratum  in  question,  is  of  r the  earth’s  mean 
radius.  Thus  if  for  example,  r = T%x,  and  if  (as  is  probable  in 
the  case  of  the  earth)  f = 21,  0=144’,  we  must  take  S=60’ 
The  table  then  shows  that  $ = 60°  gives  /=D0817.  By  sub- 
stitution in  (3)  we  get  6 = ^*;  which  with  t = ^r,  gives 


e — 


if  tt- 


Iu  the  cases  of  those  planets  which  have  satellites,  m and 
e ~ im  are  determinable  from  observation  and  from  the  theory 
of  the  satellites;  so  that  5m/ 2c  is  determinable.  This  function 
being  known,  the  corresponding  value  of  f is  determinable  from 
the  table,  or  by  direct  computation.  For  example,  Mr  G.  H.  Darwin 
has  shown  that  in  the  case  of  Jupiter,  where  5m/2t  is  3‘2646,  we 
must  have  f = 68,  6 = 179°  IF  20",  ande  = 1/16-022*.  Different 
data,  perhaps  equally  probable,  give  somewhat  different  results, 
but  in  all  cases  the  physical  conclusion  is  that  the  superficial  den- 
sity of  the  visible  disk  of  J upiter  is  very  small  compared  with  the 
mean  density — a conclusion  which  appears  to  agree  well  with 
the  telescopic  appearance  of  that  planet.  A similar  application 
to  the  planet  Saturn  points  to  a similar  result,  but  the  conclu- 
sion is  less  certain  on  account  of  the  great  uncertainty  in  the 
data. 


825-  The  phenomena  of  Precession  and  Nutation  result 
l?dTut7-  from  the  eartll’s  being  not  centrobaric  (§  534),  and  therefore 
tion-  attracting  the  sun  and  moon,  and  experiencing  reactions  from 
them,  in  lines  which  do  not  pass  precisely  through  the  earth’s 
centre  of  inertia,  except  when  they  are  in  the  plane  of  its 
equator.  The  attraction  of  either  body  transferred  (§  559,  c) 
from  its  actual  line  to  a parallel  line  through  the  earth’s  centre 
of  inertia,  gives  therefore  a couple  which,  if  we  first  assume, 
for  simplicity,  gravity  to  be  symmetrical  round  the  polar  axis, 


* In  the  Mec.  Cel.  (vm.  vii.  § 23)  Laplace  uses  values  of  m and  c which 
make  5»i/2c  greater  than  { 7r2.  His  determination  of  the  Processional  Constant 
of  the  planet  is  thus  vitiated. 


825.] 


STATICS. 


411 


tends  to  turn  the  earth  round  a diameter  of  its  equator,  in  the 
direction  bringing  the  plane  of  the  equator  towards  the  dis- 
turbing body.  The  moment  of  this  couple  is  [§  539  (14)] 
equal  to 

O Q 

Yp-(C—A)  sin  8 cos  5 (14), 

where  S denotes  the  mass  of  the  disturbing  body,  D its  dis- 
tance, and  8 its  declination ; and  C and  A the  earth’s  moments 
of  inertia  round  polar  and  equatorial  diameters  respectively. 
In  all  probability  (§§  796,  797)  there  is  a sensible  difference 
between  the  moments  of  inertia  round  the  two  principal  axes 
in  the  plane  (§  795)  of  the  equator:  but  it  is  obvious,  and 
will  be  proved  in  Yol.  II.,  that  Precession  and  Nutation  are  the 
same  as  they  would  be  if  the  earth  were  symmetrical  about  an 
axis,  and  had  for  moment  of  inertia  round  equatorial  diameters, 
the  arithmetical  mean  between  the  real  greatest  and  least  values. 
From  (12)  of  § 539  we  see  that  in  general  the  differences  of  the 
moments  of  inertia  round  principal  axes,  or,  in  the  case  of 
symmetry  round  an  axis,  the  value  of  G~A,  may  be  deter- 
mined solely  from  a knowledge  of  surface  or  external  gravity, 
01  [§§  F94,  795]  from  the  figure  of  the  sea  level,  without 
any  data  regarding  the  internal  distribution  of  density. 

Equating  § 539  (12)  to  § 794  (17),  in  which,  when  the 
sea  level  is  supposed  symmetrical,  F2  (#,  <i)  becomes  simply 
t (^  — cos2  0),  we  find 


2ft2 


f t . i ' _ a 

,-i ~ (c  — 2m)  (^  — cos"  &)  ~ 4 — ^ — (75-  — c 


cos2  6), 


whence 


= (c  -bn) 


.(15). 


Similarly  we  may  prove  the  same  formula  to  hold  for  the  real 
case,  in  which  the  sea  level  is  an  ellipsoid  of  three  unequal  axes, 
one  of  which  coincides  with  the  axis  of  rotation;  provided  c 
denotes  the  mean  of  the  ellipticities  of  the  two  principal  sections 
of  this  ellipsoid  through  the  axis  of  rotation,  and  A the  mean  of 

the  moments  of  inertia  round  the  twQ  principal  axes  in  the 
plane  of  the  equator. 


Dynamical 
origin  of 
Precession 
and  Nuta- 
tion. 


412 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[82G. 


Procession 
gives  infor- 
mation as 
to  the  dis- 
tribution of 
the  earth’s 
mass,  while 
surface- 
gravity  does 
not. 


Precession 
gives  infor- 
mation as 
to  the  dis- 
tribution of 
the  earth’s 
mass. 


The  con- 
stant of 
Precession 
deduced 
from  La- 
place’s law. 


826.  The  angular  accelerations  produced  by  the  disturbing 
couples  are  (§  281)  directly  as  the  moments  of  the  couples,  ; 
and  inversely  as  the  earth’s  moment  of  inertia  round  an  equa- 
torial diameter.  But  the  integral  results,  observed  in  Precession 
and  Nutation,  would,  if  the  earth’s  condition  varied,  vary 
directly  as  C — A,  and  inversely  as  C.  We  have  seen  (§  794) 
that  if  the  interior  distribution  of  density  were  varied  in 
any  way  subject  to  the  condition  of  leaving  the  superficial, 
and  consequently  (§  793)  the  exterior,  gravity  unchanged, 
C — A remains  unchanged.  But  it  is  not  so  with  G,  which 
will  be  the  less  or  the  greater,  according  as  the  mass  is  more 
condensed  in  the  central  parts,  or  more  nearly  homogeneous 
to  within  a small  distance  of  the  surface : and  thus  it  is  that  a 
comparison  between  dynamical  theory  and  observation  of  Pre- 
cession and  Nutation  gives  us  information  as  to  the  interior 
distribution  of  the  earth’s  density  (just  as  from  the  rate  of 
acceleration  of  balls  or  cylinders  rolling  down  an  inclined 
plane  we  can  distinguish  between  solid  brass  gilt,  and  hollow 
gold,  shells  of  equal  weight  and  equal  surface  dimensions); 
while  no  such  information  can  be  had  from  the  figure  of  the 
sea  level,  the  surface  distribution  of  gravity,  or  the  disturbance 
of  the  moon’s  motion,  without  hypothesis  as  to  primitive  fluidity 
or  present  agreement  of  surfaces  of  equal  density  with  the 
surfaces  which  would  be  of  equal  pressure  were  the  w’hole 
deprived  of  rigidity. 

827.  But  we  shall  first  find  what  the  magnitude  of  the 
terrestrial  constant  (G  — A)/C  of  Precession  and  Nutation  would 
be,  if  Laplace’s  were  the  true  law  of  density  in  the  interior  of 
the  earth ; and  if  the  layers  of  equal  density  were  level  for  the 
present  angular  velocity  of  rotation.  Every  moment  of  inertia 
involving  the  latter  part  of  this  assumption  will  be  denoted  by 
a black-letter  capital. 

The  moment  of  inertia  about  the  polar  axis  is,  by  § 281, 

rr  rkir  r2ir  _ „ 

(£  = 211  I pr2  sin  6drd6d<f) . r2  sin2  6, 

Jo  Jo  Jo 

the  first  factor  under  the  integral  sign  being  an  element  of  the 
mass,  the  second  the  square  of  its  distance  from  the  axis. 


827.] 


STATICS. 


413 


For  the  moment  of  inertia  about  another  principal  axis  The  con- 
(which  may  be  any  equatorial  radius,  but  is  here  taken  as  that  ^cession 
lying  in  the  plane  from  which  </>  is  measured),  we  have  p^’s  law. 

SI  = 2 I I I pi3  sin  Odvdddcfi . r2  (1  - sin-  0 sin2  <£). 

Jo  Jo  Jo 


Now,  by  § 823,  we  have 

r = r [1  + e — cos2  0)], 


where  r denotes  the  mean  radius  of  the  surface  of  equal  density 
passing  through  r,  0,  </> ; whence 


r*dr  — A dr  = r*dr  + Q-  — cos 2 6)  ^ (r5e)  clr. 


Let 

and 


•(16). 


= tV*i 


Now  we  have 


J pr4dr  = K 

jr,|  <*)*-*, 

/■Jtt  C2n 

Then  & = 2 J j sin3  ddddcjj  [K  + A]  - cos20)] 

or  C — nearly (17). 

©-SU2  [*”  [27r  sin0d9d<ji  [7t  + K (^  — cos20)]  (sin2  0 - 1 + sin20  sin2<£) 
Jo  Jo 

••••' (18). 

K — f pr*dr  = F [ r3  sin  -dr, 

Jo  Jo  k 

or,  if  we  put  as  before  0 = - , t — tan  0, 

K 

K = Fk 4 cos  0 ( - 03  + 302<  + G0  - 6<). 

/,r- = j/  i ^ dr  = r't?-  £ r’e  s*’ 

and  this,  by  (10)  of  last  section,  becomes 

rpr’dr-^  (19). 

= 5(c-fm)7W((-0)cosft 


Again 


N. 

\ 


L 

V 


* 


1 


-- 


414 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[827. 


The  con- 
stant of 
Precession 
deduced 
from  La- 
place’sLaw. 


Thus,  finally, 
G 


E 

K 


= (c  - \m) 


6s  (t-Q) 

— 6a  + '66at  + 60  — 6t 


= (C~|m)2T(l-6r> (2°) 

C — 

1 - 6~(  f — \)jlO* (21)- 

4 ram  these  formulae  the  numbers  in  Column  vi.  of  the  table 
§ 824  were  calculated.  By  (18)  and  (19)  we  see  that 

® ~ & = § tt  (x2e  J pr2dr  - 

= §Mv*(e-$m) (22), 

which  agrees,  as  it  ought  to  do,  with  (15)  of  § 825. 


m 


A comparison  of  (21)  and  (22)  then  shows  that 


C = £Mt3 


1-6 


(f-1)- 

W* 


.(23). 


ofTapiace’s  -^rom  ^ie  elaborate  investigations  of  Precession  and 

wTtii  obser-  Natation  made  by  Le  Verrier  and  Serret,  it  appears  that  the 
true  value  of  (C  - A)/C  is,  very  approximately,  -00327*.  This, 
according  to  the  table  of  § 824,  agrees  with  (©-&)/£  for /=  2T, 
which  gives  c = ¥a7.  These  are  (§§  792,  796,  797)  about  the’ 
most  probable  values  which  we  can  assign  to  these  elements 
by  observation.  Thus,  so  far  as  we  have  the  means  of  testing  it, 
Laplace’s  hypothesis  is  verified. 


pressibiiity  ®29.  But,  as  a further  check  upon  Laplace’s  assumption,  it 
in'the  hypo-  *s  necessary  to  inquire  whether  the  results  involve  anything 
inconsistent  with  experimental  knowledge  of  the  compressi- 
bility of  matter  under  such  pressures  as  we  can  employ  in  the 
laboratory.  For  this  purpose  the  first  column  has  been  added 
to  the  preceding  table.  From  it  may  be  deduced  the  compres- 
sibility of  the  upper  stratum  of  liquid  matter,  which  composed 
the  crust  of  the  earth,  required  by  the  assumed  law  of  density, 
for  the  respective  values  of  6.  In  fact,  the  numbers  in  Col.  i. 
are  those  by  which  the  earth’s  radius  must  be  divided  to  find 


* Annales  de  V Observatoire  Imperial  de  Paris,  1859,  p.  324. 


STATICS. 


415 


829.] 


the  lengths  of  the  modulus  of  compression  (§  G88)  of  the  upper- 
most layer  of  fluid,  according  to  the  surface  value  of  gravity. 

We  have,  by  § 824  (3), 


The  com- 
pressibility 
involved 
in  the  hypo- 
thesis. 


7 


F . r da  F (sin  (r//c)  cos  (?'/K)) 

- sin  - , 1 = J > 

r k dr  r ( r k \ 


whence,  at  the  surface, 


1 dq~ 
q dr 


Tlie  corresponding  numbers  for  several  different  liquid  and 
solid  substances  are  as  follows  : — 


Alcohol 

• 

37 

Compressi- 
bility of  lava 

Water 

29 

required  by 
Laplace’s 

Mercury 

27 

hypothesis, 

compared 

Glass 

5-0 

with  experi- 
mental 

Copper 

8-1 

data. 

Iron 

• • • • 

4-1 

Melted  Lava, 

by  Laplace’s  law,  with  f — 2d 

4-42 

This  comparison  may  be  considered  as  decidedly  not  adverse 
to  Laplace’s  law,  but  actual  experiments  on  the  compressibility 
of  melted  rock  are  still  a desideratum. 


830.  In  § 27G  it  was  proved  that  the  tides  must  tend  Numerical 
to  diminish  the  angular  velocity  of  the  earth’s  rotation  ; it  may  °r  the 

i . . J ; J amount  of 

be  proved  (and  it  was  our  intention  to  do  so  in  a later  volume)  tidal  lric- 

, , . . ' tion. 

that  this  tendency  is  not  counterbalanced  to  more  than  a very  seoAppcn- 
minute  degree  by  the  tendency  to  acceleration  which  results  Tidal  °u 
from  the  secular  cooling  and  shrinking  of  the  earth.  In  obser-  l rKtl0n‘ 
vational  astronomy  the  earth’s  rotation  serves  as  a time-keeper, 
and  thus  a retardation  of  terrestrial  rotation  will  appear  astrono- 
mically as  an  acceleration  of  the  motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies. 

It  is  only  in  the  case  of  the  moon’s  motion  that  such  an 

apparent  acceleration  can  be  possibly  detected.  Now,  as  Lajilace 

first  pointed  out,  there  must  be  a slow  variation  in  the  moon’s 

mean  motion  arising  from  the  secular  changes  in  the  eccentricity 

of  the  earth’s  orbit  round  the  sun.  At  the  present  time,  and  s?  £ 

for  several  thousand  years  in  the  future,  the  variation  in  the 

moon  s motion  has  been  and  will  be  an  acceleration.  Laplace’s 

theoretical  calculation  of  the  amount  of  that  acceleration 


41G 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Numerical 
estimates 
of  the 
amount  of 
tidal  fric- 
tion. 

See  Appen- 
dix G on 
Tidal 
Friction. 


[830. 


appeared  to  agree  well  with  the  results  which  were  in  his  day- 
accepted  as  representing  the  facts  of  observations.  But  in  1853 
Adams  wrote  as  follows  : — 

“ In  the  Mecanique  Celeste,  the  approximation  to  the  value 
“ of  the  acceleration  is  confined  to  the  principal  term,  but  in  the 
“ theories  of  Damoiseau  and  Plana  the  developments  are  carried 
“ to  an  immense  extent,  particularly  in  the  latter,  where  the  mul- 
tiplier of  the  change  in  the  square  of  the  eccentricity  of  the 
“ earth’s  orbit,  which  occurs  in  the  expression  of  the  secular 
“ acceleration,  is  developed  to  terms  of  the  seventh  order. 

“As  these  theories  agree  in  principle,  and  only  differ  slightly 
“in  the  numerical  value  which  they  assign  to  the  acceleration, 
“and  as  they  passed  under  the  examination  of  Laplace,  with 
“ especial  reference  to  this  subject,  it  might  be  supposed  that  at 
“ most  only  some  small  numerical  corrections  would  be  required 
“ in  order  to  obtain  a very  exact  determination  of  the  amount  of 
“ this  acceleration. 

“ It  has  therefore  not  been  without  some  surprise,  that  I have 
“ lately  found  that  La2ilace’s  explanation  of  the  phenomenon  in 
“question  is  essentially  incomplete,  and  that  the  numerical 
“ results  of  Damoiseau’s  and  Plana’s  theories,  with  reference 
“to  it,  consequently  require  to  be  very  sensibly  altered*.” 

Hansen’s  theory  of  the  secular  acceleration  is  vitiated  by  an 
error  of  principle  similar  to  that  which  affects  the  theories  of 
Damoiseau  and  Plana,  but  the  mathematical  process  which  he 
followed  being  different  from  theirs,  he  arrived  at  somewhat 
different  results.  From  this  erroneous  theory  Hansen  found 
the  value  12"-18  for  the  coefficient  of  the  term  in  the  moon’s 
mean  longitude  depending  on  the  square  of  the  time,  the  unit 
of  time  being  a century;  in  a later  computation  given  in  his 
Darlegung,  he  found  the  coefficient  to  be  12"-5Gf. 


* “ On  the  Secular  Variation  of  the  Moon’s  Mean  Motion,”  by  J.  C.  Adams. 
Phil.  Trans.  1853.  Vol.  143,  p.  397. 

+ It  appears  not  unusual  for  physical  astronomers  to  use  an  abbreviated 
phraseology,  for  specifying  accelerations,  which  needs  explanation.  Thus  when 
they  speak  of  the  secular  acceleration  being  e.g.  “ 12"-56  in  a century”;  they 
mean  by  “acceleration”  what  is  more  properly  “the  effect  of  the  acceleration 
on  the  moon’s  mean  longitude.”  The  correct  unabbreviated  statement  is  “ the 
acceleration  is  25" -12  per  century  per  century.”  Thus  Hausen’s  result  is  that 


830.] 


STATICS. 


417 


In  1859  Adams  communicated  to  Delaunay  Ins  final  result,  secular^ 
namely  that  the  coefficient  of  this  term  appears  from  a correctly  £»«>* 
conducted  investigation  to  be  5"‘7,  so  that  at  the  end  of  a tion 
century  the  moon  is  5"7  before  the  position  it  would  have  had 
at  the  same  time,  if  its  mean  angular  velocity  had  remained  the 
same  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  century.  Delaunay  verified 
this  result,  and  added  some  further  small  terms  which  increased 
the  coefficient  from  5"'7  to  6"T. 

Now,  according  to  Airy,  Hansen’s  value  of  the  “advance” 
represents  very  well  the  circumstances  of  the  eclipses  of 
Agathocles,  Larissa  and  Thales,  but  is  if  anything  too  small. 
Newcomb  on  the  other  hand  is  inclined  from  an  elaborate 
discussion  of  the  ancient  eclipses  to  believe  Hansen’s  value  to 
be  too  large,  and  gives  two  competing  values,  viz.  8"*4  and 
10"-9*. 

In  any  case  it  follows  that  the  value  of  the  advance  as 
theoretically  deduced  from  all  the  causes,  known  up  to  the 
present  time  to  be  operative,  is  smaller  than  that  which  agrees 
with  observation.  In  what  follows  12 " is  taken  as  the  obser- 
vational value  of  the  “ advance,”  and  6"  as  the  explained  part 
of  this  phenomenon.  About  the  beginning  of  1866  Delaunay  J^Sedb'y 
suggested  that  the  true  explanation  of  the  discrepancy  might  {jjjf frlc' 
be  a retardation  of  the  earth’s  rotation  by  tidal  friction.  Using 
this  hypothesis,  and  allowing  for  the  consequent  retardation  of 
the  moon’s  mean  motion  by  tidal  reaction  (§  276),  Adams,  in  an 
estimate  which  he  has  communicated  to  us,  founded  on  the 
rough  assumption  that  the  parts  of  the  earth’s  retardation  due 

in  each  century  the  mean  motion  of  the  moon  is  augmented  by  an  angular 
velocity  of  25"-12  per  century ; so  that  at  the  end  of  a century  the  mean 
longitude  is  greater  by  h of  2o",12  than  it  would  have  been  had  the  moon’s 
mean  motion  remained  the  same  as  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  century. 
Considering  how  absurd  it  would  be  to  speak  of  a falling  body  as  experi- 
encing an  acceleration  of  16  feet  in  a second,  or  of  64  feet  in  two  seconds; 
and  how  false  and  inconvenient  it  is  to  speak  of  a watch  being  20  seconds  fast 
when  it  is  20  seconds  in  advance  of  where  it  ought  to  be,  we  venture  to  suggest 
that,  to  attain  clearness  and  correctness  without  sacrifice  of  brevity,  “ advance” 
be  substituted  for  ‘ ‘ acceleration  ” in  the  ordinary  astronomical  phraseology. 

* See  Researches  on  the  Motion  of  the  Moon  (Washington,  1878),  by  Simon 
Newcomb,  Part  i.  pp.  13  and  280. 


VOL.  II. 


27 


418 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Numerical 
estimate 
of  amount 
of  tidal  re- 
tardation 
of  earth’s 
rotation. 


Thermo- 
dynamic 
acceleration 
of  earth’s 
rotation. 


Retardation 
from  fall 
of  meteoric 
dust. 


[830. 


to  solar  and  lunar  tides  are  as  the  squares  of  the  respective  tide- 
generating forces,  finds  22  sec.  as  the  error  by  which  the  earth, 
regarded  as  time-keeper,  would  in  a century  get  behind  a perfect 
clock  rated  at  the  beginning  of  the  century.  Thus  at  the 
end  of  a century  a meridian  of  the  earth  is  330"  behind  the 
position  in  which  it  would  have  been,  if  the  earth  had  con- 
tinued to  rotate  with  the  same  angular  velocity  which  it  had  at 
the  beginning  of  the  century*. 

Besides  the  secular  contraction  of  the  earth  in  cooling,  re- 
ferred to  above,  which  counteracts  the  tidal  retardation  of  the 
earth’s  rotation  to  a very  minute  degree,  there  exists  another 
counteracting  influence,  as  has  been  pointed  out  by  Sir  William 
Thomson -f*,  which,  though  much  more  considerable,  is  still  but 
small  in  the  amount  of  its  accelerative  effect,  compared  with 
the  actual  retardation  as  estimated  by  Adams.  It  is  an  ob- 
served fact  that  the  barometer  indicates  variations  of  pressure 
during  the  day  and  night,  and  it  is  found  that  when  these 
variations  are  analysed  into  their  diurnal  and  semi-diurnal  har- 
monic constituents,  the  semi-diurnal  constituent  rises  to  its 
maximum  about  10  a.m.  and  10  p.m.  The  crest  of  the  nearer 
atmospheric  tidal  protuberance  is  thus  directed  to  a point  in  the 
heavens  westward  of  the  sun,  and  the  solar  attraction  on  these 
protuberances  causes  a couple  about  the  earth’s  axis  by  which 
the  rotation  is  accelerated.  As  the  barometric  oscillations  are 
due  to  solar  radiation,  it  follows  that  the  earth  and  sun  together 
constitute  a thermodynamic  engine.  Sir  William  Thomson 
computes,  as  a rough  approximation,  that  from  this  cause  the 
earth  gains  about  2 ’7  seconds  in  a century  on  a perfect  chro- 
nometer set  and  rated  at  the  beginning  of  the  century.  On  the 
other  hand  the  fall  of  meteoric  dust  on  to  the  earth  must  cause 
a small  retardation  of  the  earth’s  rotation,  although  to  an 
amount  probably  quite  insensible  in  a century. 


* See  Appendix  G (a),  where  Mr  G.  H.  Darwin  verifies  Professor  Adams’s 
computation,  and  shows  that  the  combination  of  Hansen’s  12"-56  with  Delaunay’s 
6"-l  would  show  the  earth  to  be  losing  23*4  sec.  in  the  circumstances  defined  in 
the  text;  and  that  the  combination  of  Newcomb’s  8"-4  with  Delaunay’s  6"'l 
would  give  a result  of  8-3  sec.  instead  of  23 ’4. 

f Societe  de  Physique,  Sept.  1881 ; or  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  Session 


STATICS. 


419 


890.] 


Whatever  be  the  value  of  the  retardation  of  the  earth’s  feral* 
rotation,  it  is  necessarily  the  result  of  several  causes,  of  which  grepo«- 
tidal  friction  is  almost  certainly  preponderant.  If  we  accept 
Adams’s  estimate  (according  to  which  the  earth  would  in  a 
century  get  22  sec.  behind  a perfect  clock  rated  at  the  beginning 
of  the  century)  as  applicable  to  the  outcome  of  the  vaiious 
concurring  causes,  then  if  the  rate  of  retardation  gi\  ing  the 
integral  effect  were  uniform,  the  earth  as  a time-keeper  would 
be  going  slower  by  '22  of  a second  per  year  in  the  middle,  and 
by  '44  of  a second  per  year  at  the  end,  than  at  the  beginning 
of  the  century. 

The  latter  is  71-7xTo»  of  the  Present  angular  velocity;  and 
if  the  rate  of  retardation  had  been  uniform  during  ten  mil- 
lion centuries  past,  the  earth  must  have  been  rotating  faster 
by  about  one -seventh  than  at  present,  and  the  centrifugal 
force  must  have  been  greater  in  the  proportion  of  817“  to  ili  , 
or  of  67  to  51.  If  the  consolidation  took  place  then  or  earlier, 
the  ellipticity  of  the  upper  layers  must  have  been  instead 
of  about  -g-jLj,  as  it  is  at  present.  It  must  necessarily  remain  Date^of^ 
uncertain  whether  the  earth  would  from  time  to  time  adjust 
itself  completely  to  a figure  of  equilibrium  adapted  to  the 
rotation.  But  it  is  clear  that  a want  of  complete  adjustment 
would  leave  traces  in  a preponderance  of  land  in  equatorial 
regions.  The  existence ^of  large  continents  (§  832'),  and  the 
great  effective  rigidity  of  the  earth’s  mass  (§  848),  render  it 
improbable  that  the  adjustments,  if  any,  to  the  appropriate 
figure  of  equilibrium  would  be  complete.  The  fact  then  that 
the  continents  are  arranged  along  meridians,  rather  than  in  an 
equatorial  belt,  affords  some  degree  of  proof  that  the  consolida- 
tion of  the  earth  took  place  at  a time  when  the  diurnal  rotation 
differed  but  little  from  its  present  value.  It  is  probable  there- 
fore that  the  date  of  consolidation  is  considerably  more  recent 
than  a thousand  million  years  ago.  It  is  proper  however  to 
add  that  Adams  lays  but  little  stress  on  the  actual  numerical 
values  which  have  been  used  in  this  computation,  and  is  of 
opinion  that  the  amount  of  tidal  retardation  of  the  earth’s 
rotation  is  quite  uncertain. 

In  Appendix  D,  § (j)  it  is  shown,  from  the  theory  of  the 

27—2 


420 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[830. 


Argument 
from  cool- 
ing of  the 
earth. 


Abrupt 
changes  of 
interior 
density, 
not  im- 
probable. 


Two  non- 
mixing 
liquids  of 
different 
densities, 
each  homo- 
geneous. 


conduction  of  heat,  that  the  date  of  consolidation  may  be  about 
a hundred  million  years  ago  ; but  that  in  all  probability  it 
cannot  have  been  so  remote  as  five  hundred  million  years  from 
the  present  time. 

831.  Y Tom,  the  known  facts  regarding  compressibilities  of 
terrestrial  substances,  referred  to  above  (§  829),  it  is  most 
probable  that  even  in  chemically  homogeneous  substances  there 
is  a continuous  increase  of  density  downwards  at  some  rate 
comparable  with  that  involved  in  Laplace’s  law.  But  it  is  not 
improbable  that  there  may  be  abrupt  changes  in  the  quality  of 
the  substance,  as,  for  instance,  if  a large  portion  of  the  interior 
of.  the  earth  had  at  one  time  consisted  of  melted  metals,  now 
consolidated.  We  therefore  append  a solution  of  the  problem 
of  determining  the  ellipticities  of  the  surfaces  of  a rotating 
mass  consisting  of  two  non-mixing  fluids  of  different  densities, 
each,  however,  being  supposed  incompressible. 


Let  the  densities  of  the  two  liquids  be  p and  p + p,  the  latter 
forming  the  spheroid 

r = a'  [1  + e'  (g-  — cos9#)] (1), 

and  the  former  filling  the  space  between  this  spheroid  and  the 
exterior  concentric  and  coaxal  surface 

r = a [1  + c - cos20)] (2). 

Also  let  the  whole  revolve  with  uniform  angular  velocity  w.  The 
conditions  of  equilibrium  are  that  the  surface  of  each  spheroid 
must  be  an  equipotential  surface. 


Now  the  potential  at  a point  r,  6,  in  the  outer  fluid  is 


| -vp  [£  (3a2  - r2)  + -|r2€  — cos8$)] 


+ s^P 


/5 


a 

- + Tf 

r r" 

+ iwV  + Wr2  (|-  — cos  ~9) 


.(3). 


The  first  line  is  the  potential  due  to  a liquid  of  density  p filling 
the  larger  spheroid,  the  second  that  due  to  a liquid  of  density  p 
filling  the  inner  spheroid,  the  third  is  the  potential  (|a>  r sin  6) 
of  centrifugal  force  arranged  in  solid  harmonics. 


831.] 


STATICS. 


421 


Substituting  in  (3)  the  values  of  r from  (1)  and  (2)  succes- 
sively, neglecting  squares,  etc.,  of  the  ellipticities,  and  equating 
to  zero  the  sum  of  the  coefficients  of  (-J-  — cos ”0) ; we  have  two 
equations  from  which  we  find 


(p  + !/-')(§ 


a 


'3 


a 


P+ZtP  ~fsPP 


3o>2 


, a5 ' 8tt 


.(4). 


The  corresponding  value  of  e is  to  be  found  from  the  equation 

£('>+?p,)=e{p+i'>(3  + 3^)}' 


Expressing  to*  in  terms  of  the  known  quantity  m we  have 
3co2  . / a'3  A 

--^,n[p+-py... (o). 

Also,  to  a sufficient  approximation,  we  have 

^=tw(p45^)| 

2£=*1raa(p+~p^  J 


(6), 


and  the  mean  density  is  obviously  p + -g-  p ..... (7). 

Cb 

The  numerical  values  opthe  expressions  (4)  and  (7)  are  approxi- 
mately known  from  observation  and  experiment,  so  that  if  we 
assume  a value  of  a la  we  can  at  once  find  p and  p,  and,  from 
them,  the  value  of  ((7-  A)jC -. 


From  the  formulas  just  given  it  is  easy  to  show  that  results 
closely  agreeing  with  observation  as  regards  precession,  ratio 
of  surface  density  to  mean  density,  and  ellipticity  of  sea  level 
may  be  obtained  without  making  any  inadmissible  hypotheses 
as  to  the  relative  volumes  and  densities  of  the  two  assumed 
liquids.  But  this  must  be  left  as  an  exercise  for  the  student. 

■ 

832.  These  estimates,  and  all  dynamical  investigations 
(whether  static  or  kinetic)  of  tidal  phenomena,  and  of  pre- 
cession and  nutation,  hitherto  published,  with  the  exceptions 
referred  to  below,  have  assumed  that  the  outer  surface  of  the 


Two  non- 
mixing 
fluids  of 
different 
densities, 
each  homo- 
geneous. 


Two  non- 
mixing 
fluids  of 
different 
densities. 


Rigidity  of 
the  earth : 


422 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[832. 


the  earth:  s0^d  eat  tit  is  absolutely  unyielding.  A few  years  ago*,  for 
the  first  time,  the  question  was  raised : Does  the  earth  retain 
its  figure  with  practically  perfect  rigidity,  or  does  it  yield 
sensibly  to  the  deforming  tendency  of  the  moon’s  and  sun’s 
attractions  on  its  upper  strata  and  interior  mass?  It  must 
3 ield  to  so ihg  extent,  as  no  substance  is  infinitely  rigid:  but 
whether  these  solid  tides  are  sufficient  to  be  discoverable  by 
any  kind  of  observation,  direct  or  indirect,  has  not  yet  been 
enough  to  ascertained  (see  § 84?)-  The  negative  result  of  attempts  to  trace 
gloiogfcai110  ^n^uence  011  ocean  and  lake  tides,  as  hitherto  observed, 
suffices>  as  we  slia11  see>  to  disprove  the  hypothesis,  hitherto  so 
solid  crust,  prevalent,  that  we  live  on  a mere  thin  shell  of  solid  substance, 
enclosing  a fluid  mass  of  melted  rocks  or  metals,  and  proves,  on 
the  contiaiy,  that  the  earth  as  a whole  is  much  more  rigid  than 
any  of  the  rocks  that  constitute  its  upper  crust. 

SsTtemal  832 . Since  the  first  edition  of  this  work  appeared,  certain 
theefrthby fuvther  investigations  have  been  made,  the  results  of  which 
S cout!?ht  from  a different  point  of  view  confirm  the  conclusion  at  which 
nents.  we  have  arrived  concerning  the  solidity  of  the  earth.  This 

subject,  forming  a point  of  confluence  of  the  sciences  of  astro- 
nomy and  geology,  appears  of  some  importance,  so  that  we 
propose  to  give  a short  account  of  these  investigations*!*. 

The  mathematical  theory  of  elastic  solids  imposes  no  restric- 
tions on  the  magnitudes  of  the  stresses,  except  in  so  far  as  that 
mathematical  necessity  requires  the  strains  to  be  small  enough 
to  admit  of  the  jR’inciple  of  superposition.  Nature  however 
Conditions  does  impose  a limit  on  the  stresses : if  they  exceed  a limit  the 

underwhich  ...  J 

elasticity  elasticity  breaks  down,  and  the  solid  either  flows  (as  in  the 

soiTdnsand  Pimclling  or  crushing  of  metals  j)  or  ruptures  (as  when  glass  or 
rupture  stone  breaks  under  excessive  tension).  It  follows  therefore  that 
besides  the  question  of  the  earth’s  rigidity,  on  which  depends  the 

* “ On  the  Rigidity  of  the  Earth.”  W.  Thomson.  Trans.  It.  S.,  May  1863, 
p.  573. 

t “ On  the  Stresses  caused  in  the  Interior  of  the  Earth  by  the  Weight  of 
Continents  and  Mountains,”  by  G.  H.  Darwin.  Phil.  Trans.  Vol.  173,  Part.  i. 
p.  187.  1882. 

+ See  the  account  of  Tresca’s  most  interesting  experiments  on  the  flow  of 
solids.  Mimoires  Pr6senUs  a VInstitut,  Yol.  18.  1868. 


STATICS. 


423 


832'.] 


amount  of  straining  due  to  tidal  or  other  stresses,  there  is  an 
important  question  as  to  the  strength  of  the  materials  of  the 
earth. 

The  theory  of  elastic  solids  as  developed  in  §§  658,  663,  &c., 
shows  that  when  a solid  is  stressed,  the  state  of  stress  is  com- 
pletely determined  when  the  amount  and  direction  of  the  three 
principal  stresses  are  known,  or,  speaking  geometrically,  when 
the  shape,  size,  and  orientation  of  the  stress  quadric  is  given. 
It  is  obvious  that  the  tendency  of  the  solid  to  rupture  must  be 
intimately  connected  with  the  shape  of  this  quadric. 

The  precise  circumstances  under  which  elastic  solids  break 
have  not  hitherto  been  adequately  investigated  by  experiment. 
It  seems  certain  that  rupture  cannot  take  place  without  differ- 
ence of  stress  in  different  directions.  One  essential  element 
therefore  is  the  difference  between  the  greatest  and  least  of  the 
three  principal  stresses.  How  much  the  tendency  to  break  is 
influenced  by  the  amount  of  the  intermediate  principal  stress  is 
quite  unknown.  The  difference  between  the  greatest  and  least 
stresses  may  however  be  taken  as  the  most  important  datum 
for  estimating  tendency  to  break.  This  difference  has  been 
called  by  Mr  G.  H.  Darwin  (to  whom  the  investigation  of  which 
we  speak  is  due)  the  “ stress-difference.”  It  may  be  proved 
that  the  greatest  tangential  stress  at  any  point  is  equal  to  half 
the  stress-difference.  In  the  case  of  a wire  under  simple  longi- 
tudinal stress,  “the  tenacity”  is  estimated  by  the  stress  per  unit 
area  of  section  under  which  the  wire  breaks.  In  this  case  two 
of  the  principal  stresses  are  zero,  and  the  third  is  the  longitudinal 
tension ; thus  tenacity  is  a word  to  define  “ limiting  stress- 
difference  ” when  produced  in  a special  manner.  Engineers 
have  made  a great  many  experiments  on  the  strength  of 
materials  for  sustaining  tensional  and  crushing  stresses*,  and 
their  experiments  afford  data  for  a comparison  between  the 
strength  which  analysis  shows  that  the  materials  of  the  earth 
must  possess  in  the  interior,  and  that  of  the  solids  which  have 
been  submitted  to  experiment. 


Rigidity  of 
the  earth. 

Conditions 

underwhich 

elasticity 

breaks 

down  and 

solids 

rupture. 


Provisional 
reckoning  of 
tendency  to 
rupture  by 
difference 
between 
greatest 
and  least 
principal 
stresses. 


»Sce,  for  example,  Rankine’s  Useful  Rules  and  Tables.  Griffin,  London, 
1873  ; and  Sir  W.  Thomson’s  Elasticity.  Black,  Edinburgh,  1878. 


424 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Rigidity  o 
the  earth. 


Weight  of 
continents 
produces 
internal 
stress  in 
the  earth. 


Stress  when 
the  ellip- 
ticity  of  the 
spheroid  is 
not  ap- 
propriate 
to  the 
diurnal 
rotation. 


[832'. 


We  have  in  § 797  been  occupied  with  the  results  of  observa- 
tions giving  the  form  of  ellipsoid  which  most  nearly  satisfies 
geodetic  and  gravitational  experiments,  but  the  existence  of  dry 
land  proves  that  the  earth’s  surface  is  not  a figure  of  equilibrium 
appiopiiate  to  the  diurnal  rotation.  Hence  the  interior  of  the 
earth  must  be  in  a state  of  stress,  and  as  the  land  does  not  sink 
in,  nor  the  sea-bed  rise  up,  the  materials  of  which  the  earth  is 
made  must  be  strong  enough  to  bear  this  stress. 

We  are  thus  led  to  inquire  how  the  stresses  are  distributed  in 
the  earth’s  mass,  and  what  are  magnitudes  of  the  stresses. 

Mr  Darwin  has,  by  means  of  the  analysis  of  § 834,  solved  a 
problem  of  the  kind  indicated  for  the  case  of  a homogeneous 
incompressible  elastic  sphere,  and  has  applied  the  results  to  the 
discussion  of  the  strength  of  the  interior  of  the  earth. 

If  the  earth  were  formed  of  a crust  with  a semi-fluid  interior, 
the  stresses  in  that  crust  must  be  greater  than  if  the  whole  mass 
be  solid,  very  far  greater  if  the  crust  be  thin ; and  therefore  this 
investigation  cannot  give  as  its  result  stresses  greater  than 
those  which  exist  in  reality. 

He  has  only  treated  the  problem  for  the  class  of  inequali- 
ties called  zonal  harmonics  ; that  is  (§  781)  inequalities  con- 
sisting of  a number  of  undulations  running  round  the  globe  in 
parallels  of  latitude.  The  number  of  crests  is  determined  by 
the  order  of  the  harmonic.  The  second  harmonic  constitutes 
simply  ellipticity  of  the  spheroid.  A harmonic  of  a high  order 
may  be  described  as  a series  of  mountain  chains,  with  inter- 
vening valleys,  running  round  the  globe  in  parallels  of  latitude, 
estimated  with  reference  to  the  chosen  equator. 

In  the  case  of  the  second  harmonic  it  is  shown  by  Mr  Darwin 
that  the  stress-difference  rises  to  a maximum  at  the  centre  of 
the  globe,  and  is  constant  all  over  the  surface.  The  central 
stress-difference  is  eight  times  as  great  as  that  at  the  surface. 

On  evaluating  the  stress-difference  arising  from  given  ellip- 
ticity in  a rotating  spheroid  of  the  size  and  density  of  the  earth, 
it  appears  that  if  the  excess  or  defect  of  ellijiticity  above  or 
below  the  equilibrium  value  were  — t— , then  the  stress-difference 
at  the  centre  would  be  12xl05  grammes  weight  per  square 


STATICS. 


425 


832'.] 


centimetre ; and  that,  if  the  sphere  were  made  of  material  as 
strong  as  brass,  it  would  be  just  on  the  point  of  rupture.  Again,  stress  when 
if  the  homogeneous  earth,  with  ellipticity  were  to  stop  ticity  of  the 

° \ r J 28  2 r spheroid  is 

rotating,  the  central  stress-difference  would  be  50  x 10B  grammes  notap- 

# ° propriate 

weight  per  centimetre,  and  it  would  break  if  made  of  any  to  the 
material  except  the  finest  steel.  rotation. 

The  stresses  produced  by  harmonic  inequalities  of  high  orders 
are  next  considered  in  the  paper  to  which  we  refer.  This  is  in 
effect  the  case  of  a series  of  parallel  mountains  and  valleys,  cor- 
rugating a mean  level  surface  with  an  infinite  series  of  parallel 
ridges  and  furrows. 

It  is  found  that  the  stress-difference  depends  only  on  the 
depth  below  the  mean  surface,  and  is  independent  of  the  position 
of  the  point  considered  with  regard  to  ridge  and  furrow. 

Numerical  calculation  shows  that  if  we  take  a series  of  moun-  Stress  due 

• i / i to  a series 

tarns,  whose  crests  are  4,000  metres  (or  about  13,000  feet)  above  of  parallel 

i • t \ ' mountain 

the  intermediate  valley  bottoms,  formed  of  rock  of  specific  chains, 
gravity  2,8,then  the  maximum  stress-difference  is  4 x 105  grammes 
weight  per  square  centimetre  (about  the  tenacity  of  cast  tin) ; 
also  if  the  mountain  chains  are  314  kilometres  apart,  the  maxi- 
mum stress-difference  is  reached  at  50  kilometres  below  the 
mean  surface. 

The  solution  shows  that  the  stress-difference  is  nil  at  the 
surface.  It  is,  however,  only  an  approximate  solution,  for  it 
will  not  give  the  stresses  actually  in  the  mountain  masses,  but 
it  gives  correct  results  at  some  four  or  five  kilometres  below  the 
mean  surface. 

The  cases  of  the  harmonics  of  the  4th,  6th,  8th,  10th,  and  12th 
orders  are  then  considered  ; and  it  is  shown  that,  if  we  suppose 
them  to  exist  on  a sphere  of  the  mean  density  and  dimensions  of 
the  earth,  and  that  the  height  of  the  elevation  at  the  equator  is 
in  each  case  1,500  metres  above  the  mean  level  of  the  sphere, 
then  in  each  case  the  maximum  stress-difference  is  about  0 x 10° 
grammes  weight  per  square  centimetre.  This  maximum  is 
reached  in  the  case  of  the  4th  harmonic  at  1,840  kilometres, 
and  for  the  12th  at  560  kilometres,  from  the  earth’s  surface. 

In  the  second  part  of  the  paper  it  is  shown  that  the  great 
terrestrial  inequalities,  such  as  Africa,  the  Atlantic  Ocean, ° and 


426 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Rigidity  of 
the  earth. 


Conclusion 
as  to 

strength  of 
the  interior 
of  earth 
from  magni- 
tude of 
actual  con- 
tinent s. 


Tidal  influ- 
ence of  sun 
and  moon 
on  the 
earth. 


[862'. 


America,  are  represented  by  a harmonic  of  the  4th  order ; and 
that,  having  regard  to  the  mean  density  of  the  earth  being  about 
twice  that  of  superficial  rocks,  the  height  of  the  elevation  is  to 
be  taken  as  about  1,500  metres. 

bix  hundred  thousand  grammes  per  square  centimetre  is  the 
crushing  stress-difference  of  average  granite,  and  accordingly  it 
is  concluded  that  at  1,600  kilometres  from  the  earth’s  surface 
the  materials  of  the  earth  must  be  at  least  as  strong  as 
granite.  A very  closely  analogous  result  is  also  found  from 
the  discussion  of  the  case  in  which  the  continent  has  not  the 
legular  undulating  character  of  the  zonal  harmonics,  but  con- 
sists of  an  equatorial  elevation  with  the  rest  of  the  spheroid 
approximately  spherical. 

From  this  we  may  draw  the  conclusion,  that  either  the 
materials  of  the  earth  have  at  least  the  strength  of  granite  at 
1,600  kilometres  from  the  surface,  or  they  must  have  a much 
greater  strength  near  to  the  surface. 

For  the  analysis  by  which  these  conclusions  are  supported  we 
must  refer  to  Mr  Darwin’s  paper. 

The  subject  of  this  investigation  has  an  important  connection 
with  the  date  of  the  earth’s  consolidation  as  explained  in  § 830 
above. 


833.  The  character  of  the  deforming  tidal  influence  of 
the  sun  and  moon  will  be  understood  readily  by  consider- 
ing that  if  the  whole  earth  were  perfectly  fluid,  its  bounding 
surface  would  coincide  with  an  equipotential  surface  relatively 
to  the  attraction  of  its  own  mass,  the  centrifugal  force  of 
its  rotation,  and  the  tide-generating  resultant  (§  804)  of  the 
moon’s  and  sun’s  forces,  and  their  kinetic  reactions*.  Thus 


* It  was  our  intention  to  prove  in  Yol.  ii.  that  the  “equilibrium  theory”  of 
the  tides  for  an  ocean,  whether  of  uniform  density  or  denser  in  the  lower  parts, 
completely  covering  a solid  nucleus,  requires  correction,  on  account  of  the  diurnal 
rotation,  but  less  and  less  correction  the  smaller  this  nucleus  is  ; and  that  it  agrees 
perfectly  with  the  “kinetic  theory”  when  there  is  no  nucleus,  always  provided  the 
angular  velocity  is  not  too  great  for  the  ordinary  approximations  (§§  794,  SOI, 
802,  815)  which  require  that  there  he  not,  on  any  account,  more  than  an  in- 
finitely small  disturbance  from  the  spherical  figure.  It  is  interesting  to  remark 
that  this  proposition  does  not  require  the  tidal  deformations  to  be  small  in  com- 
parison with  the  70,000  feet  deviation  due  to  centrifugal  force  of  rotation. 


STATICS. 


427 


833.] 


(§§  819,  824)  there  would  be  the  full  equilibrium  lunar  and  BjgWJ^of 
solar  tides;  or  2 4 times  the  amount  of  the  disturbing  de-  Tidal  influ- 
viation  of  level  if  the  fluid  were  homogeneous,  or  ot  nearly  and  moon 
twice  this  amount  if  it  were  heterogeneous  with  Laplace  s earth, 
hypothetical  law  of  increasing  density.  If  now  a very  thin 
layer  of  lighter  liquid  were  added,  this  layer  would  rest 
covering  the  previous  bounding  surface  to  very  nearly  equal 
depth  all  round,  and  would  simply  rise  and  fall  with  that  sur- 
face, showing  only  infinitesimal  variations  in  its  own  depth, 
under  tidal  influences.  Hence  had  the  solid  part  of  the  earth 
so  little  rigidity  as  to  allow  it  to  yield  in  its  own  figure  very 
nearly  as  much  as  if  it  were  fluid,  there  would  be  very  nearly 
nothing  of  what  we  call  tides — that  is  to  say,  rise  and  fall  of 
the  sea  relatively  to  the  land  ; but  sea  and  land  together  would 
rise  and  fall  a few  feet  every  twelve  lunar  hours.  This  would, 
as  we  shall  see,  be  the  case  if  the  geological  hypothesis  of  a 
thin  crust  were  true.  The  actual  phenomena  of  tides,  therefore, 
give  a secure  contradiction  to  that  hyjDothesis.  We  shall  see 
indeed,  presently,  (§  841)  that  even  a continuous  solid  globe,  of 
the  same  mass  and  diameter  as  the  earth,  would,  if  homogeneous 
and  of  the  same  rigidity  (§  680)  as  glass  or  as  steel,  yield  in  its 
shape  to  the  tidal  influences  three-fifths  as  much,  or  one-third 
as  much,  as  a perfectly  fluid  globe;  and  further,  (§  842)  it  will 
be  proved  that  the  effect  of  such  yielding  in  the  solid,  according 
as  its  supposed  rigidity  is  that  of  glass  or  that  of  steel,  would 
be  to  reduce  the  tides  to  about  | or  § of  what  they  would  be  if 
the  rigidity  were  infinite. 

834.  To  prove  this,  and  to  illustrate  this  question  of  elastic  Etotic 
tides  in  the  solid  earth,  we  shall  work  out  explicitly  the  solu- 
tion of  the  general  problem  of  § 69G,  for  the  case  of  a homo- 
geneous elastic  solid  sphere  exposed  to  no  surface  traction; 
but  deformed  infinitesimally  by  an  equilibrating  system  of 
forces  acting  bodily  through  the  interior,  which  we  shall  ulti- 
mately make  to  agree  with  the  tide-generating  influence  of  the 
moon  or  sun.  In  the  first  place,  however,  we  only  limit  the 
deforming  force  by  the  final  assumption  of  § 733. 

Following  the  directions  of  § 732,  we  are  to  find,  the  two 
constituents  ('a,  'y)  and  (a  , y<)  for  the  complete  solu- 


428 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Rigidity  of 
the  earth. 


— — ™ [834. 

tion;  of  which  the  first,  given  by  (6)  and  (7)  of  § 733,  is  * 
follows : — 


as 


a = — 


1 


2 ( 2i  + 5)  (vi  + n) 
r'J  dW, 


as  ^ 


vfii+5 


d 


m + n 1“  2 (2i + 3) ~dx~  + (2i  + 3) (2i  + 5)  dx ^ Wi+ 1 r * 
with  symmetrical  formulae  for  '/3  and  'y;  which  [§  733  (6)], 

1 

(2). 


gtve 


vi  + n 


and,  [§  737  (28)], 

2 (-2%  + o)  (vi  + n ) 

These,  used  in  (29)  of  § 737  with  i+  2 for  i,  give 


~'Fr  = 


m + n ( 


( / \ 7|  r (l  "t  2)  Vj  d . n JJr  . 'I 

^m-n)Wwx  + ^L-  SK,)| 


7 


(3); 


which,  reduced  to  harmonics  by  the  proper  formula  [§  737  (36)], 
becomes 


Fr  = 


-1 


(2t  + 3)  (m  + n)  + (*  + 1) r‘  ^ 2i  + 5 ’ dx 

This  and  the  symmetrical  formulae  for  '6V  and  'Hr,  with  r taken 
equal  to  a,  express  the  components  of  the  force  per  unit  area 
which  would  have  to  be  balanced  by  the  application  from  without 
of  surface  traction  to  the  bounding  surface  of  the  globe,  if  the 
strain  through  the  interior  were  exactly  that  expressed  by  (1). 
Hence,  still  according  to  the  directions  of  § 732,  we  must  now 
find  (cy,  /? , y ) the  state  of  interior  strain  which  with  no  force 
from  without  acting  bodily  through  the  interior,  would  result 
from  surface  traction  equal  and  opposite  to  that  (4).  Of  this 
part  of  the  problem  we  have  the  solution  in  § 737  (52),  the  par- 
ticular data  being  now 


Homogene- 
ous elastic 
solid  globe 
free  at  sur- 
face; de- 
formed by 
bodily  har- 
monic force. 


Ai 

„i+i 


_ m + (i  + 1)  n dWi+1  A.xo 


(2i  + 5)  vi  - n 


d 


r<+3  dx  ( W ‘+ir<+S)  • • • (5)» 


(2i  + 3)  (m  + n)  dx  ’ ai+L  (2t  + 3)  (2i  + 5)  (m  + n) 

with  symmetrical  terms  for  B. , C{,  and  Bl+9,  Ci+2;  but  none  of 
other  orders  than  i and  i+  2.  Hence  for  the  auxiliary  functions 
of  § 737  (50) 

i+i 

ir 


yr,  =.Q  * (i  + ^)(2t+  l)[m  + (i+  l)n]a- 

‘-'l  ’ 1+1  (2i  + 3)(m  + n) 


7 


• <+11 


_ (i  + .2)[(2i  + 5)  vi  — ? i]  a' 
{ 2i  + 3 )(rn  + n) 


■h 


l ....(6). 


JFi+1,  and  d>1+3  = 0 


STATIC’S. 


429 


8*14.] 


Now  (52),  with  the  proper  terms  for  i + 2 instead  of  i added,  is 
to  he  used  to  give  us  cq;  and  through  the  vanishing  of  and 
<Iv+3,  it  becomes 


,-i+i 


_1  I 1 r a-* 

n jt-1  L.2t(2t  + 1)  dx 
a-*-1  r(i  + 4)m  — (2i  + 3)» 

+ i+T  L 


A j?'*  ~|  m . , (N'.+i 

+ it']  + 27  *T 


I (2t  + 5) 


r-«-*)-Mi+3ri+s~1  ~ 

(IX 


]!• 


••(7), 


where  for  brevity  we  put 

/=[2(i  + 2)*+  l]«»-(2t+3)» (71). 

To  this  we  must  add  'a,  given  by  (1),  to  obtain,  according  to 
§ 732,  the  explicit  solution,  a,  of  our  problem.  Thus,  after 
somewhat  tedious  algebraic  reductions  in  which  m + n,  appearing 
as  a factor  in  the  numerator  and  denominator  of  each  fraction,  is 
removed,  we  find  a remarkably  simple  expression  for  a.  This, 
and  the  symmetrical  formulas  for  and  y,  are  as  follows: — 


wh$re 


* = (««*-  tfr")  (r(tlr-”-a) 

(F,+1r-“-)  ■ 

rl  IV  rl 

y = (^a8-iFr2)^-©r8i-£  (Vi+1r—a)  j 

@ _(i+1)[(i  + 3)m-n] 

'li  In 


..••(8), 


jp  _ (i  + 2)  (2i  + 5)  vi  — (2 i + 3)  n 
® _ 2 (2i  + 3)In 

tix  _ (i  + l)m 
(2i  + 3)  In 


The  infinitely  great  value  of  (5  for  the  case  i=  0 depends  on 
the  circumstance  that  the  bodily  force  for  this  case,  being 
uniform  and  in  parallel  lines  through  the  whole  mass,  is  not  self 
equilibrating,  and  therefore  surface  stress  would  be  required  for 
equilibrium. 

The  formulas  (8)  are  susceptible  of  considerable  simplification 
if  we  complete  the  differentiations  in  their  last  terms.  We  shall 
at  the  same  time  separate  the  formulas  into  two  parts,  of  which 
one  has  for  coefficient  the  bulk-modulus,  and  the  other  the 
rigidity-modulus. 


430 


abstract  dynamics. 


[834. 


Rigidity  of 
the  earth. 


If  k be  tho  talk-modulus,  or  modulus  of  resistance  to  com 
pression,  we  have  by  § G 98  (5), 


Separation 
of  the  two 
mod  uluses 
of  elasticity. 


m = Ic  + In 


(91); 


aud  n is  the  rigidity  modulus. 

Thus  (71)  becomes 

^ = [2  + 2)‘  + 1]  Jc  + (7  + \^n ^gii^ 

Also  on  completing  the  differentiation  we  have 


Case  of 
incompres- 
sible elastic 
solid. 


a - {&a2  - ( jf  + ffi)  r2}  + (27  + 3)  <&x  Wi+ .....  (9U1). 

T1'en.’  °.n  Substituting  in  (9)  for  m from  (91),  carrying  the  results 
into  (9-)  and  separating  the  parts  depending  on  k and  n,  we  have 


(2In)a  = Jc  | 


(7  + 4)(a2-r2)  + ^ 


dW< 


i+i 


dx 


+ 2 


dW;. 


in(i  + 1)  |(a2  _ r2)  I + 2xW{+ 


and  symmetrical  formula;  for  J3  and 


■} 


] 


•(9"). 


7- 


In  the  elastic  solids  of  which  we  have  experimental  know- 
ledge  [§  684]  the  bulk-modulus  is  larger  than  the  modulus  of 
rigidity,  and  therefore  Jc  is  considerably  larger  than  ; thus 
the  terms  written  in  the  first  line  of  (9iv)  are  practically  much 
more  important  than  those  in  the  second.  In  the  ideal  case 
of  an  absolutely  incompressible  elastic  solid,  the  terms  in  the 
second  line  of  (9iv)  vanish,  and  I/lc  becomes  simply  2 (i  + 2)2+  1, 
and  thus  we  have 


2n  [2  (i  + 2)2+  l]a  = 

(i  + 4)  (a2-  r2)  + ~ 
% 

dW. 

d«  + s(.+  i).jrm  ■ 

and  symmetrical  formulas  for  ft  and  y. 

The  case  of  i ~ 1 is  that  with  which  We  are  concerned  in  the 
tidal  problem.  In  it  (7!)  and  (9‘‘)  give  us 


1=1 9 m — 5 n=  19  Jc  + ^ n , 


(10). 


To  prepare  for  terrestrial  applications  we  may  conveniently 
reduce  to  polar  co-ordinates  (distance  from  the  centre,  r; 
latitude,  l ; longitude,  A)  such  that 


x-r  cos  l cos  A,  y — r cos  l sin  A,  z = r sin  l (1 1) ; 


STATICS. 


431 


? 


| 834.] 


and  denote  by  p,  p,  v,  the  corresponding  components  of  displace-  Rigidity  of 
mi  , _ . •ni  tli©  Gftrth. 

.ment.  llie  expressions  for  these  will  be  precisely  the  same  as 

those  for  a,  /3,  y,  except  that  instead  of  , as  it  appears  in  the 

expression  for  a,  we  have  in  the  expression  for  p ; in  that  Case  of 

ar  rai  incompres- 

j sible  elastic 

for  [x,  and  — - in  that  for  v.  Also  in  transforming  from  a solld- 

r cos  Ldk  ° 

to  p we  must  put  x = r,  and  in  transforming  from  (3  and  y to 

fj.  and  v,  y and  must  be  put  zero.  Thus  if  we  put 


Wi+x  = Si+1ri+l  (12), 

so  that  Si+]  may  denote  the  surface  harmonic,  or  the  harmonic 
function  of  directional  angular  co-ordinates  l , A,  corresponding 
to  JFi+1,  we  have  from  (9iv) 


(2/n)  p = (i  + 1)  j (t.+  1H»  + 3)  a®  - (*  + 2)  r2  j + { (£+  1)  a2  - (*  - l)r2} J r%. 

| ('-+-1}.(t  + 3)a2 - ( i + 4) r» J + in  (i  + 1)  (a2 - r2) J r‘ 


(2  /n)fx  = 
(2 In)  v — 


j -+— a2-(i  + 4)  r®  j + I n (i+1)  (a2  - r-)  J 


J<+i 

dl 

dSm 
l d\ 


k..(13). 


In  the  case  of  elastic  solids,  such  as  we  know  them  experi- 
mentally, the  terms  in  k are  much  more  important  than  those 
in  n. 


Now  it  is  easy  to  show  that,  in  as  far  as  p depends  on  the 
term  in  Jc,  it  reaches  a maximum  value  when  r=ajl  - 1 / (i+2)2; 
and  in  as  far  as  it  depends  on  the  term  in  n it  would  algebrai- 
cally reach  a maximum  when  r = ajY+ 1)}.  But 
this  latter  point  being  outside  of  the  sphere  it  follows  that  the 
term  in  n increases  from  the  centre  to  the  surface.  We  thus 
see  that  p increases  from  zero  at  the  centre,  to  a maximum 
value  near  the  surface,  and  then  diminishes  again. 

In  a similar  manner  it  appears  that  p/r  reaches  a maximum, 
as  far  as  concerns  the  term  in  Jc,  when  r — aj\  — 3 (i  + 2)}  • 
and  as  far  as  concerns  the  term  in  n,  when  r = a. 

When  *=1,  which  corresponds  to  the  case  of  the  tidal  pro- 
blem, we  have  from  (13) 


* 


432 


Rigidity  of 
the  earth. 


P = 


n = 


v = 


1 


(19£  + ^n)n 

1 


2 (19/c  + ^ n)n 

1 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 
[(8a8  - 3r2)  k + |-aV]  rSa 
[(8a2—  5 r')Jc  + -g  (a2—  r2)  w]  r 


[834. 


cW. 

.// 


[(8a2  - 5r2)  7c + § (a2-  r2)  w] 


r 

cos  / t/A 


,...(14). 


J 


2 (19A-+  £ n)n' 

It  is  obvious  that  p/r  diminishes  from  the  centre  outwards  to 
the  surface  j and  its  extreme  values  are 


. . , , p 8 & + 

at  the  centre  - = 7— , 

r [\§k  + ^ri)n 


a2S  = 


8 a2 


l 


1+- 


n/7c 


.(15). 


Cases : — 

centrifugal 

force 


tide-gene- 
rating  force 


1 9 n \ 1 + -ghr  w//c/ 

at  the  surface  - = — l)f  + — trS  = ''a_( j , A \ r. 

When  the  disturbing  action  is  the  centrifugal  force  of  uniform 
rotation  with  angular  velocity  w,  we  have  as  found  above  (§  794) 
for  the  whole  potential 

W2  = w {icoV2  + JwV  (A  - cos2  6)}  (16), 

where  w denotes  the  mass  of  the  solid  per  unit  volume.  The 
effect  of  the  term  AiocoV2  is  merely  a drawing  outwards  of  the 
solid  from  the  centre  symmetrically  all  round  • which  we  may 
consider  in  detail  later  in  illustrating  properties  of  matter  in  our 
second  volume.  The  remainder  of  the  expression  gives  us 
according  to  our  present  notation 

K = iT  («2  + y2  - 2-2) ; or  S2  = IVT  (A  _ cos2  6) (17), 

where  r = §w2 (18). 

For  tide-generating  force  the  same  formulae  (14)  and  (15)  hold 
if  (§§  804,  808,  813)  we  take 

T = l J (19), 

and  alter  signs  so  as  to  make  the  strain -spheroids  prolate  instead 
of  oblate.  The  deformed  figure  of  each  of  the  concentric 
spherical  surfaces  of  the  sphere  is  of  course  an  ellipsoid  of 
revolution ; and  from  (15)  we  find  for  the  extremes  : — 


8a2  / 


ellipticity  of  central  strain  spheroids  = ^1  + Y^J~n^c 


, IOT 


5 a2  / 
1 9 n \ 


I+TA^A).»rl 

1 + Jr  n/kj  j 


of  free  surface 


(20). 


STATICS. 


433 


835.] 


From  those  results,  (8)  to  (20),  we  conclude  that 


Elastic  solid 
tides. 


835.  The  bounding  surface  and  concentric  interior  spherical 
surfaces  of  a homogeneous  elastic  solid  sphere  strained  slightly 
by  balancing  attractions  from  without,  become  deformed  into 
harmonic  spheroids  of  the  same  order  and  type  as  the  solid  hai- 
monic  expressing  the  potential  function  of  these  lorces,  when 
they  are  so  expressible : and  the  direction  of  the  component 
displacement  perpendicular  to  the  radius  at  any  point  is  the 
same  as  that  of  the  component  of  the  attracting  force  perpendi- 
cular to  the  radius.  These  concentric  harmonic  spheroids  Homogene- 
although  of  the  same  type  are  not  similar.  When  they  are  ot  solid  globe 
the  second  degree  (that  is  when  the  force  potential  is  a solid  face^de- 
liarmonic  of  the  second  degree),  the  proportions  of  the  ellipti- bodily ^har- 
cities  in  the  three  normal  sections  of  each  of  them  are  the 
same  in  all : but  in  any  one  section  the  ellipticities  of  the  con- 
centric ellipsoids  increase  from  the  outermost  one  inwards  to 
the  centre,  in  the  ratio  of  5/j  + §?i  to  8/i;  + |?i,  or 


1 — -2- 


S 1 + T2n/ k 


1. 


If  j^n/k  be  small,  as  is  in  general  the  case,  the  ratio  is 
approximately  ^ + -^n/k  : 1. 

For  harmonic  disturbances  of  higher  orders  the  amount  of  de- 
viation from  sphericity,  reckoned  of  course  in  proportion  to  the 
radius,  increases  from  the  surface  inwards  to  a certain  distance, 
and  then  decreases  to  the  centre.  The  explanation  of  this  re- 
markable conclusion  is  easily  given  without  analysis,  but  we 
shall  confine  ourselves  to  doing  so  for  the  case  of  ellipsoidal 
disturbances. 


Case  of 
second  de- 
gree gives 
elliptic  de- 
formation, 
diminishing 
from  centre 
outwards:— 
higher  de- 
grees give 
greatest  pro- 
portionate 
deviation 
from  spheri- 
city neither 
at  centre 
nor  surface. 


836.  Let  the  bodily  disturbing  force  cease  to  act,  and  let  Synthetic 

JO  proof  of 

the  surface  be  held  to  the  same  ellipsoidal  shape  by  such  a maxnmim 
distribution  of  surface  traction  (§§  G93,  G62)  as  shall  maintain 
a homogeneous  strain  throughout  the  interior.  The  interior  Ration  of 
ellipsoidal  surfaces  of  deformation  will  now  become  similar order- 
concentric  ellipsoids : and  the  inner  ones  must  clearly  be  less 
elliptic  than  they  were  when  the  same  figure  of  outer  boundary 
was  maintained  by  forces  acting  throughout  all  the  interior; 
vol.  ii.  28 


434 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[830. 


Rigidity  of 
the  earth. 


Synthetic 
proof  of 
maximum 
ellipticity 
at  centre, 
for  defor- 
mation of 
second 
order. 


Oblateness 
induced  in 
homogene- 
ous elastic 
solid  globe, 
by  rotation 


and,  therefore,  they  must  have  been  greater  for  the  inner  sur- 
face. And  we  may  reason  similarly  for  the  portion  of  the 
whole  solid  within  any  one  of  the  ellipsoids  of  deformation,  by 
supposing  all  cohesive  and  tangential  force  between  it  and  the 
solid  surrounding  it  to  be  dissolved ; and  its  ellipsoidal  figure  to 
be  maintained  by  proper  surface  traction  to  give  homogeneous 
strain  throughout  the  interior  when  the  bodily  force  ceases  to 
act.  We  conclude  that  throughout  the  solid  from  surface  to 
centre,  when  disturbed  by  bodily  force  without  surface  traction, 
the  ellipticities  of  the  concentric  ellipsoids  increase  inwards. 


837.  When  the  disturbing  action  is  centrifugal  force,  or 
tide  generating  force  (as  that  of  the  sun  or  moon  on  the  earth), 
the  potential  is,  as  we  have  seen,  a harmonic  of  the  second 
degree,  symmetrical  round  an  axis.  In  one  case  the  spheroids 
of  deformation  are  concentric  oblate  ellipsoids  of  revolution; 
in  the  other  case  prolate.  In  each  case  the  ellipticity  increases 
from  the  surface  inwards,  according  to  the  same  law  [§834  (15)] 
which  is,  of  course,  independent  of  the  radius  of  the  sphere. 
For  spheres  of  different  dimensions  and  similar  substances  the 
ellipticities  produced  by  equal  angular  velocities  of  rotation 
are  as  the  squares  of  the  radii.  Or,  if  the  equatorial  surface 
velocity  ( V)  be  the  same  in  rotating  elastic  spheres  of  different 
dimensions  but  similar  substance,  the  ellipticities  are  equal. 
The  values  of  the  surface  and  central  ellipticities  are  respec- 
tively 


3 Vhu 
11  in 


and 


14  V2w 
33  2 n 


(21) 


for  solids  fulfilling  Poisson’s  hypothesis  (§  685),  according  to 
which  m = 2 n,  or  k = 


If  the  solid  be  absolutely  incompressible  these  ellipticities 
are  by  § 834  (15) 


5 


V*w 
19  in 


, 8 V2w 

and  is 


.(22). 


Now  since  = *2727  and  = ‘2632  ; and  ^ = ‘4242  and 
•^=•4211,  we  see  that  the  compressibility  of  the  elastic  solid 
exercises  very  little  influence  on  the  result. 


STATICS. 


435 


837.] 


For  steel  or  iron  the  values  of  n and  m are  respectively  Elastic  solid 
780  x 106  and  about  1600  x 10°  grammes  weight  per  square 
centimetre,  or  770  x 109  and  about  1600  x 109  gramme-centi- 
metre-seconds, absolute  units  (§  223),  and  the  specific  giavity  (ju) 
is  about  7-8.  Hence  a ball  of  steel  of  any  radius  rotating  with 
an  equatorial  velocity  of  10,000  centimetres  per  second  will  be 
flattened  to  an  ellipticity  (§  801)  of  _L_.  For  a specimen  of 
flint  glass  of  specific  gravity  2 94  Everett  finds  n = 244  x 10 
grammes  weight  per  square  centimetre  and  very  approximately 
m — 2 n.  Hence  for  this  substance  n/w  = 83  x 106  [being  the 
length  of  the  modulus  of  rigidity  (§  678)  in  centimetres].  But  the 
numbers  used  above  for  steel  give  n/iu  = 100  x 10  centimetres , 
and  therefore  (§  838)  the  flattening  of  a glass  globe  is  l/‘83,  or  ^on  and 
14  times  that  of  a steel  globe  with  equal  velocities. 


838.  For  rotating  or  tidally  deformed  globes  of  glass  ori^ta^onai 
metals,  the  amount  of  deformation  is  but  little  influenced  by  eiiiptidUes 
compressibility,  as  we  see  from  the  numerical  comparison  given  in 
§ 837.  For  any  substance  for  which  3 k > 5 n the  surface  ellipti-  ^nityn 
city  is  diminished  by  three  per  cent,  or  by  less  than  three  per  or 

cent.,  and  the  centre  ellipticity  by  § per  cent.,  or  less  than  § per  |®j[st[c0US 
cent,  if  we  suppose  the  rigidity  to  remain  in  any  case  unchanged,  solld- 
but  the  substance  to  become  absolutely  incompressible.  For 
the  surface  ellipticity,  § 834  (22)  gives  on  this  supposition 


e = 


ba?w 
19?i 


(23), 


or  with  n = 770  x 109  as  for  steel  (§  837), 

a=  640  x 106,  the  earth’s  radius  in  centimetres, 
and  w = 5'5,  „ „ mean  density, 

we  have,  in  anticipation  of  § 839, 

e = 77  x 104.t (24). 


839.  If  now  we  consider  a globe  as  large  as  the  earth,  and  Value  of 

° m ° surface 

of  incompressible  homogeneous  material,  of  density  equal  to  omptidties 
the  earth’s  mean  density,  but  of  the  same  ngidity  as  steel  or  s«me  size 

J J and  mass  a 

glass;  and  if,  in  the  first  place,  we  suppose  the  matter  of  such  earth, of 
° ' ’ 1 5 i _ non-gravij 

a globe  to  be  deprived  of  the  property  of  mutual  gravitation  tatins 

28—2 


436 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[839. 


material,  between  its  parts : the  ellipticities  induced  by  rotation,  or  by  tide 
homogene-  . L ...  ..  , • •,  , ..  J 

ous,  inoom-  generating  iorce,  will  be  those  given  by  the  preceding  formulas 

and  same  [§  834  (20)],  with  the  same  values  of  n as  before;  with  n/Jc  = 0; 

steel.  with  640  x 10°  for  a,  the  earth’s  radius  in  centimetres;  and 

with  5'5  for  w instead  of  the  actual  specific  gravities  of  glass 

and  steel. 

But  without  rigidity  at  all,  and  mutual  gravitation  between 
the  parts  alone  opposing  deviation  from  the  spherical  figure, 
we  found  before  (§  819)  for  the  ellipticity 


e = ^-  T = 162  x 104.t (25). 

2 (J 

comparison  840.  Hence  of  these  two  influences  which  we  have  con- 
spheroidai-  sidered  separately: — on  the  one  hand,  elasticity  of  figure,  even 
powers  of  with  so  great  a rigidity  as  that  of  steel;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
andri^dity,  mutual  gravitation  between  the  parts : the  latter  is  consider- 

for*  liirgG 

homogene-  ably  more  powerful  than  the  former,  in  a globe  of  such  dimen- 

ons  solid  . J _ . ° . 

globes.  sions  as  the  earth.  When,  as  m nature,  the  two  resistances 
against  change  of  form  act  jointly,  the  actual  ellipticity  of  form 
will  be  the  reciprocal  of  the  sum  of  the  reciprocals  of  the  ellip- 
ticities that  would  be  produced  in  the  separate  cases  of  mne  or 
other  of  the  resistances  acting  alone.  For  we  may  imagine  the 
disturbing  influence  divided  into  two  parts:  one  of  which  alone 
would  maintain  the  actual  ellipticity  of  the  solid,  without 
mutual  gravitation ; and  the  other  alone  the  same  ellipticity 
if  the  substance  had  no  rigidity  but  experienced  mutual  gravi- 
tation between  its  parts.  Let  t be  the  disturbing  influence  as 
s,  r denote  measured  by  § 834  (20),  (21) ; and  let  r/x  and  t/ g be  the  ellipti- 
to  deforma-  cities  of  the  spheroidal  figure  into  which  the  globe  becomes 
specttveiy6*  altered  on  the  two  suppositions  of  rigidity  without  gravity  and 
ami  n>vlty  gravity  without  rigidity,  respectively.  Let  e be  the  actual 
ellipticity  and  let  r be  divided  into  t and  r"  proportional  to 
the  two  parts  into  which  we  imagine  the  disturbing  influence 
to  be  divided  in  maintaining  that  ellipticity.  We  have  r = r + r , 
and  e = t'/x  = F'/g. 

Whence  - = r + (t  or  which  proves  the  proposition. 

e e r r 


It  gives 


t _ __  r/g 

r + g r/a  + 1 


(26). 


840.] 

By  §§  83S,  839  we  have 


STATICS. 


437 


and 


19ft  i 
r = ■=-*-  > and  Q 
oa  w 


2/7 

oa 


X 19/?  _19?i//7 
g 'igaiv  Zaw 


(27), 


(28), 


-where  n/g  is  the  rigidity  in  grammes  weight  per  square  centi- 
metre.  For  steel  and  glass  as  above  (§§  837,  839)  the  values 
of  V (I  are  respectively  2T  and  '6G. 


840'.  Mr  G.  H.  Darwin  has  shown*  how  the  introduction  of  ^ticai 
the  effects  of  the  mutual  gravitation  of  the  parts  of  the  spheroid  tjno^ 
may  be  also  carried  out  analytically  instead  of  synthetically,  gravitation. 
The  sphere  being  in  a state  of  strain  is  distorted  into  a spheroid 
(say  r = a + ai>  where  cr,  is  a surface  harmonic).  Then  the 
state  of  internal  stress  and  strain  in  the  spheroid  is  due  to 
three  causes,  (i)  the  external  disturbing  potential  If,,  (ii)  the 
attraction  of  the  harmonic  inequality  of  which  the  potential  is 
'Sgwriai/(2i  + 1)  a\  (iii)  the  weight  (positive  in  parts  and  nega- 
tive in  others)  of  the  inequality  a . This  last  is  equivalent 
to  a normal  traction  per  unit  area  applied  to  the  suiface  of 
the  sphere  equal  to  — gwa ,.  It  is  not  possible  to  arrive  at 
the  results  due  to  the  last  cause  without  a modification  of  the 
analysis  of  § 834,  because  we  have  to  introduce  the  effects  of 
surface  tractions. 

But  Mr  Darwin  shows  (p.  9 loc.  cit.)  that  “ if  If  * be  the 
potential  of  the  external  disturbing  influence,  the  effective 
potential  per  unit  volume  at  a point  within  the  sphere,  now 
free  of  surface  action  and  of  mutual  gravitation,  is 


If,-  2 gw  (i  - 1)  rV,/(2?  + 1)  a1  = i*Tt  suppose.” 

The  case  considered  by  him  is  that  of  an  incompressible 
viscous  spheroid,  and  he  goes  on  to  find  the  height  and  retalia- 
tion of  tide  in  such  a spheroid.  The  analysis  is,  however,  almost 
literatim  applicable  to  the  case  of  an  elastic  incompressible 
spheroid. 

Suppose  now  that  the  external  disturbing  potential  is 

Tf2  = wtt1  (£  — cos2  6), 


* “On  the  Bodily  Tides  of  Viscous  and  Semi-elastic  Spheroids,  Ac.”  Phil. 
Trans.  Part  i.  1879,  p.  1. 


438 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Rigidity  of 
tho  earth. 

Analytical 
introduc- 
tion of 
effects  of 
gravitation. 


Hypothesis 
of  imperfect 
elasticity  of 
the  earth. 


[840'. 


and  that  the  sphere  consequently  becomes  distorted  into  the 
spheroid  whose  equation  is  r = a [1  + e ft  - cos2  0)],  so  that 
°"a = ae  cosl1  ^)*  T *ien  the  effective  disturbing  potential  to 
produce  the  same  strain  in  a sphere  devoid  of  gravitation  is 
(t  - ge)  w7 ’2  ft  - cos2<9).  Such  a potential  we  know  by  (23)  § 838, 
and  (27)  § 840,  will  produce  ellipticity  e,  given  by  e = (r-%e)/x. 
Whence 

T 


which  is  the  result  (26)  of  § 840. 

The  analytical  method  has  the  advantage  of  showing  that  we 
are  neglecting  as  small  the  tangential  action  between  the  in- 
equality cri  and  the  true  spherical  surface,  a fact  which  is  not  so 
obvious  from  the  synthetical  mode  of  treatment.  In  the  case 
of  the  viscous  spheroid  considered  by  Mr  Darwin  this  tangential 
action  (although  varying  as  t2)  is  of  much  interest,  for  the  sum 
of  the  moments  of  all  the  tangential  actions  about  the  axis  of 
revolution  of  the  spheroid  constitutes  the  tidal  frictional  retard- 
ing couple*. 


In  the  paper  to  which  we  refer  Mr  Darwin  has  also  investigated 
the  consequences  which  would  arise  from  the  hypothesis  that 
the  elasticity  of  the  earth  is  not  perfect,  but  that  the  stress 
requisite  to  maintain  a given  state  of  strain  diminishes  in 
geometrical  progression  as  the  time,  measured  from  the  time  of 
straining,  increases  in  arithmetical  progression.  This  hypothesis 
undoubtedly  represents  some  of  the  phenomena  of  the  imper- 
fect elasticity  of  actual  solids.  He  finds,  then,  that  if  “the 
modulus  of  the  time  of  relaxation  of  rigidity,”  being  the  time 
in  which  the  stress  falls  to  1/e  or  ‘378  of  its  initial  value,  be 
about  one-third  of  the  period  of  the  tidal  disturbance,  then  the 
height  of  the  bodily  tide  scarcely  differs  sensibly  from  the  height 
on  the  hypothesis  of  perfect  elasticity.  The  phase  of  tide 
would  still  however  be  considerably  affected.  The  existence  of 
the  great  continents  (§  832')  proves  almost  conclusively  that  for 


* See  “Problems  connected  with  the  Tides  of  a Viscous  Spheroid.”  Phil. 
Trans.  Part  ii.  1879,  p.  539. 


STATICS. 


439 


840'.] 


stresses  lasting  for  a few  hours  or  clays  the  earth  has  practically 
perfect  elasticity. 

841.  Reverting  now  to  the  results  of  § 840,  it  appears  that 
if  the  rigidity  of  the  earth,  on  the  whole,  weie  only  as  much  as  greatcrt,htt,i 
that  of  steel  or  iron,  the  earth  as  a whole  would  yield  about  ^^]fbseteel 
one-third  as  much  to  the  tide-generating  influences  of  the  sun  p(irf'ectly 
and  moon  as  it  would  if  it  had  no  rigidity  at  all ; and  it  would  juaintain. 
vield  bv  about  three-fifths  of  the  fluid  yielding,  if  its  ligidity  agfinsttide- 

J J ^ r , generating 

were  no  more  than  that  ot  glass.  force. 


842.  To  find  the  effect  of  the  earth’s  elastic  yielding  on  the 
tides,  we  must  recollect  (§  819)  that  the  ellipticity  of  level  due 
to  the  disturbing  force,  and  to  the  gravitation  of  the  undisturbed 
globe,  which  [§§  804,  808,  (18),  (19)]  is  ar/g,  will  be  augmented 
by  \e  on  account  of  the  alteration  of  the  globe  into  a spheroid  infl= 
of  ellipticity  e:  so  that  if  (§  799)  we  neglect  the  mutual  attrac-  gjgjftof 
tion  of  the  waters,  we  have  for  the  disturbed  ellipticity  of  the  fp£c°nthc 
sea  level  (§  785)  liquid  tides‘ 


a , 3 
- T + f( 

9 


.(29). 


The  rise  and  fall  of  the  water  relatively  to  the  solid  earth  will 
depend  on  the  excess  of  this  above  the  ellipticity  of  the  solid. 
Denoting  this  excess,  or  the  ellipticity  of  relative  tides,  by  e, 
we  have 


a 9„ 

e = - r — fe 

9 


■ (30), 


or  by  (26)  and  (27)  e = \ (31). 

Hence  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  tides  is  less  than  it  would  be 
were  the  earth  perfectly  rigid,  in  the  proportion  that  the  resist- 
ance against  tidal  deformation  of  the  solid  due  to  its  rigidity 
bears  to  sum  of  the  resistances  due  to  rigidity  of  the  solid  and 
to  mutual  gravitation  of  its  parts.  By  the  numbers  at  the  end 
of  § 840  we  conclude  that  if  the  rigidity  were  as  great  as  that 
of  steel,  the  relative  rise  and  fall  of  the  water  would  be  reduced 
by  elastic  yelding  of  the  solid  to  § , or  if  the  rigidity  were  only 
that  of  glass,  the  relative  rise  and  fall  would  be  actually  re- 
duced to  £ , of  what  it  would  be  were  the  rigidity  perfect. 


440 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[843. 


Seearthf  843'  LnPerfect  the  comparison  between  theory  and 
observation  as  to  the  actual  height  of  the  tides  has  been 
hitherto,  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  believe  that  the  height  is 
in  reality  only  two-fifths  of  what  it  would  be  if,  as  has  been 
g2S?Sn  lmiversn%  assumed  in  tidal  theories,  the  earth  were  perfectly 
than'that  riSi(L  It  seems>  therefore,  nearly  certain,  with  no  other  evi- 
giassffbe.  dence  than  is  afforded  by  the  tides,  that  the  tidal  effective 
rigidity  of  the  earth  must  be  greater  than  that  of  glass. 

844.  The  actual  distribution  of  land  and  water,  and  of 
depth  where  there  is  water,  over  the  globe  is  so  irregular,  that 
we  need  not  expect  of  even  the  most  powerful  mathematical 

theory'of  analysis  an7  approach  to  a direct  dynamical  estimate  of  what 
Imperfect  the  ordinaiT  semi-diurnal  tides  in  any  one  place  ought  to  be 
estfmateYf  lf  tlie  earth  were  perfectly  rigid.  In  water  10,000  feet  deep 
values  for  (which.  is  considerably  less  than  the  general  depth  of  the 
mena?hen°"  Atlantic,  as  demonstrated  by  the  many  soundings  taken  within 
the  last  few  years,  especially  those  along  the\whole  line  of  the 
Atlantic  Telegraph  Cable,  from  Valencia  to  Newfoundland),  the 
velocity  of  long  free  waves,  as  will  be  proved  in  Vol.  u.,  is  567 
feet  pei  second*.  At  this  rate  the  time  of  advancing  through 
5/  (or  a distance  equal  to  the  earth’s  radius)  would  be  only 
ten  hours.  Hence  it  may  be  presumed  that,  at  least  at  all 
islands  of  the  Atlantic,  any  tidal  disturbance,  whose  period 
amounts  to  several  days  or  more,  ought  to  give  very  nearlv  the 
four\hefo?t- true  e(luilibrium  tide>  not  modified  sensibly,  or  little  modified, 
semi-annual  b7 tbe  mertia  of  the  fluid.  Now  such  tidal  disturbances  (§  808) 
tides.  exist  in  virtue  of  the  moon’s  and  sun’s  changes  of  declination, 
having  for  their  periods  the  periods  of  these  changes. 

845.  The  sum  of  the  rise  from  lowest  to  highest  at  Teneriffe, 
and  simultaneous  fall  from  highest  to  lowest  at  Iceland,  in  the 

fortnlghtiy0f  lunar  fortnightly  tide>  would  amount  to  4 3 inches  if  the  earth 
Sted  on  were  perfectly  rigid,  or  2D  inches  if  the  tidal  effective  rigidity 

positfonSsUaPs'  were.  only  tbat  of  sfceel,  or  1’7  inches  if  the  tidal  effective 
to  rigidity,  rigidity  were  only  that  of  glass.  The  amounts  of  the  semi- 
annual tide,  whatever  be  the  actual  rigidity  of  the  earth,  would 
of  course  be  about  half  that  of  the  fortnightly  tide.  The  amount 

* Airy,  Tides  and  Waves,  § 170. 


84.").] 


STATICS. 


441 


of  either  in  any  one  place  would  lie  discoverable  with  certainty  Rigidity  of 
to  a small  fraction  of  an  inch  by  a proper  application  of  the 
method  of  least  squares,  such  as  has  hitherto  rot  been  made, 
to  the  indications  of  an  accurate  self-registering  tide-gauge. 

For  our  present  object,  the  semi-annual  tide,  though  it  may 
have  the  advantage  of  being  more  certainly  not  appreciably 
different  from  the  true  equilibrium  amount,  may  be  sensibly 
affected  by  the  melting  of  ice  from  the  arctic  and  antartic  polar 
regions,  and  by  the  fall  of  rain  and  drainage  of  land  elsewhere, 
which  will  probably  be  found  to  give  measurable  disturbances 
in  the  sea  level,  exhibiting,  on  the  average  of  many  years,  an 
annual  and  semi-annual  harmonic  variation.  This  disturbance  probably 
will,  however,  be  eliminated  for  any  one  fortnight  or  half-vear,  learned 

• • ^ ^ «/  ' from  obser- 

by  combining  observations  at  well-chosen  stations  in  d if-  vations 
ferent  latitudes.  It  seems  probable,  therefore,  that  a some-  amounts  °f 

, , . „ fortnightly 

what  accurate  determination  of  the  true  amount  of  the  earth’s  tides, 
elastic  yielding  to  the  tide-generating  forces  of  the  moon 
and  sun  may  be  deduced  from  good  self- registering  tide- 
gauges  maintained  for  several  years  at  such  stations  as  Ice- 


land, Teneriffe,  Cape  Verde  Islands,  Ascension  Island,  and 
St  Helena.  It  is  probable  also  that  the  ratio  of  the  moon’s 
mass  to  that  of  the  earth  may  be  determined  from  such  observa- 
tions more  accurately  than  it  has  yet  been.  It  is  to  be  hoped  Tide-gauges 
that  these  objects  may  induce  the  British  Government,  which  bushed  at 
has  done  so  much  for  physical  geography  in  many  ways,  to  S! bU' 
establish  tide-gauges  at  proper  stations  for  determining  with 
all  possible  accuracy  the  fortnightly  and  semi-annual  tides, 
and  the  variations  of  sea  level  due  to  the  melting  of  ice  in  the 
polar  regions,  and  the  fall  of  rain  and  drainage  of  land  over  the 
rest  of  the  world. 


846.  Moie  obseivation,  and  more  perfect  reduction  of  obser-  Scantiness 
vations  alieady  made,  are  wanted  to  give  any  decided  answer  hon  reKart** 
to  the  questions,  how  much  the  fortnightly  tide  and  the  semi-  )>iKbtiy 
annual  tide  really  are.  “ In  the  Philosophical  Transactions  & feE?8* 
‘‘1839,  p.  157,  Mr  Whewell  shows  that  the  observations  of-^"' 
high  and  low  water  at  Plymouth  give  a mean  height  of  water 
“ increasing  as  the  moon’s  declination  increases,  and  amounting 
“ to  3 inches  when  the  moon’s  declination  is  25°.  This  is  the 


442 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Rigidity  of 
the  earth. 
Scantiness 
of  informa- 
tion regard- 
ing fort- 
nightly 
tides, hither- 
to drawn 
from  obser- 
vation. 


Advance  in 
knowledge 
of  tides 
since  the 
first  edi- 
tion. 


[846.  I 

“same  direction  as  that  corresponding  in  the  expression  above  I- 
“ to  a high  latitude.  The  effect  of  the  sun’s  declination  is  not  1 51 
“ investigated  from  the  observations.  In  the  Philosophical  I i 
“ Transactions,  p.  163,  Mr  Whewell  lias  given  the  observations  1 1 
“ of  some  most  extraordinary  tides  at  Petropaulofsk,  in  Kams-  I 
“chatka,  and  at  Novo- Arkhangelsk,  in  the  Island  of  Sitkhi,  on  | 

“ the  west  coast  of  North  America. 

“ From  the  curves  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions , as  well 
“ as  from  the  remaining  curves  relating  to  the  same  places 
“ (which,  by  Mr  Whewell’s  kindness,  we  have  inspected),  there 
“appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  mean  level  of  the  water  at 
“ Petropaulofsk  and  Arkhangelsk  rises  as  the  moon’s  declina- 
“ tion  increases.  We  have  no  further  information  on  this 
“point.” — (Airy’s  Tides  and  Waves,  § 533.) 

847.  We  have  left  these  sections,  on  the  probability  of  the 
great  effective  rigidity  of  the  earth,  in  the  form  in  which  they 
stood  in  our  first  edition  in  1867.  Since  that  date  great 
advances  have  been  made  in  our  knowledge  of  actual  tidal 
phenomena.  The  Tidal  Committee  of  the  British  Association 
“ appointed  on  the  motion  of  Sir  William  Thomson  in  1867,  with 
for  one  prominent  object  the  evaluation  of  the  long-period  tides 
for  the  purpose  of  answering  the  cpiestion  of  the  Earth’s  rigidity,” 
has  done  much  towards  the  attainment  of  a satisfactory  know- 
ledge of  the  tides  in  the  ocean  surrounding  these  islands. 
But  by  far  the  most  complete  information  relates  to  the  Indian 
Ocean,  for  in  consequence  of  the  exertions  of  General  Walker, 
Sir  William  Thomson,  General  Strachey  and  others,  the  Indian 
Government  has  taken  up  the  question,  and  is  now  issuing,  undei 
the  direction  of  General  Walker  and  Major  Baird,  R.E.,  tide  tables 
for  the  principal  ports  in  India.  We  are  thus  now  able  to 
present  the  following  discussion  of  the  questions  raised  above, 
contributed  to  our  present  edition  by  Mr  G.  H.  Darwin. 


The  theo-  848.  The  expression  for  a tide  should  consist  of  a spheri- 
SffiSF  cal  harmonic  function  of  latitude  and  longitude  of  places  on  the 
Sffird  earth’s  surface  multiplied  by  a simple  time-harmonic;  but 
tides.'0  where  a correct  expansion,  rigorously  following  this,  defi- 
nition, would  involve  some  terms  of  very  long  period,  it 


848.] 


STATICS. 


443 


is  more  convenient  to  regard  the  spherical  harmonic  as  itself 
slowly  varying  between  certain  limits,  and  thus  to  amalgamate 
a number  of  terms  together.  The  last  term  of  (23)  § 808  will 
give  the  theoretical  equilibrium  values  of  the  fortnightly  decli- 
national  tide,  and  of  the  monthly  elliptic  tide.  The  full  expan- 
sion of  this  term  would  involve  a certain  part  going  through  its 
period  in  19  years,  in  which  time  the  lunar  nodes  complete  a 
revolution.  This  part  will,  according  to  Sir  William  Thomson,  be 
most  conveniently  included  by  conceiving  the  inclination  of  the 
lunar  orbit  to  the  equator  to  undergo  a slow  oscillation  in  that 
period.  In  practice  an  average  value  for  the  inclination,  the 
average  being  taken  over  a whole  year,  is  sufficiently  exact. 

(a)  In  what  follows,  the  descending  node  of  the  equator  on 
the  lunar  orbit  will  be  called  “the  intersection.”  If  the  lunar 
orbit  were  identical  with  the  ecliptic,  the  intersection  would  be 
the  vernal  equinox  or  T. 

The  following  is  a summary  of  the  notation  employed  below : — 

For  the  moon  : 

M = mass ; D = radius  vector  ; c = mean  distance ; cr  = mean 
motion  ; 0 — true  longitude  in  the  orbit ; i = inclination  of  lunar 
orbit  to  the  ecliptic : J\T  = longitude  of  ascending  node  on  the 
ecliptic  ; nr  = longitude  of  perigee  in  the  orbit ; e = eccentricity 
of  orbit;  £ = longitude  of  “the  intersection”  in  the  orbit;  v- 
right  ascension  of  “the  intersection”;  8 = declination. 

Observe  that  longitudes  “in  the  orbit”  are  measured  along  the 
ecliptic  as  far  as  the  lunar  node,  and  thence  along  the  orbit;  or 
are  measured  altogether  in  the  movable  orbit  from  a point 
therein,  which  is  at  a distance  behind  the  node  equal  to  the 
distance  of  the  node  from  T. 

For  the  earth  : 

E = mass  ; a = mean  radius ; l , A = latitude  and  W.  longitude 
of  places  on  the  earth’s  surface  ; o>  = obliquity  of  ecliptic ; 7=  in- 
clination of  equator  to  lunar  orbit. 

For  both  bodies  together,  let  r = ^MdiIEc\  And  let  the 
time  t be  measured  from  the  instant  when  the  moon’s  mean 
longitude  vanishes. 

The  readers  of  the  Tidal  Reports  of  the  British  Association 


The  theo- 
retical value 
of  the  fort- 
nightly and 
monthly 
elliptic 
tides. 


Definition 
of  symbols. 


444 


A BSTRACT  D YN  AM  ICS. 


Long-period 

tides. 


[848. 


for  1868,  1870,  1871,  1872,  1876*  may  find  it  convenient  to 
note  that  the  symbols  employed  are  frequently  the  Greek 
initials  of  the  corresponding  words  : thus, — y,  a,  rj  [yfj,  crtXrjvrj, 
?)\ios]  for  the  rotation  and  mean  motions  of  earth,  moon,  and 
sun. 


We  may  now  write  the  last  term  of  (23)  § 808,  thus 

h = II  g (1  - 3 sin2  8)  | 

& ' ( (1). 

where  II  = [£  ( 1 + 0)  - sin2 1\ ' 

It  is  obvious  from  the  solution  of  a right-angled  spherical  triangle 
that 


Whence 


sin  8 = sin  /sin  (0-£). 


1-3  sin2  8=  1 - f sin2 1 + £ sin2 1 cos  2 (6  - £)  (2). 

By  the  theory'  of  elliptic  motion,  we  have,  on  neglecting  the 
solar  perturbation  of  the  moon,  which  causes  the  ‘erection/  the 
‘variation’  and  other  inequalities, 


jj  (1  - e2)  = 1 + e cos  (6  - nr) 


.(3). 


In  proceeding  to  further  developments,  e and  sin2/  will  be 
treated  as  small  quantities  of  the  first  order,  and  those  of  the 
second  order  will  be  neglected.  Thus  in  terms  of  the  first  order 
we  have 

0 = at  (4). 

Then  from  (3)  and  (4)  we  have 


-jp  = 1 + 3e  cos  (at  — nr), 
and  from  (1),  (2),  and  (4) 

-^.  = {1  + 3e  cos  (at  - nr)}  (1  — £ sin2/+  £ sin2 1 cos  2 (art  - £)} 


=1  - £sin2  /+  3e(l  -2  sin2 1)  cos  (at  - nr)  + £ sin2 1 cos  2 (at  - f ) 

(5). 


In  this  expression  the  first  term  1 -£sin2/  oscillates  with  a 
period  of  19  years  about  the  mean  value  1— £ sin2  to,  the 


* Also  of  papers  presented  to  the  British  Association  by  Sir  W.  Thomson  and 
Capt.  Evans,  E.N.,  in  1878  (reprinted  in  Nature,  Oct.  24,  1878),  and  by 
Mr  G.  PI.  Darwin  in  1882. 


STATICS. 


445 


84S.J 


maximum  and  minimum  values  of  / being  to+i  and  “-i.  Long-poh°(l 
It  represents  a small  permanent  increase  to  the  ellipticity  of  the 
oceanic  spheroid,  on  which  is  superposed  a small  19-yeaily  tide. 

This  part  of  the  expression  has  no  further  interest  in  the  present 
investigation.  The  last  term  of  (5)  goes  through  a double  period 
in  nearly  27*3  m.  s.  days  and  constitutes  the  fortnightly  decli- 
national  tide.  If  the  approximation  were  carried  to  terms  of 
the  second  order,  which  may  very  easily  be  done,  this  term  would 
have  involved  a factor  1 — %e2.  The  middle  term  goes  through 
a single  period  in  something  over  27  3 days,  the  angular  motion 
of  the  lunar  perigee  being  40°  40'  per  annum.  This  term  as  it 
stands  in  (5)  is  complete  to  the  second  order.  Thus  we  may 
write  the  expressions  to  the  second  order  of  small  quantities, 
for  the  fortnightly  and  monthly  elliptic  tides,  thus  : — 


~ = \ |(1-  fe2)  sin3  / cos  2 (at  - £) 
3e  (1  — # sin2/)  cos  (at  - -cr)  J 


(6). 


(b)  We  must  now  show  how  to  compute  / and  £,  and  it  Formula; 
will  be  expedient  (as  will  appear  below)  at  the  same  time  to  longitude 

and  R.A.  of 

compute  v.  the  inter- 

section. 

The  accompanying  figure  exhibits  the  relation  of  the  three 
planes  to  one  another. 


£ the  longitude  of  I in  the  orbit  is  T£j  - ft  I,  and  v the  right 
ascension  of  I is  Tl. 

Now  from  the  spherical  triangle  T&fl,  we  have 
cot  I &I  sin  cos  iZcos  i + sin  i oot  o> 

cot  IT  sin  iZ=  cos  iZ  cos  co  + sin  to  cot  i.. 
cos  / = cos  i cos  to  — sin  i sin  o>  cos  iZ 


(7) , 

(8) , 
(9). 


Long-period 

tides. 


446 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[848. 


Formulas 
for  the 
longitude 
and  R.A.  of 
the  inter- 
section. 


Also 


tan  £ = 


(cot  I sin  A—  cos  A)  sin  A 
cos  A cot  sin  A + sin* A 


Substituting  in  which  from  (7),  and  effecting  some  reductions 
in  the  result,  and  in  (8),  we  have 


^ sin  i cot  at  sin  A (1  — tan  \ i tan  w cos  A)  ■ 
cos'  ^ i + sin  i cot  co  cos  A — sin*  £ i cos  2 A 


tan  v = 


tan  i cosec  w sin  A 
1 + tan  i cot  w cos  A 


..-(10), 


These  formulas  are  rigorously  true,  but  since  i is  small,  being 
about  5°  9',  we  may  obtain  much  simpler  approximate  for- 
mulse,  sufficiently  accurate  for  all  practical  purposes.  Treating 
then  sin  i and  tan  i as  equal  to  one  another,  and  to  i the  circular 
measui’e  of  5°  9',  equations  (10)  become  approximately, 

tan  £=  i cot  w sin  A — \i2  sin  2 A 
tan  v—i  cosec  w sin  A - 4 i2  sin  2 A 

sin  w J 


- sin2  w ■) 
sin2  to 


(11). 


The  second  terms  of  these  expressions  are  very  nearly  equal 
to  one  another,  because  cos  co  = 1 - £ sin2  co  approximately.  And 
v — £ is  a small  angle,  which  is  to  a close  degree  of  approxima- 
tion equal  to  i tan  £ co  sin  A. 

Numerical  calculation  shows  that  itan^co  is  1°4';  hence 
£=  v — 1°  4' sin  A very  nearly. 

In  the  Tidal  fteport  of  the  British  Association  for  1876  the 
treatment  of  this  subject,  with  notation  involving  a symbol  )),  is 
somewhat  different  from  the  above,  but  the  result  is  the 
same.  The  symbol  })  denotes  “the  equatorial  mean  moon’s” 
right  ascension  at  the  epoch  when  t — 0 ; which  it  may  be  ob- 
served is  not  the  same  epoch  as  that  chosen  here.  This  fictitious 
mean  moon  moves  in  the  equator  with  an  angular  velocity  equal 
to  the  moon’s  mean  motion,  and  it  is  at  the  “intersection”  at 
the  instant  when  the  moon’s  mean  longitude  is  equal  to  the 
longitude  “in  the  orbit”  of  the  intersection.  In  other  words, 
if  we  take  a second  fictitious  moon  moving  in  the  plane  of  the 
lunar  orbit  with  an  angular  velocity  equal  to  the  moon’s  mean 
motion,  and  coinciding  with  the  actual  moon  at  the  instant 
when  the  moon’s  mean  longitude  vanishes,  then  the  equatorial 


848.] 


STATICS. 


447 


mean  moon  coincides  with  this  orbital  mean  moon  at  the  intei-  ^^'r>crio^ 
section. 

It  is  obvious  then  that  the  right  ascension  of  the  equatorial 
mean  moon  will  always  differ  from  the  moon  s mean  longitude 
by  v — £,  and  thus 

J)  = moon:s  mean  longitude  at  the  epoch  + 1°  4'  sin  N. 

Therefore  with  the  epoch  of  the  Report  of  18/  G (pp.  299,  302) 
crt  + })  _ v = moon’s  mean  longitude  + 1°  4'  sin  N —v 
= moon’s  mean  longitude  - £. 


Now  according  to  the  Report  (p.  305),  the  fortnightly  tide  is  Formulas 
expressed,  (by  means  of  H as  defined  in  (1)  above),  in  the  form  ]°ijpuide of 

H | sin2 1 cos  2 (o-i  + D - v).  sectio^' 


This  only  differs  from  (6)  in  the  term  4-e2,  which  is  the  correc- 
tion for  the  eccentricity  of  the  lunar  orbit. 

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  in  the  report  ))  — tz/  is  the  moon’s 
mean  anomaly  at  the  epoch,  and  therefore  w'  is  equal  to  the 
mean  longitude  of  the  moon’s  pei'igee  + 1°4'  sin  K,  and  not  simply 
the  mean  longitude  of  the  moon’s  perigee,  as  defined  in  the  last 
line  of  p.  302.  Since  the  moon’s  mean  anomaly  is  only  involved 
in  the  arguments  of  the  elliptic  tides,  which  ai’e  all  small,  this 
correction  in  ct'  has  no  practical  importance.  It  is  however  im- 
portant, in  regard  to  clear  ideas  of  the  notation  and  the  spherical 
trigonometry  of  the  subject. 

In  consequence  of  not  at  first  apprehending  properly  the 
nature  of  the  fictitious  “ equatorial  mean  moon,”  I overlooked 
the  term  lM'siniV  in  ]),  and  in  the  reductions  made  below 
have  used  v instead  of  £.  Since  the  difference  between  v and 
£ is  clearly  of  little  importance  in  respect  to  the  numerical 
values  of  the  fortnightly  tide,  I have  not  repeated  the  compu- 
tations with  the  correct  value  of  D,  or,  in  the  present  notation, 
with  £ in  place  of  v. 


(c)  The  factor  II  or  ^ t«  [-g-  (1  + QI)  - sin3/]  involves  the 
function  CF,  which  depends  on  the  distribution  of  land  and  water 
on  the  earth’s  surface.  By  (21)  § 808 

(&  = jj( 3 sin2 1-  1)  cos  l dl  d\ 

where  Q is  the  total  area  of  ocean,  and  where  the  double  integral 
is  taken  all  over  the  surface  of  the  ocean. 


448 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


i 


Long.period 

tides. 


Evaluation 
of  tho 
function  IB. 


[848. 


The  integral  of  3 sin2/- 1 taken  over  the  whole  sphere  vanishes, 
and  therefore  the  integral  taken  over  the  sea  is  equal  to,  but 
opposite  in  sign  to  the  integral  taken  over  the  land.  It  is  more 
convenient  to  integrate  over  the  land,  because  there  is  less  of  it, 
than  over  the  sea. 

In  order  to  evaluate  this  integral,  and  to  determine  Q the 
total  area  of  sea  at  the  same  time,  it  will  be  sufficiently  accurate 
if  we  replace  the  actual  continents  and  islands  of  the  earth  by 
blocks  of  land,  limited  by  parallels  of  latitude  and  by  meridians. 
The  following  schedule  specifies  the  blocks  which  were  taken  to 
represent  the  actual  land,  together  with  the  names  of  the  land 
to  which  they  are  supposed  to  correspond. 

Since  it  is  impossible  that  the  amount  of  water,  which  flows 
in  and  out  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea  in  a week  or  a fortnight 

© f 

can  influence  the  height  of  the  sea  in  the  open  ocean  to  any 
sensible  extent,  that  sea  has  been  treated  as  though  it  were 
dry  land.  The  longitudes  of  the  land  are  given  so  that  any 
one  may  verify  that  the  representation  of  the  continents  is 
pretty  good;  in  evaluating  the  other  four  functions  of  (21)  § 808 
these  longitudes  would  be  required ; but  for  (£  we  only  require 
the  number  of  degrees  of  longitude,  which  are  occujned  by  land, 
between  each  pair  of  parallels  of  latitude. 

As  explained  above 


0(1?  = - [J( 3 sin2Z-l)  cosldldX (12), 

0 = 47 r—  //cos  ldld\ (13), 


when  the  integrals  are  taken,  all  over  the  land  of  the  globe. 

r 

Now  J (3  sin2  Z - 1)  cos  Idl  — - (sin  l + sin  3/), 

and  J cos  Idl  = sin  l. 

If  therefore  there  be  degrees  of  land  between  latitudes  /, 
and  Z„  of  the  N.  hemisphere,  and  t2  degrees  of  land  between  the 
same  parallels  of  the  S.  hemisphere,  it  is  clear  that  the  con- 
tributions to  (12)  and  (13)  due  to  land  between  these  latitudes 
in  both  hemispheres,  are  respectively 


4 Q i [sin  / + sin  3/J  and  - jjj  («,  + Q [sin  Z]Jj 


848.] 


STATICS 


449 


APPROXIMATE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  LAND  ON  THE  EARTH’S  SURFACE. 


N.  latitude. 
W.  longitude. 

N.  latitude. 
E.  longitude. 

lat.  80°  to  90°. 

20°  to  50°. 
Arctic  land. 

lat.  70°  to  80°. 

22»  t0  550.  85o  t0  ngo. 
Greenland.  Islands. 

55°  to  60°;  90°  to  110°. 

Nova  Zembla.  Tunda. 

lat.  60°  to  70°. 

35°  to  52° ; 65°  to  80° ; 90°  to  165°. 
Greenland.  Baffinland.  Brit.N.Am. 

10°  to  180°. 
Norway  & N.  Asia. 

lat.  50°  to  60°. 

0°  to  6°;  60°  to  78°;  90°  to  130°. 
G.  Brit.  Canada.  Brit.  N.  Am. 

10° to  140°;  155°  to  160°. 

Europe  & Asia.  Kamschatka. 

lat.  40°  to  50°. 

0°  to  5° ; 65°  to  123°. 

France  & Spain.  U.  S. 

0°  to  135°. 
Asia. 

lat.  30°  to  40°. 

0°  to  8° ; 78°  to  120°. 
Africa.  U.  S. 

0°  to  120° : 135°  to  138°. 

Asia  & Medit.  Sea.  Japan. 

lat.  20°  to  30°. 

0°  to  15°;  80°  to  82°;  97°  to  110°. 
Africa.  Florida  & Cuba.  Mexico. 

0°  to  118°. 
Africa  and  Asia. 

lat.  10°  to  20°. 

0°  to  17°;  87°  to  95°. 
Africa.  Mexico. 

0°  to  50°;  75°  to  85°;  95°  to  108°; 

Africa.  India.  Siam. 

122°  to  125°. 
Philip.  Isl. 

lat.  0°  to  10°. 

53°  to  78°. 
S.  America. 

0°  to  48°;  98°  to  105° ; 112°  to  117°. 
Africa.  Malay  ia.  Borneo. 

S.  latitude. 
W.  longitude. 

S.  latitude. 
E.  longitude. 

lat.  0°  to  10°. 

37°  to  80°. 

S.  America. 

12°  to  40°;  110°  to  130°. 
Africa.  Islands. 

lat.  10°  to  20°. 

37°  to  74°. 
S.  America. 

12°  to  38°;  45°  to  50°;  126°  to  144°. 

Africa.  Madagascar.  Australia. 

lat.  20°  to  30°. 

45°  to  71°. 
S.  America. 

15°  to  33°;  115° to  151°. 
Africa.  Australia. 

lat.  30°  to  40°. 

550  to  73°. 
S.  America. 

20°  to  23° ; 132°  to  140°. 

Africa.  Australia. 

lat.  40°  to  50°. 

65°  to  73°. 
S.  America. 

170°  to  172°. 
N.  Zealand. 

lat.  50°  to  60°. 

67°  to  72°. 

T.  del  Fuego. 

lat.  60°  to  70°. 

55°  to  65°. 

S.  Shetland. 

120°  to  130°. 
Adelie  Land. 

lat.  70°  to  80°. 

about  20°  of  longitude  (Antarctic  continent). 

lat.  80°  to  90°. 

about  180°  of  longitude  (Antarctic  continent). 

Now  the  above  table  gives  £,  and  ta  for  each  pair  of  latitudes 
90°  to  80°,  80°  to  70°  Ac.  in  both  hemispheres,  for  example  from 
20°  to  30°,  tx  + ta  is  228  ; hence  it  is  clear  that  if  2 denotes  sum- 

vol.  ii.  29 


Evaluation 
of  the 
function  (&. 


Theoretical 
expressions 
for  equi- 
librium 
value  of 
fortnightly 
and 

monthly 

tides. 


450 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[848. 


mation  for  the  contributions  due  to  each  such  pair  of  latitudes, 
we  have 


0 = 


2 \ (tl  + t2)  [sin  l + sin  3 1]' 


720 -2  <«,  + «.)  [sin  rf* 

It  is  only  necessary  to  form  tables  of  sin  l and  ^(sin  l + sin  31) 
for  each  10°  of  latitude  from  0°  to  90°,  and  then  to  form  the 
first  differences  of  these  two  sets  of  values,  and  subsequently 
to  perform  a number  of  multiplications,  in  order  to  obtain  the 
required  results.  As  the  amount  of  antarctic  land  is  quite 
uncertain,  two  suppositions  were  taken,  namely,  first  that  there 
is  as  much  antarctic  land  as  is  given  in  the  schedule,  and 
secondly,  that  there  is  no  land  between  S.  latitude  80°  and  the 
pole.  On  the  first  hypothesis  it  was  found  that  the  fraction  of 
the  whole  earth’s  surface  which  consists  of  land  is  °f  202 9 
= "283,  and  in  the  second  that  the  same  proportion  is  of 
200-2  = -278.  ftigaud*  has  estimated  the  proportion  as  '266; 
if  then  it  be  considered  that  he  too  could  have  no  information 
as  to  antarctic  land,  and  that  the  Mediterranean  Sea  is  here 
treated  as  solid,  it  appears  that  the  representation  of  the 
continents  by  square  blocks  of  land  has  been  very  satisfactory. 
The  numerator  for  the  expression  for  0 was  found  to  be  -7 '87 
or  — 2-53  according  to  the  two  hypotheses.  Hence  we  have 


0 = 


-7-87 

517-1 


- = — -0152,  with  antarctic  continent 


and  0 


-2-53 

519-8 


- -00486,  without  antarctic  continent 


•|(1  + 0)  will  be  found  to  be  equal  sin2  34°  40'  or  sin2  34°  57'. 
Since  ^ is  sin2  35°  16',  it  follows  that  the  latitude  of  evanescent 
fortnightly  and  monthly  tides  is  very  little  affected  by  the 
distribution  of  land  and  water  on  the  earth’s  surface. 

In  the  reductions  of  the  tidal  observations  I have  put 

|(1+  0)  - sin2 1 = sin  (35°  - l)  sin  (35°  + l). 

Thus  from  (6)  we  have 

(f>  = f TCt  (1  — -|e2)  sin2/  sin  (35°  - l)  sin  (35°  + l ) cos  2 ( art  — £) 

| T<ze  (1  - f sin2 1)  sin  (35°  — l ) sin  (35°  + 1 ) cos  (tr< 


* Trans.  Cam.  Phil.  Soc.  Vol.  6. 


STATICS. 


451 


848.] 


Taking  i?/I/=82;  c/a  = 60-27;  <z  = 20,9xlOB  feet,  it  will  be 
found  that 

ra=  2 '01 95  feet. 

If  we  take  o>  = 23°  28',  i = 5°9',  the  maximum,  mean  and  Maximum, 
minimum  values  of  7 are  28°  37',  23°  28',  18°  19'.  Then  with  mfnimum 
e = -054908,  it  will  be  found  that  Britfsh^eet 

/■298,  when  7=28°  37', 
f ra  (1  - fe2)  sin2 7 = y206,  when  7=  23°  28', 

(-128,  when  7=  18°  19'; 

j-094,  when  7=  28°  37', 
f t ae  (1  sin27)  = yl09,  when  7 = 23°  28', 

(-123,  when  7=  18°  19'. 


These  numbers  are  given  in  feet,  and  the  equatorial  semi-ranges 
of  the  <f>  and  /a  tides  are  (since  sin2  35°  = ^ nearly)  about  one- 
third  of  these  numbers.  At  the  time  when  7 is  a minimum 
these  two  tides  have  approximately  equal  ranges ; but  when  7 
is  a maximum  the  fortnightly  is  three  times  as  great  as  the 
monthly  tide. 


(d)  In  the  Reports  of  the  British  Association,  and  in  the  Preparation 
“Tide-tables  for  the  Indian  Ports”*  for  1881  and  1882,  the  tionby10' 
results  of  the  harmonic  analysis  of  the  tidal  observations  are  squares, 
given  in  the  form  R cos  (nt  — e),  where  R,  the  semi-range  of  tide, 
is  expressed  in  British  feet,  n is  the  speed  of  the  particular  tide 
in  question,  and  e,  the  retardation  of  phase  (or  shortly  the  phase), 
is  an  angle  less  than  360°. 


In  the  case  of  the  fortnightly  and  monthly  tides  n is  respec- 
tively 2 o'  and  a - zcr1 , where  rar,  is  tlie  angular  velocity  of  the 
lunar  perigee  and  therefore  -or  = vrj.  (In  the  Tidal  Report  of 
1872  that  which  is  here  called  zzq  is  denoted  as  ot.) 

Now  in  order  to  compare  the  observed  fortnightly  tide  with 
its  theoretical  value,  we  must  write  the  observation  in  the 
form 

R cos  [2  ( art  - g)  - (e  - 2£)]. 

Or  if  we  put 

R cos(e-  2£)  =A) 

R sin  (e  - 2£)  = Bj  ^ 

* These  tables  were  prepared  under  the  direction  of  Captain  (now  Major) 
A.  W.  Baird,  K.E.,  and  Mr  E.  Roberts,  and  are  published  by  “ authority  of  the 
Secretary  of  State  for  India  in  Council.” 


29 — 2 


452 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[848. 


Preparation 
for  reduc- 
tion by 
least 
squares. 


the  observation  becomes 


A cos  2 (at  - £)  + B sin  2 (at  - £) 
In  the  case  of  the  monthly  tide,  if  we  put 


R cos  e = Cl 
R sin  e — T)j 


the  result  of  observation  becomes 


(16). 

(17) 


C cos  (at  — ct)  -f  D sin  (at  — (18)- 

The  expressions  for  the  theoretical  equilibrium  fortnightly 
and  monthly  tides  are  given  in  (14).  If  however  the  solid 
earth  yields  tidally,  either  as  an  elastic  body,  or  as  a viscous  one, 
the  height  of  the  tide  will  fall  below  its  equilibrium  value. 
Moreover  on  the  hypothesis  of  viscosity  the  phase  of  the  tide 
will  be  affected  ; a result  which  would  also  follow  from  the 
effects  of  fluid  friction. 


Theoretical  Thus  the  actual  fortnightly  and  monthly  tides  must  be  ex- 

expression  J 

for  the  tides  pressed  in  the  forms 

when  the 
earth  yields 

whenilfere  ^ = ^ ~ ^ ^ 1 ^ ^35° ~ ^ Sin (35°  + l)  I x cos  2 ( at  ~ £)  + V sin  2 [ut  - £)  ( i 

is  friction.  M = fTae  (1-f  sin2/)  sin  (35°  - l)  sin  (35 ° + l)  {u  cos  (at-vr)  +v  sin  (<rt-^)}J  19’ 


Equations 
for  reduc- 
tion by  least 
squares. 


where  x,  y,  u,  v are  numerical  coefficients.  If  the  equilibrium 
theory  be  nearly  true  (compare  § 808  above)  for  the  fortnightly 
and  monthly  tides,  y and  v will  be  small ; and  x and  u will  be 
fractions  approaching  unity,  in  proportion  as  the  rigidity  of  the 
earth’s  mass  approaches  infinity. 

If  we  now  put 

a = |ra(l  -■§ e2)  sin2 /sin  (35°  - l)  sin  (35°  + 
c = -|rae(l  -§  sin8/)  sin  (35°  - £)  sin  (35°  + £)J 

then  for  the  fortnightly  tide 

atc  = A) 

ay  = BJ  j 

and  for  the  monthly  tide 

::3 «■ 

Every  set  of  tidal  observations  will  give  equations  for  x,  y,  u, 
and  the  most  probable  values  of  these  quantities  must  be  deter- 
mined by  the  method  of  least  squares. 


848.] 


STATICS. 


453 


For  places  north  of  35°  N.  lat.,  or  south  of  35°  S.  lat.  the  Equations 

coefficients  a and  c become  negative.  This  would  be  incon-  tion  by 

. . least 

venient  for  the  arithmetical  operations  of  reduction,  and  therefore  squares, 
for  such  places  it  is  convenient  to  subtract  180°  from  the  phases 
e-2£,  and  e which  occur  in  the  expressions  for  A,  B,  C,  D; 
after  doing  this  the  coefficients  a and  c may  in  all  cases  be 
treated  as  positive,  for  we  may  suppose  (l—  35°)  to  be  taken 
for  places  in  the  northern  hemisphere  North  of  35°,  and  35°  — l 
for  places  in  the  same  hemisphere  to  the  South  of  35°;  and 
similarly  for  the  southern  hemisphere. 

(e)  In  collecting  the  results  of  tidal  observation  I have  Numerical 
to  thank  Sir  William  Thomson,  General  Strachey,  and  Major  harmonic 
Baird  for  placing  all  the  materials  in  my  hands,  and  for  giving  tidafobser- 
me  every  facility.  As  above  stated  the  observations  are  to  vations- 
be  found  in  the  British  Association  Reports  for  1872  and  1876, 
and  in  the  Tide-tables  of  the  Indian  Government. 

The  results  of  the  harmonic  analysis  of  the  tidal  observations 
are  given  altogether  for  22  different  ports,  but  of  these  only  14 
are  here  used.  The  following  are  the  reasons  for  rejecting 
those  made  at  8 out  of  the  22  ports. 

One  of  these  stations  is  Cat  Island  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico ; 
this  place,  in  latitude  30°  14r  N.,  lies  so  near  to  the  critical 
latitude  of  evanescent  fortnightly  and  monthly  tides,  that  con- 
sidering the  uncertainty  in  the  exact  value  of  that  latitude,  it 
is  impossible  to  determine  the  proper  weight  which  should  be 
assigned  to  the  observation.  The  result  only  refers  to  a single 
year,  viz.  1848,  and  as  its  weight  must  in  any  case  be  very 
small,  the  omission  can  exercise  scarcely  any  effect  on  the  result. 

Another  omitted  station  is  Toulon ; this  being  in  the  Mediter- 
ranean Sea  cannot  exhibit  the  true  tide  of  the  open  ocean. 

Another  is  Hanstal  in  the  Gulf  of  Cutch.  The  result  is  given 
in  an  Indian  Blue  Book.  I do  not  know  the  latitude,  and 
General  Strachey  informs  me  that  he  believes  the  observations 
were  only  made  during  a few  months  for  the  purpose  of  deter- 
mining the  mean  level  of  the  sea,  for  the  levelling  operations  of 
the  great  survey  of  India. 

The  other  omitted  stations  are  Diamond  Harbour,  Fort 
Gloster  and  Kidderpore  in  the  Hooghly  estuary,  and  Rangoon, 


454 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


Numerical 
results  of 
harmonic 
analysis  of 
tidal  obser- 
vations. 


[848. 


and  Moulmein.  All  these  are  river  stations,  and  they  all  ex- 
hibit long  period  tides  of  such  abnormal  height  as  to  make  it 
nearly  certain  that  the  shallowness  of  the  water  has  exercised 
a large  influence  on  the  results.  The  observations  higher  up 
the  Hooghly  seem  more  abnormal  than  those  lower  down.  I 
also  learn  that  the  tidal  predictions  are  not  found  to  be  satis- 
factory at  these  stations. 

The  following  tables  exhibit  the  results  for  the  14  remaining 
ports.  The  rows  R and  e are  extracted  from  the  printed  tidal 
results,  and  the  rest  of  the  values  are  the  reductions  effected 
in  accordance  with  the  investigations  of  the  preceding  sections. 
It  has  already  been  explained  why,  in  the  case  of  the  fortnightly 
tide,  c - 2v  is  given  in  place  of  the  more  correct  e - 2£  It  must 
also  be  added  that  in  many  cases  there  is  no  information  as  to 
the  days  on  which  the  observations  began  and  ended;  it  was 
thus  impossible  to  use  the  rigorously  correct  value  for  v,  namely 
that  corresponding  to  the  middle  day  of  the  period  embraced 
by  the  observations.  These  details  might  no  doubt  have  been 
obtained  by  means  of  correspondence  with  various  persons  in 
India ; but  considering  the  uncertainty  in  the  tabular  results 
it  did  not  seem  worth  while  to  incur  this  delay. 

Sir  William  Thomson  placed  in  my  hands  a table  of  the 
values  of  I and  v corresponding  to  the  1st  of  July  of  each  year. 
Accordingly  when  the  observations  are  stated  to  be,  for  example, 
for  1874—5,  I assume  that  the  observations  began  early  in 
1874,  and  the  values  for  I and  v for  July  1,  1874,  are  used.  In 
several  cases  it  appears  that  the  observations  began  in  March, 
and  here  but  little  error  has  been  incurred.  In  the  few  cases 
in  which  only  a single  year  is  named  (e.g.  Ramsgate),  it  is 
assumed  that  values  for  July  1 will  be  proper. 

No  attempt  has  been  made  to  assign  weight  to  each  year’s 
observations  according  to  the  exact  number  of  months  over 
which  the  tidal  records  extend.  The  data  for  such  weighting 
are  in  many  cases  wanting.  In  computing  the  value  for  a the 
factor  1 -|e2  was  omitted,  but  it  has  been  introduced  finally  as 
explained  below, 


British  and  French  Ports,  North  of  Latitude  35°. 

[ Tidal  Reports  of  Brit.  Assoc.  1872  and  1876.] 


848.] 


STATICS, 


455 


Indian  Ports. 

[Indian  Tide  Tables  for  1881.] 


45G 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS, 


[848 


Kdbbachee. 
24°  47' 

19. 

00 

P- 
P- 
00 
1— 1 

•065 

Ol 

05 

© 

OS 

rH 

tP 

CD 

o 

00 

CD 

+ 

+ -0508 

CO 

o 

© 

+ 

00 

i 

o 

•110 

CD 

© 

d 

OS 

05 

o 

os 

4- 

05 

05 

P- 

O 

4- 

+ -0831 

•0147 

oo 

rH 

IP 

CD 

IP 

00 

rH 

CO 

o 

Ol 

05 

d 

CO 

ID 

CD 

co 

05 

o 

rH 

1 

o 

to 

•*< 

o 

+ 

05 

rH 

O 

O 

1 

os 

ID 

© 

ID 

GO 

© 

rH 

rH 

d 

05 

p- 

© 

05 

4- 

rH 

CD 

CO 

o 

+ 

O 

P- 

»D 

O 

+ 

ID 

rH 

O 

P 

rH 

CO 

i 

id 

IP 

00 

rH 

rH 

o 

tP 

OS 

d 

ID 

05 

C- 

o 

rH 

05 

+ 

rH 

CD 

rH 

© 

+ 

o 

ID 

O 

o 

+ 

CO 

ID 

O 

CO 

ID 

O 

05 

05 

o 

CD 

O 

rH 

p- 

© 

CO 

P- 

1 

N 

CD 

CD 

rH 

o 

1 

ID 

CO 

ID 

O 

+ 

ID 

rH 

o 

CO 

«H 

id 

tp 

00 

rH 

>o 

o 

00 

rH 

d 

OS 

CO 

05 

o 

tP 

CD 

+ 

OS 

05 

O 

+ 

00 

05 

CD 

© 

+ 

o 

© 

tr- 

io 

© 

CO 
c O 
o 
CD 
05 

OS 

CD 

o 

CD 

05 

4- 

05 

05 

ID 

O 

4* 

os 

05 

05 

O 

+ 

00 

rH 

O 

id 

H 

i 

CO 

tp 

00 

rH 

CO 

rH 

o 

o 

d 

P- 

CD 

05 

k 

J 

05 

CD 

o 

OS 

CD 

+ 

CD 

05 

rH 

© 

) 

05 
O 
rH 
c p 

1 

rH 

rH 

© 

O 

ID 

© 

CD 

CO 

o 

ID 

ID 

o 

ID 

o 

ID 

ID 

4- 

rH 

GO 

05 

O 

+ 

rH 

O 

+ 

CD 

ID 

rH 

9 

rH 

rH 

i 

O 

1P 

00 

rH 

ID 

CD 

O 

05 

05 

o 

CD 

00 

05 

J 

os 

05 

o 

tP 

P- 

4- 

CO 

tp 

o 

o 

1 

05 

r* 

CD 

© 

1 

IP 

00 

05 

© 

05 

CD 

© 

O 

OS 

d 

ID 

rH 

rH 

So 

o 

co 

1 

N 

o 

O 

1 

00 

CO 

05 

O 

+ 

CD 

tr- 

rH 

O 

CO 

rH 

d 

tp 

1 

OS 

CO 

GO 

rH 

co 

o 

rH 

os 

d 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 

ID 

o 

GO 

tH 

1 

rH 

05 

© 

+ 

05 

00 

o 

*1 

00 

05 

© 

CD 

O 

tP 

05 

d 

ID 

P- 

rH 

-cH 

o 

tH 

i 

i 

OS 

05 

o 

1 

ID 

CD 

O 

O 

+ 

O 

00 

rH 

o 

05 

H 

OS 

i 

00 

CO 

00 

rH 

00 

CD 

O 

O 

tH 

o 

ID 

CD 

CD 

cb 

ID 

o 

o 

1 

r- 

00 

05 

© 

+ 

OS 

05 

© 

1 

00 

rH 

05 

© 

CO 

tp 

o 

CD 

tP 

o 

tP 

05 

o 

p— 

CO 

4- 

k 

00 

00 

05 

o 

1 

CD 

O 

P- 

o 

’l 

ID 

GO 

rH 

O 

3 ^ 

3 3 

rH 

rH 

d 

00 

os 

IP 

00 

rH 

05 

CO 

© 

IP 

o 

ID 

CD 

d 

o 

ID 

rH 

+ 

tp 

OS 

ID 

© 

+ 

P- 

CO 

rH 

© 

+ 

CO 

o 

p 

© 

CD 

CD 

O 

05 

CO 

d 

T* 

p- 

CD 

o 

4- 

OS 

05 

CD 

O 

+ 

tr- 

ot 

8 

+ 

CO 

GO 

05 

O 

© 

rH 

00 

1 

tP 

IP 

00 

rH 

05 

CO 

© 

O 

CO 

o 

05 

05 

rH 

O 

05 

rH 

+ 

CO 

o 

CO 

© 

+ 

rH 

CD 

rH 

© 

+ 

00 

rH 

00 

© 

ID 

05 

© 

CO 

p- 

o 

o 

05 

CD 

rH 

© 

os 

CD 

1 

OS 

rH 

O 

+ 

00 

»o 

1—1 

o 

1 

00 

CO 

05 

o 

J Place 

Latitude. . 

a 

■< 

w 

d 

d 

05 

1 

<3 

I 

M 

gS 

R3 

d 

d 

d 

ft 

d 

•OPIX  -gpix  AtI?n0H 


Indian  Ports  (continued). 

[ Indian  Tide  Tables  for  1881-2.] 


STATICS 


457 


848.] 


Paumben-Pass,  Island 
of  Ramesweram. 

cb 

29. 

1879-80. 

•045 

rH 

cp 

b 

CO 

CO 

CO 

05 

04 

o 

IO 

1 

■0448 

- -0043 

•0764 

•052 

04 

»p 

b 

C— 

IO 

rH 

CO 

© 

P- 

IO 

+ 

+ •0279 

+ •0439 

o 

rH 

co 

p 

© 

05 

00 

<N 

05 

i 

00 

D— 

00 

rH 

CO 

IO 

o 

rH 

tH 

o 

CO 

CO 

05 

o 

O 

1 

o 

CO 

IO 

o 

o 

T— 1 

o 

o 

1 

IO 

CO 

00 

p 

05 

IO 

p 

00 

p 

© 

00 

CO 

tH 

© 

rH 

rH 

i 

05 

tr- 

io 

O 

+ 

CO 

1—t 

rH 

o 

1 

CO 

05 

04 

O 

H 

« 

O 

o 

rH 

04 

1879-80. 

IO 

05 

p 

CO 

© 

b 

CO 

IO 

CO 

rH 

o 

P— 

rH 

+ 

+ -0907 

rH 

00 

04 

cp 

+ 

IO 

CO 

p— 

o 

rH 

P- 

O 

04 

TH 

o 

IO 

00 

to 

04 

© 

IO 

00 

+ 

»o 

o 

o 

+ 

+ -0708 

CO 

05 

04 

O 

& 

w 

pp 

o 

T— f 

rH 

CD 

04 

05 

00 

C— 

00 

rH 

CO 

o 

rH 

05 

CO 

b 

iO 

IO 

CO 

P- 

rH 

o 

rH 

rH 

+ 

o 

o 

i-H 

+ 

00 

o 

CM 

© 

+ 

CO 

o 

CO 

p 

05 

CO 

O 

IO 

p 

© 

IO 

p- 

lO 

© 

IO 

+ 

+ •0687 

+ •0072 

tr- 

ee 

04 

p 

Karwar. 

5o 

IO 

04 

o 

00 

05 

c- 

00 

rH 

o 

E- 

o 

00 

cp 

© 

o 

CO 

»b 

o 

04 

+ 

6690-  + 

(M 

o 

© 

+ 

IO 

co 

CO 

o 

CO 

p 

00 

04 

© 

rH 

p- 

rH 

© 

rH 

+ 

04 

CO 

IO 

o 

+ 

+ -0143 

O 

t- 

04 

O 

O 

rH 

** 

C4 

05 

i 

00 

P- 

00 

rH 

t- 

CO 

o 

o 

05 

o 

05 

04 

CO 

© 

CO 

o 

rH 

1 

05 

CO 

o 

+ 

00 

CO 

rH 

O 

1 

co 

04 

p- 

p 

<N 

© 

00 

ip 

© 

o 

IO 

co 

ib 

04 
© 

05 

1 

rH 

r# 

O 

+ 

05 

CO 

o 

o 

1 

O 

co 

04 

O 

« 

H 

fl 

& 

D 

CO 

<N 

1879-80. 

CO 

CO 

o 

05 

H< 

o 

t- 

CO 

rH 

o 

00 

+ 

CO 

»o 

CO 

© 

+ 

0010-  + 

IO 

co 

IO 

p 

CO 

O 

CO 

© 

IO 

IO 

CO 

04 

CO 

© 

hH 

1 

+ -0459 

co 

CO 

o 

p 

1 

05 

04 

04 

O 

PP 

o 

£ 

0 
<3 

1 

ib 

10 

o 

00 

rH 

ci 

<N 

05 

i 

00 

D- 

CO 

rH 

rH 

05 

o 

CO 

o 

rH 

CO 

CO 

© 

o 

04 

rH 

1 

00 

00 

00 

© 

+ 

05 

05 

rH 

O 

1 

p- 

rH 

CO 

o 

CO 

IO 

O 

04 

Ip 

© 

rH 

CO 

05 

04 

© 

IO 

1 

04 

tr— 

co 

p 

+ 

00 

t- 

CO 

o 

1 

o 

04 

04 

O 

Bombay 

rH 

CM 

t> 

i 

CO 

fc— 

00 

rH 

rH 

fc- 

o 

rH 

IO 

o 

t- 

V 

rH 

lo 

o 

05 

+ 

05 

05 

co 

© 

+ 

rH 

04 

rH 

O 

+ 

rH 

P- 

CO 

O 

P— 

04 

O 

04 

© 

O 

o 

rH 

CO 

© 

05 

1 

k 

oo 

o 

C> 

1 

+ •0266 

04 

rH 

04 

O 

Okha  Point 
and  Beyt 
Harbour. 

co 

04 

o 

04 

© 

<N 

»b 

t- 

00 

rH 

o 

© 

CO 

tT- 

o 

04 

IO 

05 

lo 

o 

o 

+ 

05 

04 

lo 

o 

+ 

05 

IO 

-cH 

© 

+ 

lo 

04 

»o 

p 

o 

»o 

o 

00 

CO 

© 

rH 

rH 

CO 

co 

© 

GO 

1 

rH 

co 

CO 

O 

+ 

ic 

t- 

co 

o 

1 

t> 

t- 

rH 

O 

pq 

2k 

04 

I 

PH 

e 

H 

i 

w 

t-H 

05 

b 

1 

UJ 

H* 

m 

ca 

f4 

b 

b 

d 

ft 

c5 

•aPLT,  -apii 


458 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[848. 


Results  of 
reduction. 


Indian  Ports  ( continued ). 

[ Indian  Tide  Tables,  1881-2.] 


Place  

Latitude . . 

VlZAGAPATAM. 

17°  41' 

Madras. 
13°  4' 

Port  Blair, 
Ross  Island. 

11°  40^' 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

Year 

1879-80. 

1880-1. 

1880-1. 

1880-1. 

E. 

•036 

•055 

•032 

•059 

o5 

rC 

• i— < 

EH 

>> 

r—i 

-< 

€. 

3°-07 

317°-54 

341°-95 

332°-33 

e — 2v. 

+ 24°  16' 

- 17°  43' 

+ 6°  41' 

— 2°  56' 

W 

'8 

A. 

+ ‘0328 

+ -0524 

+ •0318 

+ •0589 

•g 

o 

pH 

B. 

4-  -0148 

- ‘0167 

+ -0037 

- -0029 

L 

a. 

•0597 

•0534 

•0626 

•0649 

' 

R. 

•021 

•077 

•040 

•020 

<D 

€. 

22° -48 

52°-54 

40°-65 

12°-95 

Eh 

\ 

6. 

+ 22°  29' 

+ 52°  33' 

+ 40°  39' 

+ 12°  57' 

a 

■4-= 

a 

o 

C. 

+ •0194 

+ -0468 

+ -0304 

+ -0195 

a 

D. 

+ -0080 

+ •0611 

+ •0260 

+ •0045 

c. 

•0242 

•0253 

•0296 

•0307 

Gauss’s  notation  is  adopted  for  the  reductions*.  That  is  to 
say,  [AA]  denotes  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  A’s,  and  [Aa] 
the  sum  of  the  products  of  each  A into  its  corresponding  a. 

In  computing  the  value  of  a for  the  fortnightly  tide  the 
factor  (1  — -|e2)  which  occurs  therein  was  treated  as  being  equal 
to  unity;  since  |e2= ‘00754,  it  follows  that  the  [aa],  which 
would  be  found  from  the  numbers  given  in  the  table,  must  be 
multiplied  by  (1  — ‘01508),  and  the  [Aa]  and  [Ba]  by  (1--00754). 
After  introducing  these  correcting  factors  the  following  results 
were  found  ; 

[aa]=-14573,  [AA]=-09831,  [BB]=‘02576,  [Aa]=-09836,  [Ba]=‘00291 
[cc]=-02253,  [CC]=‘11588,  [DD]=-07552,  [Cc]=*01533,  [Dc]=‘00202. 


See  Gauss’s  works,  or  the  Appendix  to  Chauvenet’s  Astronomy. 


848.] 


STATICS. 


459 


Then  according  to  the  method  of  least  squares,  the  following 
the  most  probable  values  of  x,  y,  u,  v. 


are  Results  of 
reduction. 


_ [Aa] 

“ [aa]  ’ 


y“[aa]’  [co]  ’ 


v = 


[Dc] 

[cc]* 


And  if  m be  the  number  of  observations  (which  in  the  present 
case  is  33)  the  mean  errors  of  x,  y,  u,  v are  respectively 


1 /[A A]  [aa]  — [Aa] : 

[aa]  V 7/i-l 

1 /[CC]  [cc]-[CcJ2 

[cc]V  vi -l  ’ 


1 /[BB]  [aa]  - [Ba]3 

[aa]  V in  - 1 

1_  /[DD][cc]  - [Dc]2 

[cc]  'V  m—  1 


The  probable  errors  are  found  from  the  mean  errors  by  multi- 
plying by  ‘6745. 


I thus  find  that 


x — ‘675  + -056,  y = -020  ± '055,  u = -680  + -258,  v = -090  ± -218. 

The  smallness  of  the  values  of  y and  v is  satisfactory;  for,  as 
stated  above  (§  848  (d)),  if  the  equilibrium  theory  were  true  for 
the  two  tides  under  discussion,  they  should  vanish.  Moreover 
the  signs  are  in  agreement  with  what  they  should  be,  if  friction 
be  a sensible  cause  of  tidal  retardation.  But  considering  the 
magnitude  of  the  probable  errors,  it  is  of  course  rather  more 
likely  that  the  non-evanescence  of  y and  v is  due  to  errors  of 
observation*. 

If  the  solid  earth  does  not  yield  tidally,  and  if  the  equi- 
librium theory  is  fulfilled,  x and  u should  each  be  approximately 

* Shortly  after  these  computations  were  completed  Professor  Adams  hap- 
pened to  observe  a misprint  in  the  Tidal  Report  for  1872.  This  Report  gives 
the  method  employed  in  the  reduction  by  harmonic  analysis  of  the  tidal  obser- 
vations, and  the  erroneous  formula  relates  to  the  reduction  of  the  tides  of  long 
period.  On  inquiring  of  Mr  Roberts,  who  has  superintended  the  harmonic 
analysis,  it  appears  that  the  erroneous  formula  has  been  throughout  used  in  the 
reductions.  A discussion  of  this  mistake  and  of  its  effects  will  be  found  in  a 
paper  communicated  to  the  British  Association  by  me  in  1882.  It  appears  that 
the  values  of  the  fortnightly  tide  are  not  seriously  vitiated,  but  the  monthly 
elliptic  tide  will  have  suffered  much  more.  This  will  probably  account  for  the 
large  probable  error  which  I have  found  for  the  value  of  the  monthly  tide.  If  a 
recomputation  of  all  the  long-period  tides  should  be  carried  out,  I think  there  is 
good  hope  that  the  probable  error  of  the  value  of  the  fortnightly  tide  may  also 
be  reduced. 


460 


ABSTRACT  DYNAMICS. 


[848. 


unity,  and  if  it  yields  tidally  they  should  have  equal  values. 
The  very  close  agreement  between  them  is  probably  somewhat 
due  to  chance.  From  this  point  of  view  it  seems  reasonable  to 
combine  all  the  observations,  resulting  from  66  years  of  obser- 
vation, for  both  sorts  of  tides  together. 

Then  writing  X and  F for  the  numerical  factors  by  which 
the  equilibrium  values  of  the  two  components  of  either  tide  are 
to  be  multiplied  in  order  to  give  the  actual  results,  I find 

X=  -676  + -076,  F= -029  + -065. 

Tidal  yield-  These  results  really  seem  to  present  evidence  of  a tidal 

earth’s  yielding  of  the  earths  mass,  showing  that  it  has  an  effective 

Rigidity  rigidity  about  equal  to  that  of  steel  *. 

about  equal  ° J 1 

greater  But  this  result  is  open  to  some  doubt  for  the  following' 

than  that 

of  steel.  reason : 

Taking  only  the  Indian  results  (48  years  in  all),  which  are 
much  more  consistent  than  the  English  ones,  I find 

X = -931  ±'056,  F=  155  ±-068. 

We  thus  see  that  the  more  consistent  observations  seem  to 
bring  out  the  tides  more  nearly  to  their  theoretical  equilibrium- 
values  with  no  elastic  yielding  of  the  solid. 

It  is  to  be  observed  however  that  the  Indian  results  being 
confined  within  a narrow  range  of  latitude  give  (especially  when 
we  consider  the  absence  of  minute  accuracy  in  the  evaluation  of 
(£  in  § 848  (c))  a less  searching  test  for  the  elastic  yielding,  than 
a combination  of  results  from  all  latitudes. 

On  the  whole  we  may  fairly  conclude  that,  whilst  there  is 
some  evidence  of  a tidal  yielding  of  the  earth’s  mass,  that 
yielding  is  certainly  small,  and  that  the  effective  rigidity  is  at 
least  as  great  as  that  of  steel. 

* It  is  remarkable  that  elastic  yielding  of  the  upper  strata  of  the  earth,  in 
the  case  where  the  sea  does  not  cover  the  whole  surface,  may  lead  to  an  apparent 
augmentation  of  oceanic  tides  at  some  places,  situated  on  the  coasts  of  conti- 
nents. This  subject  is  investigated  in  the  Report  for  1882  of  the  Committee  of 
the  British  Association  on  “ The  Lunar  Disturbance  of  Gravity.”  It  is  there, 
however,  erroneously  implied  that  this  kind  of  elastic  yielding  would  cause  an 
apparent  augmentation  of  tide  at  all  stations  of  observation. 


APPENDIX  TO  CHAPTER  VII. 


The  following  Appendices  are  reprints  of  papers  published  at  various  times. 
Excepting  where  it  is  expressly  so  stated,  or  where  it  is  obvious  from  the 
context,  they  speak  as  from  the  date  of  publication.  The  marginal  notes 
are  however  now  added  for  the  first  time. 

(C.) — Equations  of  Equilibrium  of  an  Elastic  Solid 

DEDUCED  FROM  THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  ENERGY*. 


(a)  Let  a solid  composed  of  matter  fulfilling  no  condition  of 
isotropy  in  any  part,  and  not  homogeneous  from  part  to  part, 
be  given  of  any  shape,  unstrained,  and  let  every  point  of  its 
surface  be  altered  in  position  to  a given  distance  in  a given 
direction.  It  is  required  to  find  the  displacement  of  every  point 
of  its  substance,  in  equilibrium.  Let  x,  y , 2 be  the  co-ordinates 
of  any  particle,  P,  of  the  substance  in  its  undisturbed  position,  and 
x + a,  y + (3,  z + y its  co-ordinates  when  displaced  in  the  manner  strain  of 
specified : that  is  to  say,  let  a,  (3,  y be  the  components  of  the  tude  sped-' 
required  displacement.  Then,  if  for  brevity  we  put  elements* 


£ = 
G = 

a = 
b = 
c — 


e *■)'*©'*  (s 


dx 
da\ 
dy) 

© 


+ 


(iHs-y 


\dy  J dz  dy\dz  J 

\ , , (dy  , Ady 

J dz  dx  \dz  )dx 

fa  + + dfi(dj3  \ dydy 

\dx  J dy  dx  \dy  J dx  dy 


da  da 
dy  dz 
da  / da 
dz  \dx  + 


(i); 


these  six  quantities  A,  B,  C,  a,  b,  c are  proved  [§  190  (e)  and 
§181  (5)]  to  thoroughly  determine  the  strain  experienced  by  the 


* Appendix  to  a paper  by  Sir  W.  Thomson  on  “ Dynamical  problems  re- 
garding Elastic  Spheroidal  Shells  and  Spheroids  of  incompressible  liquid.” 
Pliil.  Trans.  18G3,  Vol.  153,  p.  010. 


462 


APPENDIX  C. 


Strain  speci- 
fied by  six 
elements. 


Antici- 
patory ap- 
plication of 
the  Carnot 
and  Clau- 
sius ther- 
modynamic 
law: 


its  combina- 
tion with 
Joule’s  law 
expressed 
analytically 
for  elastic 
solid. 


Potential 
energy  of 
deforma- 
tion; 


a minimum 
for  stable 
equilibrium. 


[C,  b. 


substance  infinitely  near  the  particle  P (irrespectively  of  any 
rotation  it  may  experience),  in  the  following  manner: 

(b.)  Let  £,  rj,  £ be  the  undisturbed  co-ordinates  of  a particle 
infinitely  near  P,  relatively  to  axes  through  P parallel  to  those 
of  x,  y,  z respectively  ; and  let  V/,  £ be  the  co-ordinates 
relative  still  to  axes  through  P , when  the  solid  is  in  its  strained 
condition.  Then 

£/2  + v/  + C = A£2  + Byf  + CC  4-  2 ar]C  + 2 b£g  + 2c£r)  (2) ; 

and  therefore  all  particles  which  in  the  strained  state  lie  on  a 
spherical  surface 

are  in  the  unstrained  state,  on  the  ellipsoidal  surface, 

Ae  + Byf  + Ctf  + 2arii  + 2bH  + 2c^  = rf. 

This  (§§  155 — 165)  completely  defines  the  homogeneous  strain  of 
the  matter  in  the  neighbourhood  of  P. 

(c.)  Hence,  the  thermodynamic  principles  by  which,  in  a paper 
on  the  “Thermo -elastic  Properties  of  Matter*,”  Green’s  dynamical 
theory  of  elastic  solids  was  demonstrated  as  part  of  the  modern 
dynamical  theory  of  heat,  show  that  if  wdxdydz  denote  the  work 
required  to  alter  an  infinitely  small  undisturbed  volume,  dxdydz, 
of  the  solid,  into  its  disturbed  condition,  when  its  temperature 
is  kept  constant,  we  must  have 

w=f(A,  B,  C,  a,  b,  c)  (3) 

where  f denotes  a positive  function  of  the  six  elements,  which 
vanishes  when  A-\,  B-l,  (7-1,  a,  b,  c each  vanish.  And  if 
W denote  the  -whole  work  required  to  produce  the  change  actually 
experienced  by  the  whole  solid,  we  have 

W = fff  wdxdydz (4) 

where  the  triple  integral  is  extended  through  the  space  occupied 
by  the  undisturbed  solid. 

(d.)  The  position  assumed  by  every  particle  in  the  interior  of 
the  solid  will  be  such  as  to  make  this  a minimum  subject  to  the 
condition  that  every  particle  of  the  surface  takes  the  position 
given  to  it ; this  being  the  elementary  condition  of  stable  equili- 
brium. Hence,  by  the  method  of  variations 

SJF  = ff f&wdxdydz  = 0 (5). 

* Quarterly  Journ.  of  Math.,  April,  1855,  or  Mathematical  and  Physical 
Papers  by  Sir  W.  Thomson,  1882,  Art,  xlviii.  Part  vii. 


STATICS. 


463 


C,d.] 


But,  exhibiting  only  terms  depending  on  8a,  we  have 
8w  - 

+ f9  dw  da  + dw  da  ^ dw  / da  \|  d8a 

( dB  dy  da  dz  dc  \dx  J)  dy 

9 dw  da  dw  da  dw  /da  \1  d8a 

dC  dz  da  dy  + db  \dx  + J)  dz 


9 dw  /da  \ dw  da  dw  da j d8a 

dA  \dx  J db  dz  dc  dy J dx 


Potential 
energy  of 
deforma- 
tion; 

a minimum 
for  stable 
equilibrium. 


+ etc. 

Hence,  integrating  by  parts,  and  observing  that  8a,  8(3,  8y  vanish 
at  the  limiting  surface,  we  have 

+ g + f)Sa+etc.} (6) 

where  for  brevity  P,  Q,  R denote  the  multipliers  of  — , ~a  — 

dx  dy  ’ dz 

respectively,  in  the  preceding  expression.  In  order  that  8 IF  may 
vanish,  the  multipliers  of  Sa,  8/3,  Sy,  in  the  expression  now  found 

for  it,  must  each  vanish,  and  hence  we  have,  as  the  equations  of 
equilibrium 


d fo  j dw  da  dw  d'a'l 

dx  { dA  \dx  ) db  dz  dc  dy) 

I d j dw  da  dw  da  dw /da  N'j 

dy\  dB  dy  da  dz ; dc  \dx  + )j 

d j dw  da  dw  da  dw  (da  \ ) 

dz\  dCdz  ' da  dy+Tb\d^  + l)r° 

etc.  etc. 


Equations 
of  internal 
equilibrium 
of  an  elastic 
solid  experi- 
encing no 
bodily  force. 


of  which  the  second  and  third,  not  exhibited,  may  be  written 
down  merely  by  attending  to  the  symmetry. 


(e.)  From  the  property  of  w that  it  is  necessarily  positive  when 
there  is  any  strain,  it  follows  that  there  must  be  some  distribu- 
tion of  strain  through  the  interior  which  shall  make  f f fwdxdydz 
the  least  possible,  subject  to  the  prescribed  surface  condition ; and 
therefore  that  the  solution  of  equations  (7)  subject  to  this  con-  tionlpr°ved 
dition,  is  possible.  If,  whatever  be  the  nature  of  the  solid  as  unique6  and 
to  difference  of  elasticity  in  different  directions,  in  any  part,  and  face  disFr" 
as  to  heterogeneity  from  part  to  part,  and  whatever  be  the  « 
extent  of  the  change  of  form  and  dimensions  to  which  it  is  F,!!!ev!s  there 
subjected,  there  cannot  be  any  internal  configuration  of  unstable  nbriu  6?Ui* 


464 


APPENDIX  C. 


[C,  e. 


hence  neces- 
sarily uni- 
que for  a 
homogene- 
ous solid. 


Extension 
of  the  ana- 
lysis to  in- 
clude bodily 
force,  and 
data  of  sur- 
face easy. 


Transition 
to  case  of  in- 
finitely 
small 
strains. 


Green’s 

theory: 


equilibrium,  nor  consequently  any  but  one  of  stable  equilibrium, 
with  the  prescribed  surface  displacement,  and  no  disturbing  force 
on  the  interior  ; then,  besides  being  always  positive,  w must  be 
such  a function  of  A,  B,  etc.,  that  there  can  be  only  one  solution 
of  the  equations.  This  is  obviously  the  case  when  the  unstrained 
solid  is  homogeneous. 

(f)  It  is  easy  to  include,  in  a general  investigation  similar  to 
the  preceding,  the  effects  of  any  force  on  the  interior  substance, 
such  as  we  have  considered  particularly  for  a spherical  shell,  of 
homogeneous  isotropic  matter,  in  §§  730... 7 37  above.  It  is  also 
easy  to  adapt  the  general  investigation  to  supei'ficial  data  of  force , 
instead  of  displacement. 

(7/.)  Whatever  be  the  general  form  of  the  function  f for  any 
part  of  the  substance,  since  it  is  always  positive  it  cannot  change 
in  sign  when  A - 1,  A - 1,  G - 1 ,a,  b , c,  have  their  signs  changed ; 
and  therefore  for  infinitely  small  values  of  these  quantities  it  must 
be  a homogeneous  quadratic  function  of  them  with  constant  co- 
efficients. (And  it  may  be  useful  to  observe  that  for  all  values  of 
the  variables  A,  B , etc.,  it  must  therefore  be  expressible  in  the 
same  form,  with  varying  coefficients,  each  of  which  is  always 
finite,  for  all  values  of  the  variables.)  Thus,  for  infinitely  small 
strains  we  have  Green’s  theory  of  elastic  solids,  founded  on  a 
homogeneous  quadratic  function  of  the  components  of  strain,  ex- 
pressing the  work  required  to  produce  it.  Thus,  putting 


A - 1 = 2e,  B-l  = 2f  C-l=2g (8) 


and  denoting  by  \ (e,  e),  ^ (f  /),••  •(£»./)> #)>•••  the  coeffi- 
cients, we  have,  as  above  (§  673), 


w = \ {(e,  e)  e2  + (. /,/)/“+  (<7,  g)  9*  + («,  ®) + (&>  h)  h*+  (c> c) 

4-  (eif)  ef  + (e>  9)  e9  + (e>  a ) ea  + ( e ’ b)  eb  + {e>  c)ec 

+ (f  9)fg  + (/>  a)fa+  (f  (/> c)fc 

+ (g,  a)  ga  + {g,  b)  gb  + (g,  c)  gc 
+ (a,  b)  ab  + ( a , c)  ac 
+ ( b , c)  be 


■'l 


(9). 


dw  da 

(h.)  When  the  strains  are  infinitely  small  the  products^-  ^ , 


— etc.,  are  each  infinitely  small,  of  the  second  order. 
db  dz  ’ 


We 


STATICS. 


465 


Q A.] 


therefore  omit  them  ; and  then  attending  to  (8), 
(7)  to 


d,  dw  d dw  d diu 


-r  -T-  + 


dz  db  ^ ] 
d dw 


dx  de  dy  dc 

d dw  d div  w — 
dx  dc  dy  df  dz  da 

d dw  + d dw  ^ d dw  ' 
dx  db  dy  da  dz  dg 


we  reduce  Case  of 
infinitely 
small 
strains : — 


(10), 


dynamic 
equations 
of  internal 
equili- 
brium : 


which  are  the  equations  of  interior  equilibrium.  Attending  to 

(9)  we  see  that  — ...  ^...  are  linear  functions  of  e,  /,  g,  a, 

b,  c the  components  of  strain.  Writing  out  one  of  them  as  an 
example  we  have 


dw 

£ = (e’ 


e)e  + (e,f)f+(e,  g)g  + (e, 


a) 


a + (e,  b)b  + (e,c)c...(  11). 


And,  a,  (3,  y denoting,  as  before,  the  component  displacements  of 
any  interior  particle,  P,  from  its  undisturbed  position  (x,  y,  z) 
we  have,  by  (8)  and  (1) 


e = 


da  d/3 
dx  ’ J dy  ’ 


a = d^+dy  h^dy+da 
dz  dy  ’ dx  dz’ 


da  d./3 
dy  dx 


(12). 


and  relative 

kinematic 

equations. 


It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  coefficients  (e,  e ),  (e,f),  etc.,  will  be 
in  general  functions  of  (x,  y,  z),  but  will  be  each  constant  when 
the  unstrained  solid  is  homogeneous. 


(i.)  It  is  now  easy  to  prove  directly,  for  the  case  of  infinitely 
small  strains,  that  the  solution  of  the  equations  of  interior  equi- 
librium, whether  for  a heterogeneous  or  a homogeneous  solid,  Solution 
subject  to  the  prescribed  surface  condition,  is  unique.  For,  let  unique 
a,  f3,  y be  components  of  displacement  fulfilling  the  equations,  timbody 
and  let  a',  (3',  y denote  any  other  functions  of  x,  y,  z,  having  geneous'or 
the  same  surface  values  as  a,  (3,  y,  and  let  e\  f,...,wf  denote 
functions  depending  on  them  in  the  same  way  as  e,  f . . . , %o  de-  s”acemcntS" 
pend  on  a,  (3,  y.  Thus  by  Taylor’s  theorem,  is  given  • 


where  II  denotes  the  same  homogeneous  quadratic  function  of 
VOL.  II.  IQ  A 


466 


Case  of  in- 
finitely 
small 
strains 


solution  not 
necessarily 
unique, 
when  the 
surface  data 
are  of  force. 


Condition 
that  sub- 
stance may 
be  isotropic, 
without 
limitation 
to  infinitely 
small 
strains: 


APPENDIX  C. 


e -e,  etc.,  that  w is  of  e,  etc.  If  for  e'-e,  etc.,  we  substitute 
their  values  by  (12),  this  becomes 


10  — w = 


dw  d (a!  — a)  ^ dw  d ( a — a)  ^ dw  d (a  — a) 


de  dx  ' db  dz  dc  dy 


+ etc.  4-  II. 


Multiplying  by  dxdydz , integrating  by  parts,  observing  that 
a!  — a,  (3’  - (3,  y - y vanish  at  the  bounding  surface,  and  taking 
account  (10),  we  find  simply 


f ff  (w'  -w)  dxdydz  = fjf  H dxdydz. (13). 

But  H is  essentially  positive.  Therefore  every  other  interior 
condition  than  that  specified  by  a,  (3,  y,  provided  only  it  has  the 
same  bounding  surface,  requires  a greater  amount  of  work  than 
w to  produce  it : and  the  excess  is  equal  to  the  work  that  would 
be  required  to  produce,  from  a state  of  no  displacement,  such  a 
displacement  as  superimposed  on  a,  (3,  y,  would  produce  the 
other.  And  inasmuch  as  a,  (3,  y,  fulfil  only  the  conditions  of 
satisfying  (11)  and  having  the  given  surface  values,  it  follows 
that  no  other  than  one  solution  can  fulfil  these  conditions. 


(j.)  But  (as  has  been  pointed  out  to  us  by  Stokes)  when  the 
surface  data  are  of  force,  not  of  displacement,  or  when  force  acts 
from  without,  on  the  interior  substance  of  the  body,  the  solution 
is  not  in  general  unique,  and  there  may  be  configurations  of 
unstable  equilibrium  even  with  infinitely  small  displacement. 
For  instance,  let  part  of  the  body  be  composed  of  a steel-bar 
magnet ; and  let  a magnet  be  held  outside  in  the  same  line,  and 
with  a pole  of  the  same  name  in  its  end  nearest  to  one  end  of  the 
inner  magnet.  The  equilibrium  will  be  unstable,  and  there  will 
be  positions  of  stable  equilibrium  with  the  inner  bar  slightly  in- 
clined to  the  line  of  the  outer  bar,  unless  the  rigidity  of  the  rest 
of  the  body  exceed  a certain  limit. 

(Jc.)  Recurring  to  the  general  problem,  in  which  the  strains  are 
not  supposed  infinitely  small ; we  see  that  if  the  solid  is  isotropic 
in  every  part,  the  function  of  A,  B,  C,  ci , b,  c which  expresses 
w , must  be  merely  a function  of  the  roots  of  the  equation 
[§  181  (11)] 

(A-t2)(B-l2)(C-t2)-a2(A-C2)-b2(I3-t>2)-c2(C-t2)  + 2abc=0...(U) 

which  (that  is  the  positive  values  of  £)  are  the  ratios  of  elonga- 
tion along  the  principal  axes  of  the  strain-ellipsoid.  It  is  un- 


STATICS. 


467 


c,  k] 


necessary  here  to.  enter  on  tlie  analytical  expression  of  this 
condition.  For  in  the  case  of  .4-1,  B - 1,  C - 1,  a,  b,  c each, 
infinitely  small,  it  obviously  requires  that 

(e>e)  = (f,f)  = (ff,9);  (f,g)  = (ff>*)=(e,f)'>  (a,a)  = (&,6)  = (c,c)j,J 
(«>«)=(/  b)=(g,c)  = 0;  (b,c)=(c,a)=(a,b)= 0;  and  l ...(15). 

(e,  b)  = (e,  c)  = (f  c)  = (/,  a)  = (g,a)  = (g,  b)  = 0.  J 

Thus  the  21  coefficients  are  reduced  to  three — 

( e , e ) which  we  may  denote  by  the  single  letter  SI, 

5)  >>  »>  >,  1$) 

(®>  ®)  jj  jj  ,»  ,,  w. 

It  is  clear  that  this  is  necessary  and  sufficient  for  insuring  cubic  expressed  in 
isotropy ; that  is  to  say,  perfect  equality  of  elastic  properties  ammig°the 
with  reference  to  the  three  rectangular  directions  OX,  OY,  OZ.  “Sdty 
But  for  spherical  isotropy,  or  complete  isotropy  with  reference  to  infidtciy*' 
all  directions  through  the  substance,  it  is  further  necessary  that  strains. 

= 2 n (16); 

as  is  easily  proved  analytically  by  turning  two  of  the  axes  of 
co-ordinates  in  their  own  plane  through  45°;  or  geometrically 
by  examining  the  nature  of  the  strain  represented  by  any  one  of 
the  elements  a,  b,  c (a  simple  shear)  and  comparing  it  with  the 
resultant  of  c,  and  f = — e (which  is  also  a simple  shear).  It  is 
convenient  now  to  put 

® + 33  = 2 m;  so  that  <E  = m + rc,  33  = m-n (17); 

and  thus  the  expression  for  the  potential  energy  per  unit  of 
vohime  becomes 


2w=m(e+f+g)°-+n  ( e 2 +f2 +g‘ 3 - 2fg  - 2ge  - 2ef+  a2 + ¥ + c8) . . . ( 1 8).  Potential 

Using  this  in  (9),  and  substituting  for  e,f,  g,  a , b,  c their  values  snmj^eIy 
(12),  we  find  immediately  the  equations  of  internal  equi-  f^isotropic 
librium,  which  are  the  same  as  (6)  of  § 698.  solid- 


(l.)  To  find  the  mutual  force  exerted  across  any  surface  within 
the  solid,  as  expressed  by  (1)  of  § 662,  we  have  clearly,  by  con- 
sidering the  work  done  respectively  by  F,  Q,  11,  S,  T,  U (§  662) 

on  any  infinitely  small  change  of  figure  or  dimensions  in  the 
solid, 


p dw 

= de 


Q 


dw 

df’ 


dw 

Tg’ 


Q dw 


T = 


dw 

db’ 


U= 


div 

dc 


•(19). 


Components 
of  stress  re- 
quired for 
infinitely 
small 
strain. 


30—2 


468 


APPENDIX  C. 


[c,  I 


Moduli  of 
resistance 
to  compres- 
sion and  of 
rigidity. 


Hence,  for  an  isotropic  solid,  (18)  gives  the  expressions  which  we 
have  used  above,  (12)  of  § 673. 

(m.)  To  interpret  the  coefficients  m and  n in  connexion  with 
elementary  ideas  as  to  the  elasticity  of  the  solid  : first  let 
a=b—c—  0,  and  e =f=  g — ^8 : in  other  words,  let  the  substance 
experience  a uniform  dilatation,  in  all  directions,  producing  an 
expansion  of  volume  from  1 to  1 + S.  In  this  case  (18)  becomes 


and  we  have 


w = \(m-  \n)  82 ; 

Wo 
d8 


d~  = (m~ln)  8. 


Hence  (m  — ~n)  8 is  the  normal  force  per  unit  area  of  its  surface 
required  to  keep  any  portion  of  the  solid  expanded  to  the  amount 
specified  by  8.  Thus  m — \n  measures  the  elastic  force  called 
out  by,  or  the  elastic  resistance  against  change  of  volume:  and 
viewed  as  a modulus  of  elasticity , it  may  be  called  the  bulk- 
modulus.  [Compare  §§  692,  693,  694,  688,  682,  and  680.] 
What  is  commonly  called  the  “compressibility”  is  measured  by 
1 /(m  — n). 

And  let  next  e—f—g~b  = c--  0;  which  gives 
w = ^na2;  and,  by  (19),  S-na. 

This  shows  that  the  tangential  force  per  unit  area  required  to 
produce  an  infinitely  small  shear  (§171),  amounting  to  a,  is  na. 
Hence  n measures  the  innate  power  of  the  body  to  resist  change 
of  shape,  and  return  to  its  original  shape  when  force  has  been 
applied  to  change  it : that  is  to  say,  it  measures  the  rigidity  of 
the  substance. 


Appendix  D. 

Dissipation 
of  energy 
disregarded 
by  many 
followers  of 
Hutton. 


(D). — On  the  Secular  Cooling  of  the  Earth *. 

(a.)  For  eighteen  years  it  has  pressed  on  my  mind,  that 
essential  principles  of  Thermo-dynamics  have  been  overlooked 
by  those  geologists  who  uncompromisingly  oppose  all  paroxysmal 
hypotheses,  and  maintain  not  only  that  we  have  examples  now 
before  us,  on  the  earth,  of  all  the  different  actions  by  which  its 
crust  has  been  modified  in  geological  history,  but  that  these 
actions  have  never,  or  have  not  on  the  whole,  been  more  violent 
in  past  time  than  they  are  at  present. 

* Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  1862  (W.  Thomson). 


COOLING  OF  THE  EARTH. 


469 


D,  b.] 


(b.)  It  is  quite  certain  the  solar  system  cannot  have  gone  on,  Dissipation 
even  as  at  present,  for  a few  hundred  thousand  or  a few  million  from  the 
years,  without  the  irrevocable  loss  (by  dissipation,  not  by  anni-  system. 
hilation)  of  a very  considerable  proportion  of  the  entire  energy 
initially  in  store  for  sun  heat,  and  for  Plutonic  action.  It  is 
quite  certain  that  the  whole  store  of  energy  in  the  solar  system 
has  been  greater  in  all  past  time  than  at  present ; but  it  is  con- 
ceivable that  the  rate  at  which  it  has  been  drawn  upon  and  dis- 
sipated, whether  by  solar  radiation,  or  by  volcanic  action  in  the 
earth  or  other  dark  bodies  of  the  system,  may  have  been  nearly 
equable,  or  may  even  have  been  less  rapid,  in  certain  periods  of 
the  past.  But  it  is  far  more  probable  that  the  secular  rate  of 
dissipation  has  been  in  some  direct  proportion  to  the  total  amount 
of  energy  in  store,  at  any  time  after  the  commencement  of  the 
present  order  of  things,  and  has  been  therefore  very  slowly 
diminishing  from  age  to  age. 

(c.)  I have  endeavoured  to  prove  this  for  the  sun’s  heat,  in  an  Terrestrial 
article  recently  published  in  Macmillan' s Magazine  (March  1862)*,  fluen’ceclby 
where  I have  shown  that  most  probably  the  sun  was  sensibly  bab^y  hotter 
hotter  a million  years  ago  than  he  is  now.  Hence,  geological  Snion  few 
speculations  assuming  somewhat  greater  extremes  of  heat,  more  years  as°‘ 
violent  storms  and  floods,  more  luxuriant  vegetation,  and  hardier 
and  coarser  grained  plants  and  animals,  in  remote  antiquity,  are 
more  probable  than  those  of  the  extreme  quietist,  or  “ uni- 
form itarian”  school.  A middle  path,  not  generally  safest  in 
scientific  speculation,  seems  to  be  so  in  this  case.  It  is  probable 
that  hypotheses  of  grand  catastrophes  destroying  all  life  from 
the  earth,  and  ruining  its  whole  surface  at  once,  are  greatly  in 
error ; it  is  impossible  that  hypotheses  assuming  an  equability 
of  sun  and  storms  for  1,000,000  years,  can  be  wholly  true. 

(d.)  Fourier’s  mathematical  theory  of  the  conduction  of  heat 
is  a beautiful  working  out  of  a particular  case  belonging  to  the 
general  doctrine  of  the  “Dissipation  of  Energy  f.”  A character- 

Iistic  of  the  practical  solutions  it  presents  is,  that  in  each  case  a 

* Reprinted  as  Appendix  E,  below. 

t Proceedings  of  Royal  Soc.  Edin.,  Feb.  1852.  “ On  a universal  Tendency 

in  Nature  to  the  Dissipation  of  Mechanical  Energy,”  Mathematical  and  Physical 
Papers,  by  Sir  W.  Thomson,  1882,  Art.  nix.  Also,  “On  the  Restoration  of  Energy 
> in  an  unequally  Heated  Space,”  Phil.  Mag.,  1853,  first  half  year,  Mathematical 
' and  Physical  Papers,  by  Sir  W.  Thomson,  1882,  Ait.  lxii. 


470 


APPENDIX  D. 


Mathema- 
ticians’ use 
of  word 
“arbitrary” 
metaphysic- 
ally signifi- 
cant. 


Criterion 
of  an  es- 
sentially 
“initial” 
distribution 
of  heat  in  a 
solid : 


now  applied 
to  estimate 
date  of 
earth’s  con- 
solidation, 
from  data 
of  present 
under- 
ground 
tempera- 
ture. 

Value  of 
local  geo- 
thermic 
surveys, 
for  estima- 
tion of  ab- 
solute dates 
in  geology. 


[D,  d. 


distribution  of  temperature,  becoming  gradually  equalized  through 
' an  unlimited  future,  is  expressed  as  a function  of  the  time,  which 
is  infinitely  divergent  for  all  times  longer  past  than  a definite 
determinable  epoch.  The  distribution  of  heat  at  such  an  epoch 
is  essentially  initial — that  is  to  say,  it  cannot  result  from  any 
previous  condition  of  matter  by  natural  processes.  It  is,  then, 
well  called  an  “arbitrary  initial  distribution  of  heat,”  in  Fourier’s 
great  mathematical  poem,  because  that  which  is  rigorously  ex- 
piessed  by  the  mathematical  formula  could  only  be  realized  by 
action  of  a power  able  to  modify  the  laws  of  dead  matter.  In  an 
ai  tide  published  about  nineteen  years  ago  in  the  C onbridge  j 
Mathematical  Journal  *,  I gave  the  mathematical  criterion  for  an 
essentially  initial  distribution ; and  in  an  inaugural  essay,  “De 
Motu  Galoris  per  rl  erne  Corpus,”  read  before  the  Faculty  of  the 
University  of  Glasgow  in  1846,  I suggested,  as  an  application 
of  these  principles,  that  a perfectly  complete  geothermic  survey 
would  give  us  data  for  determining  an  initial  epoch  in  the  pro-  ! 
ble’m  of  terrestrial  conduction.  At  the  meeting  of  the  British 
Association  in  Glasgow  in  1855,  I urged  that  special  geothermic 
surveys  should  be  made  for  the  purpose  of  estimating  absolute 
dates  in  geology,  and  I pointed  out  some  cases,  especially  that  | 
of  the  salt-spring  borings  at  Creuznach,  in  Rhenish  Prussia,  in  < 
which  eruptions  of  basaltic  rock  seem  to  leave  traces  of  their 
igneous  origin  in  residual  heatt.  I hope  this  suggestion  may  yet  i 
be  taken  up,  and  may  prove  to  some  extent  useful ; but  the  dis-  1 
turbing  influences  affecting  underground  temperatui’e,  as  Pro-  I 
fessor  Phillips  has  well  shown  in  a recent  inaugural  address  to  j 
the  Geological  Society,  are  too  great  to  allow  us  to  expect  any 
very  precise  or  satisfactory  results  ij:. 

(e.)  The  chief  object  of  the  present  communication  is  to  esti- 
mate from  the  known  general  increase  of  temperature  in  the  : 
earth  downwards,  the  date  of  the  first  establishment  of  that  con-  \ 
sistentior  status , which,  according  to  Leibnitz’s  theory,  is  the 
initial  date  of  all  geological  history. 

■ 

* Feb.  1844. — “Note  on  Certain  Points  in  the  Theory  of  Heat,”  Mathcmati-  1 
cal  and  Physical  Papers , by  Sir  W.  Thomson,  1882,  Vol.U.  Art.  x. 

t See  British  Association  Report  of  1855  (Glasgow)  Meeting. 

J Much  work  in  the  direction  suggested  above  has  been  already  carried  out 
by  the  Committee  of  the  British  Association,  on  Underground  Temperature. 


COOLING  OF  THE  EARTH. 


471 


D./J 


(/.)  In  all  parts  of  the  world  m which  the  earths  crust  has  increase  of 
. . . , . temperature 

been  examined,  at  sufficiently  great  depths  to  escape  large  m-  downwards 

flueuce  of  the  irregular  and  of  the  annual  variations  of  the  super-  crust;  but 

ficial  temperature,  a gradually  increasing  temperature  has  been  perfectly 

found  in  going  deeper.  The  rate  of  augmentation  (estimated  at  hitherto. 

only  jL^th  of  a degree,  Fahr.,  in  some  localities,  and  as  much 

as  pbth  of  a degree  in  other,  per  foot  of  descent)  has  not  been 

observed  in  a sufficient  number  of  places  to  establish  any  fair 

average  estimate  for  the  upper  crust  of  the  whole  earth.  But 

Jg-th  is  commonly  accepted  as  a rough  mean;  or,  in  other  words, 

it  is  assumed  as  a result  of  observation,  that  there  is,  on  the 

whole,  about  1°  Fahr.  of  elevation  of  temperature  per  50  British 

feet  of  descent. 


(g.)  The  fact  that  the  temperature  increases  with  the  depth 
implies  a continual  loss  of  heat  from  the  interior,  by  conduction 
outwards  through  or  into  the  upper  crust.  Hence,  since  the 
upper  crust  does  not  become  hotter  from  year  to  year,  there 
must  be  a secular  loss  of  heat  from  the  whole  earth.  It  is  pos- 
sible that  no  cooling  may  result  from  this  loss  of  heat,  but  only 
an  exhaustion  of  potential  energy,  which  in  this  case  could 
scarcely  be  other  than  chemical  affinity  between  substances 
forming  part  of  the  earth’s  mass.  But  it  is  certain  that  either 
the  earth  is  becoming  on  the  whole  cooler  from  age  to  age,  or 
the  heat  conducted  out  is  generated  in  the  interior  by  temporary 
dynamical  (that  is,  in  this  case,  chemical)  action  *.  To  suppose, 
as  Lyell,  adopting  the  chemical  hypothesis,  has  done  f , that  the 
substances,  combining  together,  may  be  again  separated  electro- 
lytically  by  thermo-electric  currents,  due  to  the  heat  generated 
by  their  combination,  and  thus  the  chemical  action  and  its  heat 
continued  in  an  endless  cycle,  violates  the  principles  of  natural 
philosophy  in  exactly  the  same  manner,  and  to  the  same  degree, 
as  to  believe  that  a clock  constructed  with  a self-winding  move- 
ment may  fulfil  the  expectations  of  its  ingenious  inventor  by 
going  for  ever. 


Secular  loss 
of  heat  out 
of  the  earth 
demon- 
strated: 


but  not  so 

any  present 

or  past 

secular 

cooling, 

however 

probable. 


Fallacy  of 
a thermo- 
electric 
perpetual 
motion. 


* Another  kind  of  dynamical  action,  capable  of  generating  heat  in  the  interior 
of  the  earth,  is  the  friction  which  would  impede  tidal  oscillations,  if  the  earth 
were  partially  or  wholly  constituted  of  viscous  matter.  See  a paper  by  Mr  G.  H. 
Darwin,  “ On  problems  connected  with  the  tides  of  a viscous  spheroid.”  Phil. 
Trans.  Part  ii.  1879. 

t Principles  of  Geology,  chap.  xxxi.  ed.  1853. 


472 


APPENDIX  D. 


Exception  to 
the  sound- 
ness of 
arguments 
adduced  in 
tho  promul- 
gation and 
prosecution 
of  the  Hut- 
tonian  re- 
form. 


Secular 
diminution 
of  whole 
amount  of 
volcanic 
energy  quite 
certain : 

but  not 
in  1862 
admitted 
by  some  of 
the  chief 
geologists. 


Chemical 
hypothesis 
to  account 
for  ordinary 
under- 
ground heat 
not  impos- 
sible, but 
very  impro- 
bable. 


[D,  h. 


(A.)  It  must  indeed  be  admitted  that  many  geological  writers 
of  the  “ Uniformitarian”  school,  who  in  other  respects  have 
taken  a profoundly  philosophical  view  of  their  subject,  have 
argued  in  a most  fallacious  manner  against  hypotheses  of  violent 
action  in  past  ages.  If  they  had  contented  themselves  with 
showing  that  many  existing  appearances,  although  suggestive  of 
extreme  violence  and  sudden  change,  may  have  been  brought 
about  by  long-continued  action,  or  by  paroxysms  not  more  in- 
tense than  some  of  which  we  have  experience  within  the  periods 
of  human  history,  their  position  might  have  been  unassailable  ; 
and  certainly  could  not  have  been  assailed  except  by  a detailed 
discussion  of  their  facts.  It  would  be  a very  wonderful,  but  not 
an  absolutely  incredible  result,  that  volcanic  action  has  never 
been  more  violent  on  the  whole  than  during  the  last  two  or  three 
centuries  ; but  it  is  as  certain  that  there  is  now  less  volcanic 
energy  in  the  whole  earth  than  there  was  a thousand  years  ago, 
as  it  is  that  there  is  less  gunpowder  in  a “Monitor”  after  she 
has  been  seen  to  discharge  shot  and  shell,  whether  at  a nearly 
equable  rate  or  not,  for  five  hours  without  receiving  fresh  sup 
plies,  than  there  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  action.  Yet  this 
truth  has  been  ignored  or  denied  by  many  of  the  leading  geolo- 
gists of  the  present  day  *,  because  they  believe  that  the  facts  within 
their  province  do  not  demonstrate  greater  violence  in  ancient 
changes  of  the  earth’s  surface,  or  do  demonstrate  a nearly  equable 
action  in  all  periods. 

(i.)  The  chemical  hypothesis  to  account  for  underground  heat 
might  be  regarded  as  not  improbable,  if  it  was  only  in  isolated 
localities  that  the  temperature  was  found  to  increase  with  the 
depth;  and,  indeed,  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  chemical 
action  exercises  an  appreciable  influence  (possibly  negative,  how- 
ever) on  the  action  of  volcanoes ; but  that  there  is  slow  uniform 
“combustion,”  eremacausis,  or  chemical  combination  of  any  kind 
going  on,  at  some  great  unknown  depth  under  the  surface  every- 
where, and  creeping  inwards  gradually  as  the  chemical  affinities 
in  layer  after  layer  are  successively  saturated,  seems  extremely 
improbable,  although  it  cannot  be  pronounced  to  be  absolutely 
impossible,  or  contrary  to  all  analogies  in  nature.  The  less 

* It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  was  written  in  1862.  The  opposite 
statement  concerning  the  beliefs  of  geologists  would  probably  be  now  nearer  the 
truth. 


D,  i]  COOLING  OF  THE  EARTH.  473 

hypothetical  view,  however,  that  the  earth  is  merely  a warm 
chemically  inert  body  cooling,  is  clearly  to  be  preferred  in  the 
present  state  of  science. 

(j.)  Poisson’s  celebrated  hypothesis,  that  the  present  under-  Poisson’s 
"round  heat  is  due  to  a passage,  at  some  former  period,  of  the  t^account 
solar  system  through  hotter  stellar  regions,  cannot  provide  the  un<jer-  y 
circumstances  required  for  a palaeontology  continuous  through  heat  proved 
that  epoch  of  external  heat.  For  from  a mean  of  values  of  the  ™thoutble 
conductivity,  in  terms  of  the  thermal  capacity  of  unit  volume,  of  o^!ifefCt'°U 
the  earth’s  crust,  in  three  different  localities  near  Edinburgh, 
deduced  from  the  observations  on  underground  temperature 
instituted  by  Principal  Forbes  there,  I find  that  if  the  sup- 
posed transit  through  a hotter  region  of  space  took  place 
between  1250  and  5000  years  ago,  the  temperature  of  that  sup- 
posed region  must  have  been  from  25°  to  50°  Fahr.  above  the 
present  mean  temperature  of  the  earth’s  surface,  to  account  for 
the  present  general  rate  of  underground  increase  of  temperature, 
taken  as  1°  Fahr.  in  50  feet  downwards.  Human  history  nega- 
tives this  supposition.  Again,  geologists  and  astronomers  will, 

I presume,  admit  that  the  earth  cannot,  20,000  years  ago,  have 
been  in  a region  of  space  100°  Fahr.  warmer  than  its  present 
surface.  But  if  the  transition  from  a hot  region  to  a cool  region  Poisson's 
supposed  by  Poisson  took  place  more  than  20,000  years  ago,  the  disproved  as 
excess  of  temperatui’e  must  have  been  more  than  100°  Fahr.,  and  abiemitiga- 
must  therefore  have  destroyed  animal  and  vegetable  life.  Hence,  Leibnitz’s 
the  further  back  and  the  hotter  we  can  suppose  Poisson’s  hot theory- 
region,  the  better  for  the  geologists  who  require  the  longest 
periods ; but  the  best  for  their  view  is  Leibnitz’s  theory,  which 
simply  supposes  the  earth  to  have  been  at  one  time  an  incan- 
descent liquid,  without  explaining  how  it  got  into  that  state.  If 
we  suppose  the  temperature  of  melting  rock  to  be  about  10,000° 

Fahr.  (an  extremely  high  estimate),  the  consolidation  may  have 
taken  place  200,000,000  years  ago.  Or,  if  we  suppose  the 
temperature  of  melting  rock  to  be  7000°  Fahr.  (which  is  more 
nearly  what  it  is  generally  assumed  to  be),  we  may  suppose  the 
consolidation  to  have  taken  place  98,000,000  years  ago. 

(k.)  These  estimates  are  founded  on  the  Fourier  solution  de-  Probable 
monstrated  below.  The  greatest  variation  we  have  to  make  in  uncertainty 
them,  to  take  into  account  the  differences  in  the  ratios  of  con-  maVcon^' 


474 


appendix  d. 


ciuctivities 
and  capaci- 
ties of  sur- 
face rocks. 


Extreme 
admissible 
limits  of 
date  of 
earth’s  con- 
solidation. 


Mathemati- 
cal expres- 
sion for 
interior 
temperature 
near  the 
surface  of  a 
hot  solid 
commencing 
to  cool: 


[D,  k. 


activities  to  specific  heats  of  the  three  Edinburgh  rocks,  is  to 
reduce  them  to  nearly  half,  or  to  increase  them  by  rather  more 
than  half.  A reduction  of  the  Greenwich  underground  observa- 
tions recently  communicated  to  me  by  Professor  Everett  of 
Windsor,  Nova  Scotia,  gives  for  the  Greenwich  rocks  a quality 
intermediate  between  those  of  the  Edinburgh  rocks.  But  we  are 
veiy  ignorant  as  to  the  effects  of  high  temperatures  in  altering 
the  conductivities  and  specific  heats  of  rocks,  and  as  to  their 
latent  heat  of  fusion.  We  must,  therefore,  allow  very  wide 
limits  in  such  an  estimate  as  I have  attempted  to  make;  but  I 
think  we  may  with  much  probability  say  that  the  consolidation 
cannot  have  taken  place  less  than  20,000,000  years  ago,  or  we 
should  have  more  underground  heat  than  we  actually  have,  nor 
more  than  400,000,000  years  ago,  or  we  should  not  have  so  much 
as  the  least  observed  underground  increment  of  temperature. 
That  is  to  say,  I conclude  that  Leibnitz’s  epoch  of  emergence 
of  the  consistentior  status  was  probably  between  those  dates. 

(I.')  The  mathematical  theory  on  which  these  estimates  are 
founded  is  very  simple,  being,  in  fact,  merely  an  application  of 
one  of  Fourier’s  elementary  solutions  to  the  problem  of  finding 
at  any  time  the  rate  of  variation  of  temperature  from  point  to 
point,  and  the  actual  temperature  at  any  point,  in  a solid  extend- 
ing to  infinity  in  all  directions,  on  the  supposition  that  at  an 
initial  epoch  the  temperature  has  had  two  different  constant 
values  on  the  two  sides  of  a certain  infinite  plane.  The  solution 
for  the  two  required  elements  is  as  follows: — 

dv  _ F 

d'*'  J 7TKt 

2 V p/2 _ „ 

V = v0  + -7-  dz€ 

v7r  Jo 


where  k denotes  the  conductivity  of  the  solid,  measured  in  terms 
of  the  thermal  capacity  of  the  unity  of  bulk; 

V,  half  the  difference  of  the  two  initial  temperatures; 
v0,  their  arithmetical  mean; 
t,  the  time; 

x,  the  distance  of  any  point  from  the  middle  plane; 
v,  the  temperature  of  the  point  x and  t; 

and,  consequently  (according  to  the  notation  of  the  differential 


COOLING  OF  THE  EARTH. 


475 


D,  L] 


calculus),  dv/dx  the  rate  of  variation  of  the  temperature  per  unit 
of  length  perpendicular  to  the  isothermal  planes. 

(in.)  To  demonstrate  this  solution,  it  is  sufficient  to  verify — 

(1.)  That  the  expression  for  v satisfies  Fourier’s  equation  for 
the  linear  conduction  of  heat,  viz.  : 

dv  d2v 
dt  K dx2  ’ 

(2.)  That  when  t = 0,  the  expression  for  v becomes  v0  + V for  all 
positive,  and  v0-V  for  all  negative  values  of  x ; and  (3.)  That  the  proof, 
expression  for  dv/dx  is  the  differential  coefficient  of  the  expres- 
sion for  v with  reference  to  x.  The  propositions  (1.)  and  (3.)  are 
proved  directly  by  differentiation.  To  prove  (2.)  we  have,  when 
t = 0,  and  x positive, 

2v  r 

v-vo+-t~  I dze~z2 
si*  JO 

or  according  to  the  known  value,  of  the  definite  integral 

Jo  dze~z~,  v = v0  + V ; 

and  for  all  values  of  t,  the  second  term  has  equal  positive  and 
negative  values  for  equal  positive  and  negative  values  of  x,  so 
that  when  t = 0 and  x negative, 

v = v0-V. 

The  admirable  analysis  by  which  Fourier  arrived  at  solutions  in- 
cluding this,  forms  a most  interesting  and  important  mathematical 
study.  It  is  to  be  found  in  his  Theorie  Ancdytique  de  la  Ghaleur. 

Paris,  1822. 

(n.)  The  accompanying  diagram  (page  477)  represents,  by  two 
curves,  the  preceding  expressions  for  dv/dx  and  v respectively. 

(o.)  The  solution  thus  expressed  and  illustrated  applies,  for  a Expression 
certain  time,  without  sensible  error,  to  the  case  of  a solid  sphere,  temperature 
primitively  heated  to  a uniform  temperature,  and  suddenly  ex-  "f “rhSotrface 
posed  to  any  superficial  action,  which  for  ever  after  keeps  the  bod,v  conY 
surface  at  some  other  constant  temperature.  If,  for  instance,  cool: 
the  case  considered  is  that  of  a globe  8000  miles  diameter  of 
solid  rock,  the  solution  will  apply  with  scarcely  sensible  error  for 
more  than  1000  millions  of  years.  For,  if  the  rock  be  of  a 
certain  average  quality  as  to  conductivity  and  specific  heat,  the 
value  of  k,  as  found  in  a previous  communication  to  the  Royal 


4 76 


APPENDIX  D. 


proved  to  be 
practically 
approximate 
for  the  earth 
for  100  mil- 
lion years. 


Distribution 
of  tempera- 
ture 100  mil- 
lion years 
after  com- 
mencement 
of  cooling 
of  a great 
enough  mass 
of  average 
rock. 


* 

Roy. 


[D,  0. 


Society,*  will  be  400,  for  unit  of  length  a British  foot  and  unit  of 
time  a year;  and  the  equation  expressing  the  solution  becomes 


dv=  _i_  F 

dx  36  -4  v /t 


e-x?  oaoot . 


and  if  we  give  t the  value  1,000,000,000,  or  anything  less,  the 
exponential  factor  becomes  less  than  <rB-6  (which  being  equal 
to  about  maJ  be  regarded  as  insensible),  when  x exceeds 
3,000,000  feet,  or  568  miles.  That  is  to  say,  during  the  first 
1000  million  years  the  variation  of  temperature  does  not  become 
sensible  at  depths  exceeding  568  miles,  and  is  therefore  con- 
fined to  so  thin  a crust,  that  the  influence  of  curvature  may  be 
neglected. 


(y>.)  If,  now,  we  suppose  the  time  to  be  100  million  years  from 
the  commencement  of  the  variation,  the  equation  becomes 

dv 

= 1 Vc  - /1600  x 108 

dx  3-54X105 

The  diagram,  therefore,  shows  the  variation  of  temperature  which 
would  now  exist  in  the  earth  if,  its  whole  mass  being  first  solid 
and  at  one  temperature  100  million  years  ago,  the  temperature  of 
its  surface  had  been  everywhere  suddenly  lowered  by  V degrees, 
and  kept  permanently  at  this  lower  temperature:  the  scales  used 
being  as  follows: — 


(1)  For  depth  below  the  surface,— scale  along  OX,  length  a 
represents  400,000  feet. 

(2)  For  rate  of  increase  of  temperature  per  foot  of  depth,— 
scale  of  ordinates  parallel  to  OY,  length  b,  represents  ^Tinn  of 
1 pei  foot.  If,  for  example,  F=7000°  Fahr.  this  scale  will 
be  such  that  b represents  -L_  0f  a degree  Fahr.  per  foot. 

(3)  For  excess  of  temperature,— scale  of  ordinates  parallel  to 
OY,  length  b,  represents  F/|  Jir,  or  7900°,  if  V=  7000°  Fahr. 

Thus  the  rate  of  increase  of  temperature  from  the  surface 
downwards  would  be  sensibly  ~ of  a degree  per  foot  for  the 
first  100,000  feet  or  so.  Below  that  depth  the  rate  of  increase 
per  foot  would  begin  to  diminish  sensibly.  At  400,000  feet  it 
would  have  diminished  to  about  y|y  of  a degree  per  foot.  At 


“ On  the  Periodical  Variations  of  Underground  Temperature.”  Trans, 
Soc.  Edin March  I860. 


Distribution 
of  tempera- 
ture 100  mil- 
lion years 
after  com- 
mencement 
of  cooling 
of  a great 
enough  mass 
of  average 
rock: 


graphically 

represented. 


OPQ  curve  showing  excess  of  temperature  above  that  of  the  surface. 
AP'R  curve  showing  rate  of  augmentation  of  temperature  downwards. 


478 


APPENDIX  D. 


Terrestrial 
climate  not 
sensibly  in- 
fluenced by 
under- 
ground 
heat. 


Rates  of  in- 
crease of 
temperature 
inwards  in  a 
great  • 
enough 
mass  of 
average 
rock,  at 
various 
times  after 
commence- 
ment of 
coolingfrom 
a primitive 
temperature 
of  7000“ 

Fahr. 


[D,  p. 


800,000  feet  it  would  have  diminished  to  less  than  ^ of  its 
initial  value,— that  is  to  say,  to  less  than  of  a degree  per 
foot;  and  so  on,  rapidly  diminishing,  as  shown  in  the  curve. 
Such  is,  on  the  whole,  the  most  probable  representation  of  the 
earth’s  present  temperature,  at  depths  of  from  100  feet,  where 
the  annual  variations  cease  to  be  sensible,  to  100  miles;  below 
which  the  whole  mass,  or  all  except  a nucleus  cool  from  the 
beginning,  is  (whether  liquid  or  solid),  probably  at,  or  very 
nearly  at,  the  proper  melting  temperature  for  the  pressure  at 
each  depth. 

((?•)  The  theory  indicated  above  throws  light  on  the  question  so 
often  discussed,  as  to  whether  terrestrial  heat  can  have  influenced 
climate  through  long  geological  periods,  and  allows  us  to  answer 
it  very  decidedly  in  the  negative.  There  would  be  an  increment  of 
temperature  at  the  rate  of  2°  Fahr.  per  foot  downwards  near  the 
surface  10,000  years  after  the  beginning  of  the  cooling,  in  the 
case  we  have  supposed.  The  radiation  from  earth  and  atmo- 
sphere into  space  (of  which  we  have  yet  no  satisfactory  absolute 
measurement)  would  almost  certainly  be  so  rapid  in  the  earth’s 
actual  circumstances,  as  not  to  allow  a rate  of  increase  of  2°  Fahr. 
per  foot  underground  to  augment  the  temperature  of  the  surface 
by  much  more  than  about  1°;  and  hence  I infer  that  the  general 
climate  cannot  be  sensibly  affected  by  conducted  heat  at  any  time 
more  than  10,000  years  after  the  commencement  of  superficial 
solidification.  No  doubt,  however,  in  particular  places  there 
might  be  an  elevation  of  temperature  by  thermal  springs,  or  by 
eruptions  of  melted  lava,  and  everywhere  vegetation  would,  for 
the  first  three  or  four  million  years,  if  it  existed  so  soon  after 
the  epoch  of  consolidation,  be  influenced  by  the  sensibly  higher 
temperature  met  with  by  roots  extending  a foot  or  more  below 
the  surface. 

(r.)  Whatever  the  amount  of  such  effects  is  at  any  one  time, 
it  would  go  on  diminishing  according  to  the  inverse  proportion  of 
the  square  roots  of  the  times  from  the  initial  epoch.  Thus,  if  at 

10,000  years  we  have  2°  per  foot  of  increment  below  ground, 

At  40,000  years  we  should  have  1°  per  foot. 

160,000 
„ 4,000,000 

„ 100,000,000 


1 0 

1<T  >> 


1 o 

TU  ” 


D,  r.] 


COOLING  OF  THE  EARTH. 


479 


It  is  therefore  probable  that  for  the  last  96,000,000  years  the 
rate  of  increase  of  temperature  under  ground  has  gradually 
diminished  from  about  Tgbh  to  about  —gth  of  a degree  Fahrenheit 
per  foot,  and  that  the  thickness  of  the  crust  through  which  any 
stated  degree  of  cooling  has  been  expeidenced  has  in  that 
period  gradually  increased  up  to  its  present  thickness  from  Ith 
of  that  thickness.  Is  not  this,  on  the  whole,  in  harmony  with 
geological  evidence,  rightly  interpreted?  Do  not  the  vast  masses 
of  basalt,  the  general  appearances  of  mountain-ranges,  the  vio- 
lent distortions  and  fractures  of  strata,  the  great  prevalence  of 
metamorphic  action  (which  must  have  taken  place  at  depths  of 
not  many  miles,  if  so  much),  all  agree  in  demonstrating  that  the 
rate  of  increase  of  temperature  downwards  must  have  been  much 
more  rapid,  and  in  rendering  it  probable  that  volcanic  energy, 
earthquake  shocks,  and  every  kind  of  so-called  plutonic  action, 
have  been,  on  the  whole,  more  abundantly  and  violently  opera- 
tive in  geological  antiquity  than  in  the  present  age? 

(s.)  But  it  maybe  objected  to  this  application  of  mathematical  Objections 
theory — (1),  That  the  earth  was  once  all  melted,  or  at  least  triSappii- 
melted  all  round  its  surface,  and  cannot  possibly,  or  rather  cannot  raised  and 
with  any  probability,  be  supposed  to  have  been  ever  a uniformly  rumoved- 
heated  solid,  7000°  Fahr.  warmer  than  our  present  surface 
temperature,  as  assumed  in  the  mathematical  problem  • and  (2) 

No  natural  action  could  possibly  produce  at  one  instant,  and 
maintain  for  ever  after,  a seven  thousand  degrees’  lowering  of 
the  surface  temperature.  Taking  the  second  objection  first,  I 
answer  it  by  saying,  what  I think  cannot  be  denied,  that  a large 
mass  of  melted  rock,  exposed  freely  to  our  air  and  sky,  will,  after 
it  once  becomes  crusted  over,  present  in  a few  hours,  or  a few 
days,  or  at  the  most  a few  weeks,  a surface  so  cool  that  it  can  be 
walked  over  with  impunity.  Hence,  after  10,000  years,  or, 
indeed,  I may  say  after  a single  year,  its  condition  will  be  sensibly 
the  same  as  if  the  actual  lowering  of  temperature  experienced  by 
the  surface  had  been  produced  in  an  instant,  and  maintained 
constant  ever  after.  I answer  the  first  objection  by  saying,  that 
if  experimenters  will  find  the  latent  heat  of  fusion,  and  the  varia- 
tions of  conductivity  and  specific  heat  of  the  earth’s  crust  up  to 
its  melting  point,  it  will  be  easy  to  modify  the  solution  given 
above,  so  as  to  make  it  applicable  to  the  case  of  a liquid  globe 
gradually  solidifying  from  without  inwards,  in  consequence  of 


Objections 
to  terres- 
trial appli- 
cation 
raised  and 
removed. 


Present 
under- 
ground 
temperature 
probably 
due  to  heat 
generated 
in  the 
original 
building  of 
the  earth. 


Primitive 
heating  may 
have  been 
throughout, 
or  merely 
through  a 
superficial 
layer  of  no 
greater 
depth  than 


A-  of  the 
radius. 


480 


APPENDIX  D. 


[D, 


lieat  conducted  through  the  solid  crust  to  a cold  external  medium. 
In  the  meantime,  we  can  see  that  this  modification  will  not  make 
any  considerable  change  in  the  resulting  temperature  of  any 
point  in  the  crust,  unless  the  latent  heat  parted  with  on  solidifi- 
cation proves,  contrary  to  what  we  may  expect  from  analogy,  to 
be  considerable  in  comparison  with  the  heat  that  an  equal  mass 
of  the  solid  yields  in  cooling  from  the  temperature  of  solidifica- 
tion to  the  superficial  temperature.  But,  what  is  more  to  the 
purpose,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  objection,  plausible  as  it 
appears,  is  altogether  fallacious,  and  that  the  problem  solved 
above  corresponds  much  more  closely,  in  all  probability,  with  the 
actual  history  of  the  earth,  than  does  the  modified  problem  sug- 
gested by  the  objection.  The  earth,  although  once  all  melted,  or 
melted  all  round  its  surface,  did,  in  all  probability,  really  become 
a solid  at  its  melting  temperature  all  through,  or  all  through  the 
outer  layer,  which  had  been  melted ; and  not  until  the  solidifica- 
tion was  thus  complete,  or  nearly  so,  did  the  surface  begin  to 
cool.  That  this  is  the  true  view  can  scarcely  be  doubted,  when 
the  following  arguments  are  considered. 

(t.)  In  the  first  place,  we  shall  assume  that  at  one  time  the 
earth  consisted  of  a solid  nucleus,  covered  all  round  with  a very 
deep  ocean  of  melted  rocks,  and  left  to  cool  by  radiation  into 
space.  This  is  the  condition  that  would  supervene,  on  a cold 
body  much  smaller  than  the  present  earth  meeting  a great  number 
of  cool  bodies  still  smaller  than  itself,  and  is  therefore  in  accord- 
ance with  what  we  may  regal’d  as  a probable  hypothesis  regarding 
the  earth’s  antecedents.  It  includes,  as  a particular  case,  the 
commoner  supposition,  that  the  earth  was  once  melted  through- 
out, a condition  which  might  result  from  the  collision  of  two  nearly 
equal  masses.  But  the  evidence  which  has  convinced  most  geolo- 
gists that  the  earth  had  a fiery  beginning,  goes  but  a very  small 
depth  below  the  surface,  and  affords  us  absolutely  no  means  of 
distinguishing  between  the  actual  phenomena,  and  those  which 
would  have  resulted  from  either  an  entire  globe  of  liquid  rock, 
or  a cool  solid  nucleus  covered  with  liquid  to  any  depth  exceed- 
ing 50  or  100  miles.  Hence,  irrespectively  of  any  hypothesis 
as  to  antecedents  from  which  the  earth’s  initial  fiery  condition 
may  have  followed  by  natural  causes,  and  simply  assuming,  as 
rendered  probable  by  geological  evidence,  that  there  was  at  one 
time  melted  rock  all  over  the  surface,  we  need  not  assume  the 


COOLING  OF  THE  EARTH. 


481 


D,  t] 

depth  of  this  lava  ocean  to  have  been  more  than  50  or  100  miles; 
although  we  need  not  exclude  the  supposition  of  any  greater  depth, 
or  of  an  entire  globe  of  liquid. 

(u.)  In  the  process  of  refrigeration,  the  fluid  must  [as  I have 
remarked  regarding  the  sun,  in  a recent  article  in  Macmillan’s 
Magazine  (March,  1862)*,  and  regarding  the  earth’s  atmosphere, 
in  a communication  to  the  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society  of 
Manchester!]  be  brought  by  convection,  to  fulfil  a definite  law  of  “Co.n.vec.tive 
distribution  of  temperature  which  I have  called  “ convective  equi-  of  tempera- 
librium  of  temperature.”  That  is  to  say,  the  temperatures  at  fined :de’ 
different  parts  in  the  interior  must  [in  any  great  fluid  mass 
which  is  kept  well  stirred]  differ  according  to  the  different  pres- 
sures by  the  difference  of  temperatures  which  any  one  portion 
of  the  liquid  would  present,  if  given  at  the  temperature  and  pres- 
sure of  any  part,  and  then  subjected  to  variation  of  pressure,  but  must  have 
prevented  from  losing  or  gaining  heat.  The  reason  for  this  is  proximately 
the  extreme  slowness  of  true  thermal  conduction ; and  the  con-  untKidi- 
sequently  preponderating  influence  of  great  currents  throughout  commenced, 
a continuous  fluid  mass,  in  determining  the  distribution  of  tem- 
perature through  the  whole. 


(??.)  The  thei mo-dynamic  law  connecting  temperature  and 
pressure  in  a fluid  mass,  not  allowed  to  lose  or  gain  heat,  in- 
vestigated theoretically,  and  experimentally  verified  in  the  cases 
of  air  and  water,  by  Dr  Joule  and  myself*,  shows,  therefore, 
that  the  temperature  in  the  liquid  will  increase  from  the  surface 
downwards,  if,  as  is  most  probably  the  case,  the  liquid  contracts 
in  cooling.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  liquid,  like  water  near  its 


* See  Appendix  E,  below. 

. ^ Proceedin9s,  Jan.  1862.  “ On  the  Convective  Equilibrium  of  Temperature 

m the  Atmosphere.” 

£ Joule,  “ On  the  Changes  of  Temperature  produced  by  the  Rarefaction  and 
Condensation  of  Air,”  Phil.  Mag.  1845.  Thomson,  “On  a Method  for  Deter- 
mining Experimentally  the  Heat  evolved  by  the  Compression  of  Air Dynamical 
Theory  of  Heat,  Part  IV.,  Tram.  R.  S.  E.,  Session  1850-51;  and  reprinted 
Phil.  Mag.  Joule  and  Thomson,  “On  the  Thermal  Effects  of  Fluids  in  Motion  ” 
Trans.  R.  S.  Loud.,  June  1853  and  June  1854.  Joule  and  Thomson  “On  the 
Alterations  of  Temperature  accompanying  Changes  of  Pressure  in  Fluids  ” 
Proceedings  R.  S.  Land.,  June  1857.  These  articles,  except  the  first  by  Joule 
are  all  now  republished  in  Vol.  I.  Arts.  XLvm.  and  xmx.  of  Mathematical  and 
Physical  Papers , by  Sir  W.  Thomson. 

VOL.  II. 


31 


482 


APPENDIX  D. 


Alternative 
cases  as  to 
distribution 
of  tempera- 
ture before 
solidifica- 
tion. 


Effect  of 
pressure  on 
the  tempe- 
rature of 
solidifica- 
tion. 


Question 
whether 
solidifica- 
tion com- 
menced at 
surface  or 
centre  or 
bottom. 


[I>, 


freezing-point,  expands  in  cooling,  the  temperature,  according 
to  the  convective  and  thermo-dynamic  laws  just  stated  (§§  u,  v), 
would  actually  be  lower  at  great  depths  than  near  the  surface, 
even  although  the  liquid  is  cooling  from  the  surface ; but  there 
would'  be  a very  thin  superficial  layer  of  lighter  and  cooler  liquid, 
losing  heat  by  true  conduction,  until  solidification  at  the  surface 
would  commence. 

(w.)  Again,  according  to  the  thermo-dynamic  law  of  freezing, 
investigated  by  my  brother*,  Professor  James  Thomson,  and 
verified  by  myself  experimentally  for  watert,  the  temperature  of 
solidification  will,  at  great  depths,  because  of  the  great  pressure, 
be  higher  there  than  at  the  surface  if  the  fluid  contracts,  or  lower 
than  at  the  surface  if  it  expands,  in  becoming  solid. 

( x .)  How  the  temperature  of  solidification,  for  any  pressure, 
may  be  related  to  the  corresponding  temperature  of  fluid  con- 
vective equilibrium,  it  is  impossible  to  say,  without  knowledge, 
which  we  do  not  yet  possess,  regarding  the  expansion  with  heat, 
and  the  specific  heat  of  the  fluid,  and  the  change  of  volume,  and 
the  latent  heat  developed  in  the  transition  from  fluid  to  solid. 

(y.)  For  instance,  supposing,  as  is  most  probably  true,  both 
that  the  liquid  contacts  in  cooling  towards  its  freezing-point, 
and  that  it  contracts  in  freezing,  we  cannot  tell,  without  definite 
numerical  data  regarding  those  elements,  whether  the  elevation 
of  the  tempei’ature  of  solidification,  or  of  the  actual  temperature 
of  a portion  of  the  fluid  given  just  above  its  freezing-point,  pro- 
duced by  a given  application  of  pressure  is  the  greater.  If  the 
former  is  greater  than  the  latter,  solidification  would  commence 
at  the  bottom,  or  at  the  centre,  if  there  is  no  solid  nucleus  to 
begin  with,  and  would  proceed  outwards  ; and  there  could  be  no 
complete  permanent  incrustation  all  round  the  surface  till  the 
whole  globe  is  solid,  with,  possibly,  the  exception  of  irregular, 
comparatively  small  spaces  of  liquid. 

(z.)  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  elevation  of  temperature,  produced 

* “ Theoretical  Considerations  regarding  the  Effect  of  Pressure  in  lowering 
the  Freezing-point  of  Water,”  Trans.  R.  S.  E.,  Jan.  1849.  Republished  by 
permission  of  the  author,  in  Yol.  I.  (pp.  156 — 164)  of  Mathematical  and  Phy- 
sical Papers,  by  Sir  W.  Thomson,  1882. 

t Proceedings  R.  ,9.  E.,  Session  1849-50.  Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers , 
by  Sir  W,  Thomson,  1882,  p.  165, 


COOLING  OF  THE  EARTH. 


483 


D.  z .] 

by  an  application  of  pressure  to  a given  portion  of  the  fluid,  is 
greater  than  the  elevation  of  the  freezing  temperature  produced 
by  the  same  amount  of  pressure,  the  superficial  layer  of  the  fluid 
would  be  the  first  to  reach  its  freezing-point,  and  the  first  actually 
to  freeze. 

(aa.)  But  if,  according  to  the  second  supposition  of  § v,  the 
liquid  expanded  in  cooling  near  its  freezing-point,  the  solid  would 
probably  likewise  be  of  less  specific  gravity  than  the  liquid  at  its 
freezing-point.  Hence  the  surface  would  crust  over  permanently 
with  a crust  of  solid,  constantly  increasing  inwards  by  the  freez- 
ing of  the  interior  fluid  in  consequence  of  heat  conducted  out 
through  the  crust.  The  condition  most  commonly  assumed  by 
geologists  would  thus  be  produced. 

(bb.)  But  Bischof’s  experiments,  upon  the  validity  of  which,  importance 
as  far  as  I am  aware,  no  doubt  has  ever  been  thrown,  show  that  intaHn- 
melted  granite,  slate,  and  trachyte,  all  contract  by  something  JfSSSS 
about  20  per  cent,  in  freezing.  We  ought,  indeed,  to  have  more  pans ?onoi 
experiments  on  this  most  important  point,  both  to  verify  Bischof  s Sffin 
results  on  rocks,  and  to  learn  how  the  case  is  with  iron  and  other  SU?"0* 
unoxydised  metals.  In  the  meantime  we  must  consider  it  as  pro- 
bable that  the  melted  substance  of  the  earth  did  really  contract 
by  a very  considerable  amount  in  becoming  solid. 

(cc.)  Hence  if,  according  to  any  relations  whatever  among  the 
complicated  physical  circumstances  concerned,  freezing  did  really 
commence  at  the  surface,  either  all  round  or  in  any  part,  before 
the  whole  globe  had  become  solid,  the  solidified  superficial  layer 
must  have  broken  up  and  sunk  to  the  bottom,  or  to  the  centre 
before  it  could  have  attained  a sufficient  thickness  to  rest  stably 
on  the  lighter  liquid  below.  It  is  quite  clear,  indeed,  that  if  at  Bischof’s 
any  time  the  earth  were  in  the  condition  of  a thin  solid  shell  of,  ?r£“ent8 
let  us  suppose  50  feet  or  100  feet  thick  of  granite,  enclosing  a 
continuous  melted  mass  of  20  per  cent,  less  specific  gravity  in  its  Kthe 
upper  parts,  where  the  pressure  is  small,  this  condition  cannot  SSSSiT" 
have  lasted  many  minutes.  The  rigidity  of  a solid  shell  of  super- 
cial  extent  so  vast  in  comparison  with  its  thickness,  must  be  as  tfonwf1" 
nothing,  and  the  slightest  disturbance  would  cause  some  part  to  ve°r"y  newly 
end  down,  crack,  and  allow  the  liquid  to  run  out  over  the  whole  ^roughthe 
solid.  The  crust  itself  would  in  consequence  become  shattered  lntU,°r' 
into  fragments,  which  must  all  sink  to  the  bottom,  or  meet  in 

31—2 


Probable 
cause  of 
volcano 
and  earth- 
quakes. 


484  APPENDIX  L).  [D,  cc.  : 

the  centre  unci  form  a nucleus  there  if  there  is  none  to  begin 
with. 

(cld.)  It  is,  however,  scarcely  possible,  that  any  such  continuous 
crust  can  ever  have  formed  all  over  the  melted  surface  at  one 
time,  and  afterwards  have  fallen  in.  The  mode  of  solidification 
conjectured  in  § y,  seems  on  the  whole  the  most  consistent  with 
what  we  know  of  the  physical  properties  of  the  matter  concerned. 
So  far  as  regards  the  result,  it  agrees,  I believe,  with  the  view 
adopted  as  the  most  probable  by  Mr  Hopkins*.  But  whether 
from  the  condition  being  rather  that  described  in  § z,  which 
seems  also  possible,  for  the  whole  or  for  some  parts  of  the  hetero- 
geneous substance  of  the  earth,  or  from  the  viscidity  as  of  mortar, 
which  necessarily  supervenes  in  a melted  fluid,  composed  of  in- 
gredients becoming,  as  the  whole  cools,  separated  by  crystallizing 
at  different  temperatures  before  the  solidification  is  perfect,  and 
which  we  actually  see  in  lava  from  modern  volcanoes  • it  is  pro- 
bable that  when  the  whole  globe,  or  some  very  thick  superficial 
layer  of  it,  still  liquid  or  viscid,  has  cooled  down  to  near  its  tem- 
perature of  perfect  solidification,  incrustation  at  the  surface  must 
commence. 

(ee.)  It  is  probable  that  crust  may  thus  form  over  wide  extents 
of  surface,  and  may  be  temporarily  buoyed  up  by  the  vesicular 
character  it  may  have  retained  from  the  ebullition  of  the  liquid 
in  some  places,  or,  at  all  events,  it  may  be  held  up  by  the 
viscidity  of  the  liquid  '}  until  it  has  acquired  some  considerable 
thickness  sufficient  to  allow  gravity  to  manifest  its  claim,  and 
sink  the  heavier  solid  below  the  lighter  liquid.  This  process 
must  go  on  until  the  sunk  portions  of  crust  build  up  from  the 
bottom  a sufficiently  close  ribbed  solid  skeleton  or  frame,  to  allow 
fresh  incrustations  to  remain  bridging  across  the  now  small  areas 
of  lava  pools  or  lakes. 

(ff.)  In  the  honey-combed  solid  and  liquid  mass  thus  formed, 
there  must  be  a continual  tendency  for  the  liquid,  in  consequence 
of  its  less  specific  gravity,  to  work  its  way  up ; whether  by  masses 
of  solid  falling  from  the  roofs  of  vesicles  or  tunnels,  and  causing 
earthquake  shocks,  or  by  the  roof  breaking  quite  thiough  w hen 
very  thin,  so  as  to  cause  two  such  hollows  to  unite,  or  the  liquid  of 

* See  his  report  on  “Earthquakes  and  Volcanic  Action.”  British  Associa-J 
tion  Beport  for  1847, 


AGE  OF  THE  SUN’S  HEAT. 


485 


1>,  ffi 

any  of  them  to  flow  out  freely  over  the  outer  surface  of  the  earth : 
or  by  gradual  subsidence  of  the  solid,  owing  to  the  thermo- 
dynamic melting,  which  portions  of  it,  under  intense  stress,  must 
experience,  according  to  views  recently  published  by  Professor 
James  Thomson*  The  results  which  must  follow  from  this 
tendency  seem  sufficiently  great  and  various  to  account  for  all 
that  we  see  at  present,  and  all  that  we  learn  from  geological 
investigation,  of  earthquakes,  of  upheavals,  and  subsidences  of 
solid,  and  of  eruptions  of  melted  rock. 

(gg.)  These  conclusions,  drawn  solely  from  a consideration  of 
the  necessary  order  of  cooling  and  consolidation/ according  to 
Bischof’s  result  as  to  the  relative  specific  gravities  of  solid  and 
of  melted  rock,  are  in  perfect  accordance  with  §§  832... 848, 
regarding  the  present  condition  of  the  earth’s  interior, — that  it 
is  not,  as  commonly  supposed,  all  liquid  within  a thin  solid  crust 
of  from  30  to  100  miles  thick,  but  that  it  is  on  the  whole  more 
rigid  certainly  than  a continuous  solid  globe  of  glass  of  the  same 
diameter,  and  probably  than  one  of  steel. 


(E.)  On  the  Age  of  the  Sun’s  Heat+. 

% 

The  second  great  law  of  Thermodynamics  involves  a certain 
principle  of  irreversible  action  in  nature.  It  is  thus  shown  that, 
although  mechanical  energy  is  indestructible,  there  is  a universal 
tendency  to  its  dissipation,  which  produces  gradual  augmentation  Dissipation 
and  diffusion  of  heat,  cessation  of  motion,  and  exhaustion  0£ofEnerg-'- 
potential  energy  through  the  material  universe j.  The  result 
would  inevitably  be  a state  of  universal  rest  and  death,  if  the 
universe  were  finite  and  left  to  obey  existing  laws.  But  it  is 
impossible  to  conceive  a limit  to  the  extent  of  matter  in  the 
universe;  and  therefore  science  points  rather  to  an  endless 
progress,  through  an  endless  space,  of  action  involving  the  trans- 

* Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  1861,  “On  Crystallization 
and  Liquefaction  as  influenced  by  Stresses  tending  to  Change  of  Form  in 
Crystals.” 

+ From  Macmillan's  Magazine,  March  1862. 

J See  Proceedings  R.S.E.  Feb.  1852,  or  Phil.  Mag.  1853,  first  half  year,  “On 
a Universal  Tendency  in  Nature  to  the  Dissipation  of  Mechanical  Energy.” 

Math,  and  Phys.  Papers,  by  Sir  \V.  Thomson,  1882,  Art.  lix. 


486 


appendix  e. 


In- 
formation of  potential  energy  into  palpable  motion  and  thence 
into  heat,  than  to  a single  finite  mechanism,  running  down  like 
a clock,  and  stopping  for  ever.  It  is  also  impossible  to  conceive 
either  the  beginning  or  the  continuance  of  life,  without  an 
overruling  creative  power;  and,  therefore,  no  conclusions  of 
dynamical  science  regarding  the  future  condition  of  the  earth, 
can  be  held  to  give  dispiriting  views  as  to  the  destiny  of  the 
race  of  intelligent  beings  by  which  it  is  at  present  inhabited. 

The  object  proposed  in  the  present  article  is  an  application  of 
these  general  principles  to  the  discovery  of  probable  limits  to 
the  periods  of  time,  past  and  future,  during  which  the  sun  can 
be  reckoned  on  as  a source  of  heat  and  light.  The  subject  will 
be  discussed  under  three  heads  : — 


I.  The  secular  cooling  of  the  sun. 

II.  The  present  temperature  of  the  sun. 

III.  The  origin  and  total  amount  of  the  sun’s  heat. 


PART  I. 

ON  THE  SECULAR  COOLING  OF  THE  SUN. 


Rate  of 
cooling  of 
sun  un- 
known. 


Heat  gene- 
rated by  fall 
of  meteors 
into  the  sun 


How  much  the  sun  is  actually  cooled  from  year  to  year,  if  at 
all,  we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining,  or  scarcely  even  of  estimat- 
ing in  the  roughest  manner.  In  the  first  place  we  do  not  know 
that  he  is  losing  heat  at  all.  For  it  is  quite  certain  that  some 
heat  is  generated  in  his  atmosphere  by  the  influx  of  meteoric 
matter ; and  it  is  possible  that  the  amount  of  heat  so  generated 
from  year  to  year  is  sufficient  to  compensate  the  loss  by  radia- 
tion. It  is,  however,  also  possible  that  the  sun  is  now  an  incan- 
descent liquid  mass,  x-adiating  away  heat,  either  primitively 
created  in  his  substance,  or,  what  seems  far  moi-e  probable, 
generated  by  the  falling  in  of  meteors  in  past  times,  with  no 
sensible  compensation  by  a continuance  of  meteoi’ic  action. 

It  has  been  shown*  that,  if  the  foi’mer  supposition  were  true, 
the  meteors  by  which  the  sun’s  heat  would  have  beeix  pi-oduced 
during  the  last  2,000  or  3,000  years  must  have  been  during  all 


* “On  the  Mechanical  Energies  of  the  Solar  System.”  Transactions  of  the 
Royal  tSociety  of  Edinburgh,  1854,  and  Phil.  Mag.  1854,  second  half-year.  Math, 
and  Phys.  Papers , by  Sir  W.  Thomson  (Art.  lxvi.  of  Yol.  II.  now  in  the  press). 


COOLING  OF  THE  SUN. 


487 


&} 


that  time  much  within  the  earth’s  distance  from  the  sun,  and 
must  therefoi*e  have  approached  the  central  body  in  very  gradrfal 
spirals ; because,  if  enough  of  matter  to  produce  the  supposed 
thermal  effect  fell  in  from  space  outside  the  earth’s  orbit,  the 
length  of  the  year  would  have  been  very  sensibly  shortened  by 
the  additions  to  the  sun’s  mass  which  must  have  been  made. 

The  quantity  of  matter  annually  falling  in  must,  on  that  insufficient 
supposition,  have  amounted  to  jr  of  the  earth’s  mass,  or  to  supply, 16a 
if  006,600  the  sun’s ; and  therefore  it  would  be  necessaiy  to 
suppose  the  zodiacal  light  to  amount  to  at  least  -g^1^  of  the 
sun’s  mass,  to  account  in  the  same  way  for  a future  supply  of 
3,000  years’  sun-heat.  When  these  conclusions  were  first 
published  it  was  pointed  out  that  “ disturbances  in  the  motions 
of  visible  planets”  should  be  looked  for,  as  affording  us  means 
for  estimating  the  possible  amount  of  matter  in  the  zodiacal 
light ; and  it  was  conjectured  that  it  could  not  be  nearly  enough 
to  give  a supply  of  300,000  years’  heat  at  the  present  rate. 

These  anticipations  have  been  to  some  extent  fulfilled  in  Le 
Verifier's  great  researches  on  the  motion  of  the  planet  Mercury, 
which  have  recently  given  evidence  of  a sensible  influence 
attributable  to  matter  circulating  as  a great  number  of  small 
planets  within  his  orbit  round  the  sun.  But  the  amount  of  because  the 
matter  thus  indicated  is  very  small ; and,  therefore,  if  the  zwHa^ai11 
meteoric  influx  taking  place  at  present  is  enough  to  produce  llarLmer- 
any  appreciable  portion  of  the  heat  radiated  away,  it  must  be  punets  is 
supposed  to  be  from  matter  circulating  round  the  sun,  within 
very  short  distances  of  his  surface.  The  density  of  this  meteoric 
cloud  would  have  to  be  supposed  so  great  that  comets  could 
scarcely  have  escaped,  as  comets  actually  have  escaped,  showing 
no  discoverable  effects  of  resistance,  after  passing  his  surface 
within  a distance  equal  to  of  his  radius.  AH'  things  con- 
sidered, there  seems  little  probability  in  the  hypothesis  that 
solar  radiation  is  compensated,  to  any  appreciable  degree,  by 


heat  generated  by  meteors  falling  in,  at  present;  and,  as  it  can 
be  shown  that  no  chemical  theory  is  tenable*,  it  must  be  con-  The  sun  an 
eluded  as  most  probable  that  the  sun  is  at  present  merely  an  descent 
incandescent  liquid  mass  cooling.  mass’” 


a 


How  much  he  cools  from  year  to  year,  becomes  therefore 
* “ Mechanical  Energies,”  <fcc.  referred  to  above. 


488 


APPENDIX  E. 


Pouillet’s 

and 

Herschel’s 
estimates 
of  solar 
radiation. 


Largeness 
of  specific 
heat  of  sun 


question  of  very  serious  import,  but  it  is  one  which  we  are  at 
% Present  fluite  unable  to  answer.  It  is  true  we  have  data  on 
which  we  might  plausibly  found  a probable  estimate,  and  from  ' 
which  we  might  deduce,  with  at  first  sight  seemingly  well 
founded  confidence,  limits,  not  very  wide,  within  which  the  1 
present  true  rate  of  the  sun’s  cooling  must  lie.  For  we  know, 
from  the  independent  but  concordant  investigations  of  Herschel 
and  Pouillet,  that  the  sun  radiates  every  year  from  his  whole  1 
suiface  about  6 x 10™  (six  million  million  million  million  million) 
times  as  much  heat  as  is  sufficient  to  raise  the  temperature  of 
1 lb.  of  water  by  1°  Cent.  We  also  have  excellent  reason  for 
believing  that  the  sun’s  substance  is  very  much  like  the  earth’s. 
Stokes  s principles  of  solar  and  stellar  chemistry  have  been  for 
many  years  explained  in  the  University  of  Glasgow,  and  it  has 
been  taught  as  a first  result  that  sodium  does  certainly  exist  in 
the  sun’s  atmosphere,  and  in  the  atmospheres  of  many  of  the 
stars,  but  that  it  is  not  discoverable  in  others.  The  recent 
application  of  these  principles  in  the  splendid  researches  of 
Bunsen  and  Kirchhof  (who  made  an  independent  discovery  of 
Stokes’s  theory)  has  demonstrated  with  equal  certainty  that 
there  aie  iron  and  manganese,  and  several  of  our  other  known 
metals,  in  the  sun.  The  specific  heat  of  each  of  these  substances 
is  less  than  the  specific  heat  of  water,  which  indeed  exceeds  that 
of  every  other  known  terrestrial  body,  solid  or  liquid.  It  might, 
therefore,  at  first  sight  seem  probable  that  the  mean  specific 
heat  * of  the  sun’s  whole  substance  is  less,  and  very  certain  that 
it  cannot  be  much  greater,  than  that  of  water.  If  it  were  equal 
to  the  specific  heat  of  water  we  should  only  have  to  divide  the 
preceding  number  (6  x 1030),  derived  from  Herschel’s  and 
Pouillet’s  observations,  by  the  number  of  pounds  (4-23  x 1030)in 
the  sun’s  mass,  to  find  I'M  Cent,  for  the  present  annual  rate  of 

The  “specific  heat”  of  a homogeneous  body  is  the  quantity  of  heat  that 
a unit  of  its  substance  must  acquire  or  must  part  with,  to  rise  or  to  fall  by  1°  in 
temperature.  The  mean  specific  heat  of  a heterogeneous  mass,  or  of  a mass  of 
homogeneous  sabstance,  under  different  pressures  in  different  parts,  is  the  - 
quantity  of  heat  which  the  whole  body  takes  or  gives  in  rising  or  in  falling 
1°  in  temperature,  divided  by  the  number  of  units  in  its  mass.  . The  expression, 
“mean  specific  heat”  of  the  sun,  in  the  text,  signifies  the  total  amount  of  heat 
actually  radiated  away  from  the  sun,  divided  by  his  tnass,  during  any  time  in 
which  the  average  temperature  of  his  mass  sinks  by  1°,  whatever  physical  or 
chemical  changes  any  part  of  his  substance  may  experience. 


E.] 


COOLING  OF  THE  SUN. 


4<S9 


cooling.  It  might  therefore  seem  probable  that  the  sun  cools 
more,  and  almost  certain  that  he  does  not  cool  less,  than  a centi- 
grade degree  and  four-tenths  annually.  But,  if  this  estimate 
were  well  founded,  it  would  be  equally  just  to  assume  that  the  andsmail- 
sun’s  expansibility  * with  heat  does  not  differ  greatly  from  that  pansibility 
of  some  average  terrestrial  body.  If,  for  instance,  it  were  the 
same  as  that  of  solid  glass,  which  is  about  :r(JUy  of  bulk, 
or  T-roVrro  of  diameter,  per  1°  Cent,  (and  for  most  terrestrial 
liquids,  especially  at  high  temperatures,  the  expansibility  is 
much  more),  and  if  the  specific  heat  were  the  same  as  that  of  rendered 
liquid  water,  there  would  be  in  860  years  a contraction  of  one  absence^'7 
per  cent,  on  the  sun’s  diameter,  which  could  scarcely  have  contraction 
escaped  detection  by  astronomical  observation.  There  is,  how-  diameter, 
ever,  a far  stronger  reason  than  this  for  believing  that  no  such 
amount  of  contraction  can  have  taken  place,  and  therefore  for 
suspecting  that  the  physical  circumstances  of  the  sun’s  mass 


render  the  condition  of  the  substances  of  which  it  is  composed, 
as  to  expansibility  and  specific  heat,  very  different  from  that  of 
the  same  substances  when  experimented  on* in  our  terrestrial 
laboratories.  Mutual  gravitation  between  the  different  parts  of 
the  sun’s  contracting  mass  must  do  an  amount  of  work,  which  can- 
not be  calculated  with  certainty,  only  because  the  law  of  the  sun’s 
interior  density  is  not  known.  The  amount  of  work  performed  work  done 
during  a contraction  of  one-tenth  per  cent,  of  the  diameter,  if&^fX- 
the  density  remained  uniform  through  the  interior,  would,  as  c^meter 
Helmholtz  showed,  be  equal  to  20,000  times  the  mechanical  give  heat 
equivalent  of  the  amount  of  heat  which  Pouillet  estimated  to  perhaps 
be  radiated  from  the  sun  in  a year.  But  in  reality  the  sun’s 
density  must  increase  very  much  towards  his  centre,  and  pro- 
bably in  varying  proportions,  as  the  temperature  becomes  lower 
and  the  whole  mass  contracts.  We  cannot,  therefore,  say 
whether  the  work  actually  done  by  mutual  gravitation  during  a 
contraction  of  one-tenth  per  cent,  of  the  diameter,  would  be 


The  “ expansibility  in  volume,”  or  the  “ cubical  expansibility,”  of  a body, 
is  an  expression  technically  used  to  denote  the  proportion  which  the  increase  or 
diminution  of  its  bulk,  accompanying  a rise  or  fall  of  1°  in  its  temperature, 
bears  to  its  whole  bulk  at  some  stated  temperature.  The  expression,  “ the  sun’s 
expansibility,”  used  in  the  text,  may  be  taken  as  signifying  the  ratio  which  the 
actual  contraction,  during  a lowering  of  his  mean  temperature  by  1«  Cent., 
bears  to  his  present  volume. 


490 


APPENDIX  E. 


[E. 


.more  or  less  than  the  equivalent  of  20,000  years’  heat ; but  we 
may  regard  it  as  most  probably  not  many  times  more  or  less 
than  this  amount.  Now,  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable 
that  mechanical  energy  can  in  any  case  increase  in  a body  con-  ! 
tracting  in  virtue  of  cooling.  It  is  certain  that  it  really  does 
diminish  very  notably  in  every  case  hitherto  experimented  on. 

It  must  be  supposed,  therefore,  that  the  sun  always  radiates 
away  in  heat  something  more  than  the  Joule-equivalent  of  the 
work  done  on  his  contracting  mass,  by  mutual  gravitation  of  its 
paits.  Hence,  in  contracting  by  one-tenth  per  cent,  in  his 
diameter,  or  three-tenths  per  cent,  in  his  bulk,  the  sun  must 
give  out  something  either  more,  or  not  greatly  less,  than  20,000 
years  heat  j and  thus,  even  without  historical  evidence  as  to  the 
constancy  of  his  diameter,  it  seems  safe  to  conclude  that  no  such 
contraction  as  that  calculated  above  one  per  cent,  in  860  years 
can  have  taken  place  in  reality.  It  seems,  on  the  contrary, 
probable  that,  at  the  present  rate  of  radiation,  a contraction  of 
one-tenth  per  cent,  in  the  sun’s  diameter  could  not  take  place  in 
much  less  than  20,000  years,  and  scarcely  possible  that  it  could 
take  place  in  less  than  8,600  years.  If,  then,  the  mean  specific 
heat  of  the  sun’s  mass,  in  its  actual  condition,  is  not  more  than 
ten  times  that  of  water,  the  expansibility  in  volume  must  be 
less  than  per  100°  Cent.,  (that  is  to  say,  less  than  Ag  of 

that  of  solid  glass,)  which  seems  improbable.  But  although 
from  this  consideration  we  are  led  to  regard  it  as  probable  that 
the  sun’s  sjoecific  heat  is  considerably  more  than  ten  times  that 
of  water  (and,  therefore,  that  his  mass  cools  considerably  less 
than  100°  in  700  years,  a conclusion  which,  indeed,  we  could 
scarcely  avoid  on  simply  geological  grounds),  the  physical  prin- 
ciples we  now  rest  on  fail  to  give  us  any  reason  for  supposing 
that  the  sun’s  specific  heat  is  more  than  10,000  times  that  of 
water,  because  we  cannot  say  that  his  expansibility  in  volume  is 
probably  more  than  ^-Ag  per  1°  Cent.  And  there  is,  on  other 
grounds,  very  strong  reason  for  believing  that  the  specific  heat 
is  really  much  less  than  10,000.  For  it  is  almost  certain  that 
the  sun’s  mean  temperature*  is  even  now  as  high  as  14,000° 


* [Eosetti  (Phil.  Mag.  1879,  2nd  half  year)  estimates  the  effective  radiational 
temperature  of  the  sun  as  “not  much  less  than  ten  thousand  degrees  Centigrade:  ” 
(9965°  is  the  number  expressing  the  results  of  his  measurements).  On  the  other 
hand,  C.  W.  Siemens  estimates  it  at  as  low  as  8000°  Cent.  The  mean  tem- 


E.] 


SUNS  PRESENT  TEMPERATURE. 


491 


Cent. ; and  the  greatest  quantity  of  heat  that  we  can  explain, 
with  any  probability,  to  have  been  by  natural  causes  ever 
acquired  by  the  sun  (as  we  shall  see  in  the  third  part  of  this 
article),  could  not  have  raised  his  mass  at  any  time  to  this  tem- 
perature, unless  his  specific  heat  were  less  than  10,000  times 
that  of  water. 

We  may  therefore  consider  it  as  rendered  highly  probable 
that  the  sun’s  specific  heat  is  more  than  ten  times,  and  less  than 
10,000  times,  that  of  liquid  water.  From  this  it  would  follow 
with  certainty  that  his  temperature  sinks  100°  Cent,  in  some 
time  from  700  years  to  700,000  years. 


Sun’s 

specific  heat 
probably 
between  10 
and  10,000 
times  that 
of  water; 
and  fall  of 
tempera- 
ture 100° 
Cent,  in 
from  700  to 
700,000 
years. 


PART  II. 

ON  THE  SUN’S  PRESENT  TEMPERATURE. 

% 

At  his  surface  the  sun’s  temperature  cannot,  as  we  have 
many  reasons  for  believing,  be  incomparably  higher  than  tem- 
peratures attainable  artificially  in  our  terrestrial  laboratories. 

Among  other  reasons  it  may  be  mentioned  that  the  sun 
radiates  heat,  from  every  square  foot  of  his  surface,  at  only 
about  7,000  horse  power*.  Coal,  burning  at  a rate  of  a little 
less  than  a pound  per  two  seconds,  would  generate  the  same 
amount  \ and  it  is  estimated  (Rankine,  ‘ Prime  Movers,’  p.  285, 
Ed.  1859)  that,  in  the  furnaces  of  locomotive  engines,  coalburns 
at  from  one  pound  in  thirty  seconds  to  one  pound  in  ninety 
seconds,  per  square  foot  of  grate-bars.  Hence  heat  is  radiated 
from  the  sun  at  a rate  not  more  than  from  fifteen  to  forty-five 
times  as  high  as  that  at  which  heat  is  generated  on  the  grate- 
bars  of  a locomotive  furnace,  per  equal  areas. 

peratnre  of  the  whole  sun’s  mass  must  (Part  ii.  below)  be  much  higher  than  the 
“ surface  temperature,”  or  “ effective  radiational  temperature.” — W.  T Nov  9 
1882.] 

* One  horse  power  in  mechanics  is  a technical  expression  (following  Watt’s 
estimate),  used  to  denote  a rate  of  working  in  which  energy  is  evolved  at  the 
rate  of  33,000  foot  pounds  per  minute.  This,  according  to  Joule’s  determination 
of  the  dynamical  value  of  heat,  would,  if  spent  wholly  in  heat,  be  sufficient  to 
raise  the  temperature  of  23£  lbs.  of  water  by  1°  Cent,  per  minute. 

[Note  of  Nov.  11,  1882.  This  is  sixty-seven  times  the  rate  per  unit  of 
radiant  surface  at  which  energy  is  emitted  from  the  incandescent  filament  of 
the  Swan  electric  lamp  when  at  the  temperature  which  gives  about  240  candles 
per  horse  power.] 


Sun’s 
superficial 
tempera- 
ture com- 
parable 
with  what 
may  be 
artificially 
produced. 


402 


Interior 

tempera- 

ture 

probably 
far  higher 


Law  of  tem- 
perature 
probably 
roughly 
that  of  con- 
vective equi- 
librium. 


APPENDIX  E.  [E. 

The  interior  temperature  of  the  uun  is  probably  far  higher  than 
that  at  his  surface,  because  direct  conduction  can  play  no  sensi- 
ble part  in  the  transference  of  heat  between  the  inner  and  outer 
portions  of  his  mass,  and  there  must  in  virtue  of  the  prodigious 
convective  currents  due  to  cooling  of  the  outermost  portions  by 
radiation  into  space,  be  an  approximate  convective  equilibrium 
of  heat  throughout  the  whole,  if  the  whole  is  fluid.  That  is  to 
say,  the  temperatures,  at  different  distances  from  the  centre, 
must  be  approximately  those  which  any  portion  of  the  substance, 
if  carried  from  the  centre  to  the  surface,  would  acquire  by  ex- 
pansion without  loss  or  gain  of  heat. 


Solar  heat 
must  arise 
from  con- 
version of 
kinetic  and 
potential 
energy. 


PART  III. 

ON  THE  ORIGIN  AND  TOTAL  AMOUNT  OF  THE  SUN’S  HEAT. 


The  sim  being,  for  reasons  referred  to  above,  assumed  to  be 
an  incandescent  liquid  now  losing  heat,  the  question  naturally 
occurs,  How  did  this  heat  originate  ? It  is  certain  that  it  can- 
not have  existed  in  the  sun  through  an  infinity  of  past  time, 
since,  as  long  as  it  has  so  existed,  it  must  have  been  suffering 
dissipation,  and  the  finiteness  of  the  sun  precludes  the  supposi- 
tion of  an  infinite  primitive  store  of  heat  in  his  body. 

The  sun  must,  therefore,  either  have  been  created  an  active 
source  of  heat  at  some  time  of  not  immeasurable  antiquity,  by  an 
over-ruling  decree ; or  the  heat  which  he  has  already  radiated 
away,  and  that  which  he  still  possesses,  must  have  been  acquired 
by  a natural  process,  following  permanently  established  laws. 
Without  pronouncing  the  former  supposition  to  be  essentially 
incredible,  we  may  safely  say  that  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  ■ 
improbable,  if  we  can  show  the  latter  to  be  not  contradictory  to 
known  physical  laws.  And  we  do  show  this  and  more,  by 
merely  pointing  to  certain  actions,  going  on  before  us  at  present, 
which,  if  sufficiently  abundant  at  some  past  time,  must  have 
given  the  sun  heat  enough  to  account  for  all  we  know  of  his 
past  radiation  and  present  temperature. 

It  is  not  necessary  at  present  to  enter  at  length  on  details 
regarding  the  meteoric  theory,  which  appears  to  have  been  first 
proposed  in  a definite  form  by  Mayer,  and  afterwards  indepen- 


E.] 


ORIGIN  OF  SOLAR  HEAT. 


493 


dently  by  Waterston;  or  regarding  the  modified  hypothesis  of 
meteoric  vortices,  which  the  writer  of  the  present  article  showed 
to  be  necessary,  in  order  that  the  length  of  the  year,  as  known 
for  the  last  2,000  years,  may  not  have  been  sensibly  disturbed 
by  the  accessions  which  the  sun’s  mass  must  have  had  during 
that  period,  if  the  heat  radiated  away  has  been  always  compen- 
sated by  heat  generated  by  meteoric  influx. 

For  the  reasons  mentioned  in  the  first  part  of  the  present 
article,  we  may  now  believe  that  all  theories  of  complete,  or 
nearly  complete,  contemporaneous  meteoric  compensation,  must 
be  rejected ; but  we  may  still  hold  that — 

“ Meteoric  action . ...  is ... . not  only  'proved  to  exist  as  a 
cause  of  solar  heat , but  it  is  the  only  one  of  all  conceivable  causes 
which  we  know  to  exist  from  independent  evidence*  ” 

The  form  of  meteoric  theory  which  now  seems  most  proba- 
ble, and  which  was  first  discussed  on  true  thermodynamic  prin- 
ciples by  Helmholtz  t,  consists  in  supposing  the  sun  and  his  heat 
to  have  originated  in  a coalition  of  smaller  bodies,  falling  to- 
gether by  mutual  gravitation,  and  generating,  as  they  must  do 
according  to  the  great  law  demonstrated  by  Joule,  an  exact 
equivalent  of  heat  for  the  motion  lost  in  collision. 

That  some  form  of  the  meteoric  theory  is  certainly  the  true 
and  complete  explanation  of  solar  heat  can  scarcely  be  doubted, 
when  the  following  reasons  are  considered  : 

(1)  No  other  natural  explanation,  except  by  chemical  action,  Chemical 

can  be  conceived.  sufficient, 

but  meteo- 

(2)  The  chemical  theory  is  quite  insufficient,  because  the  may  easily 
most  energetic  chemical  action  we  know,  taking  place  between  fo^o'mu6*4 
substances  amounting  to  the  whole  sun’s  mass,  would  only  gene-  hon  years' 
rate  about  3,000  years’  heat;j;. 

(3)  There  is  no  difficulty  in  accounting  for  20,000,000  years’ 
heat  by  the  meteoric  theory. 

* “Mechanical  Energies  of  the  Solar  System,’’  referred  to  above. 

t Popular  lecture  delivered  on  the  7th  February,  1854,  at  Konigsberg,  on  the 
occasion  of  the  Kant  commemoration. 

X “Mechanical  Energies  of  the  Solar  System.” 


494 


APPENDIX  E. 


Only  about 
half  the  heat 
due  to 
energy  of 
matter  con- 
centrating 
in  sun 
available 
for  explain- 
ing solar 
tempe- 
rature. 


The  sun  has 
probably 
not  lighted 
the  earth 
for  100  mil- 
lion years. 


[E. 


It  would  extend  this  article  to  too  great  a length,  and  would 
require  something  of  mathematical  calculation,  to  explain  fully 
the  principles  on  which  this  last  estimate  is  founded.  It  is 
enough  to  say  that  bodies,  all  much  smaller  than  the  sun,  fell, 
ing  together  from  a state  of  relative  rest,  at  mutual  distances  all 
large  in  comparison  with  their  diameters,  and  forming  a globe 
of  uniform  density  equal  in  mass  and  diameter  to  the  sun,  would 
generate  an  amount  of  heat  which,  accurately  calculated  accord- 
ing to  Joule’s  principles  and  experimental  results,  is  found  to  be 
just  20,000,000  times  Pouillet’s  estimate  of  the  annual  amount 
of  solar  radiation.  The  sun’s  density  must,  in  all  probability, 
increase  very  much  towards  his  centre,  and  therefore  a consider- 
ably  greater  amount  of  heat  than  that  must  be  supposed  to  have 
been  generated  if  his  whole  mass  was  formed  by  the  coalition  of 
comparatively  small  bodies.  On  the  other  hand,  we  do  not 
know  how  much  heat  may  have  been  dissipated  by  resistance 
and  minor  impacts  before  the  final  conglomeration ; but  there  is 
leason  to  believe  that  even  the  most  rapid  conglomeration  that 
we  can  conceive  to  have  probably  taken  place  could  only  leave 
the  finished  globe  with  about  half  the  entire  heat  due  to  the 
amount  of  potential  energy  of  mutual  gravitation  exhausted. 
We  may,  therefore,  accept,  as  a lowest  estimate  for  the  sun’s 
initial  heat,  10,000,000  times  a year’s  supply  at  present  rate, 
but  50,000,000  or  100,000,000  as  possible,  in  consequence  of 
the  sun’s  greater  density  in  his  central  parts. 

The  considerations  adduced  above,  in  this  paper,  regarding 
the  sun  s possible  specific  heat,  rate  of  cooling,  and  superficial 
temperature,  render  it  probable  that  he  must  have  been  very 
sensibly  warmer  one  million  years  ago  than  now ; and,  conse- 
quently, that  if  he  has  existed  as  a luminary  for  ten  or  twenty 
million  years,  he  must  have  radiated  away  considerably  more 
than  the  corresponding  number  of  times  the  present  yearly 
amount  of  loss. 


It  seems,  therefore,  on  the  whole  most  probable  that  the  sun 
has  not  illuminated  the  earth  for  100,000,000  years,  and  almost 
certain  that  he  has  not  done  so  for  500,000,000  years.  As  for 
the  future,  we  may  say,  with  equal  certainty,  that  inhabitants 
of  the  earth  cannot  continue  to  enjoy  the  light  and  heat  essential 
to  their  life,  for  many  million  years  longer,  unless  sources  now 
unknown  to  us  are  prepared  in  the  great  storehouse  of  creation. 


F.J 


THE  SIZE  OF  ATOMS. 


495 


(F.) — On  the  Size  of  Atoms*. 

The  idea  of  an  atom  has  been  so  constantly  associated 
with  incredible  assumptions  of  infinite  strength,  absolute 
rigidity,  mystical  actions  at  a distance,  and  indivisibility,  that 
chemists  and  many  other  reasonable  naturalists  of  modern 
times,  losing  all  patience  with  it,  have  dismissed  it  to  the  realms 
of  metaphysics,  and  made  it  smaller  than  “anything  we  can 
conceive.”  But  if  atoms  are  inconceivably  small,  why  are  not 
all  chemical  actions  infinitely  swift  ? Chemistry  is  powerless  to 
deal  with  this  question,  and  many  others  of  paramount  import- 
ance, if  barred  by  the  hardness  of  its  fundamental  assumptions, 
from  contemplating  the  atom  as  a real  portion  of  matter  occupy- 
ing a finite  space,  and  forming  a not  immeasurably  small  consti- 
tuent of  any  palpable  body. 

More  than  thirty  years  ago  naturalists  were  scared  by  a wild 
proposition  of  Cauchy’s,  that  the  familiar  prismatic  colours 
proved  the  “sphere  of  sensible  molecular  action”  in  transparent 
liquids  and  solids  to  be  comparable  with  the  wave-length  of  Meaning  of 
light.  The  thirty  years  which  have  intervened  have  only  con-  molecular 
firmed  that  proposition.  They  have  produced  a large  number  of  act"m 
capable  judges  ; and  it  is  only  incapacity  to  judge  in  dynamical 
questions  that  can  admit  a doubt  of  the  substantial  correctness 
of  Cauchy’s  conclusion.  But  the  “ sphere  of  molecular  action” 
conveys  no  very  clear  idea  to  the  non-mathematical  mind.  The 
idea  which  it  conveys  to  the  mathematical  mind  is,  in  my  opinion, 
irredeemably  false.  For  I have  no  faith  whatever  in  attractions 
and  repulsions  acting  at  a distance  between  centres  of  force 
according  to  various  laws.  What  Cauchy’s  mathematics  really 
proves  is  this:  that  in  palpably  homogeneous  bodies  such  as  Meaning  of 
glass  or  water,  contiguous  portions  are  not  similar  when  their  JeTeity. 
dimensions  are  moderately  small  fractions  of  the  wave-length. 

Thus  in  water  contiguous  cubes,  each  of  one  one-thousandth  of 
a centimetre  breadth  are  sensibly  similar.  But  contiguous  cubes 
of  one  ten-millionth  of  a centimetre  must  be  very  sensibly 
different.  So  in  a solid  mass  of  brickwork,  two  adjacent  lengths 
of  20,000  centimetres  each,  may  contain,  one  of  them  nine 
hundred  and  ninety-nine  bricks  and  two  half  bricks,  and  the 


* Nature,  March  1870. 


496 


APPENDIX  F. 


Contact 
electricity 
of  metals. 


Energy  of 

electric 

attraction 

between 

plates  of 

different 

metals  in 

metallic 

contact. 


[V. 


other  one  thousand  bricks  : thus  two  contiguous  cubes  of  20,000 
centimetres  breadth  may  be  considered  as  sensibly  similar. 
But  two  adjacent  lengths  of  forty  centimetres  each  might 
contain  one  of  them,  one  brick,  and  two  half  bricks,  and 
the  other  two  whole  bricks;  and  contiguous  cubes  of  forty 
centimetres  would  be  very  sensibly  dissimilar.  In  short,  optical 
dynamics  leaves  no  alternative  but  to  admit  that  the  diameter 
of  a molecule,  or  the  distance  from  the  centre  of  a molecule  to 
the  centre  of  a contiguous  molecule  in  glass,  water,  or  any  other 
of  our  transparent  liquids  and  solids,  exceeds  a ten-thousandth 
of  the  wave-length,  or  a twoJiundred- millionth  of  a centimetre. 

By  experiments  on  the  contact  electricity  of  metals  made  in 
the  year'  1862,  and  described  in  a letter  to  Dr  Joule*,  which  was 
published  in  the  proceedings  of  the  Literary  and  Philosophical 
Society  of  Manchester  [Jan.  1862],  I found  that  plates  of  zinc 
and  copper  connected  with  one  another  by  a fine  wire  attract 

one  another,  as  would  similar  pieces  of  one  metal  connected  with 

« 

the  two  plates  of  a galvanic  element,  having  about  three-quarters 
of  the  electro-motive  force  of  a Daniel’s  element. 

Measurements  published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Royal 
Society  for  1860  showed  that  the  attraction  between  parallel 
plates  of  one  metal  held  at  a distance  apart  small  in  comparison 
with  their  diameters,  and  kept  connected  with  such  a galvanic 
element,  would  experience  an  attraction  amounting  to  two  ten- 
thousand-millionths  of  a gramme  weight  per  area  of  the  opposed 
siirfaces  equal  to  the  square  of  the  distance  between  them.  Let 
a plate  of  zinc  and  a plate  of  copper,  each  a centimetre  square 
and  a hundred-thousandth  of  a centimetre  thick,  be  placed  with 
a corner  of  each  touching  a metal  globe  of  a hundred-thousandth 
of  a centimetre  diameter.  Let  the  plates,  kept  thus  in  metallic 
communication  with  one  another  be  at  first  wide  apart,  except 
at  the  corners  touching  the  little  globe,  and  let  them  then  be 
gradually  turned  round  till  they  are  parallel  and  at  a distance  of 
a hundred-thousandth  of  a centimetre  asunder.  In  this  position 
they  will  attract  one  another  with  a force  equal  in  all  to  two 
grammes  weight.  By  abstract  dynamics  and  the  theory  of 
energy,  it  is  readily  proved  that  the  work  done  by  the  changing 
force  of  attraction  during  the  motion  bv  which  we  have  supposed 

* [Now  published  as  Art.  xxii.  in  a “Reprint  of  Papers  on  Electrostatics  and 
Magnetism  ” by  Sir  William  Thomson.  New  edition,  1883. J 


F.] 


the:  size  of  atoms. 


407 


this  position  to  be  reached,  is  equal  to  that  of  a constant  force  of 
two  grammes  weight  acting  through  a space  of  a hundred- 
thousandth  of  a centimetre ; that  is  to  say,  to  two  hundred- 
thousandths  of  a centimetre-gramme.  Now  let  a second  plate 
of  zinc  be  brought  by  a similar  process  to  the  other  side  of  the 
plate  of  copper ■ a second  plate  of  copper  to  the  remote  side  of 
this  second  plate  of  zinc,  and  so  on  till  a pile  is  formed  consisting  Work  done 
of  50,001  plates  of  zinc  and  50,000  plates  of  copper,  separated  iue°ofTnc 
by  100,000  spaces,  each  plate  and  each  space  one  hundred-  p?ate£PPer 
thousandth  of  a centimetre  thick.  The  whole  work  done  by 
electric  attraction  in  the  formation  of  this  pile  is  two  centimetre- 
grammes. 

The  whole  mass  of  metal  is  eight  grammes.  Hence  the 
amount  of  work  is  a quarter  of  a centimetre-gramme  per  gramme 
of  metal.  Now  4,030  centimetre-grammes  of  work,  according 
to  J oule’s  dynamical  equivalent  of  heat,  is  the  amount  required 
to  warm  a gramme  of  zinc  or  copper  by  one  degree  Centigrade. 

Hence  the  work  done  by  the  electric  attraction  could  warm  the 
substance  by  only  of  a degree.  But  now  let  the  thickness  of 
each  piece  of  metal  and  of  each  intervening  space  be  a hundred-  The  heat  of 
millionth  of  a centimetre  instead  of  a hundred  thousandth.  The  PombTa: 
work  would  be  increased  a million-fold  unless  a hundred-millionth  shows tftlt 
of  a centimetre  approaches  the  smallness  of  a molecule  The  mo!ec,u,les 

-I...  * -i"Llc  probably  are 

Heat  equivalent  would  therefore  be  enough  to  raise  the  tempera- 
ture  of  the  material  by  62°.  This  is  barely,  if  at  all,  admissible,  ^,yCr' 
according  to  our  present  knowledge,  or,  rather,  want  of  know-  more  than 
ledge,  regarding  the  heat  of  combination  of  zinc  and  copper,  m diameter. 
But  suppose  the  metal  plates  and  intervening  spaces  to  be  made 
yet  four  times  thinner,  that  is  to  say,  the  thickness  of  each  to 
be  a four  hundred-millionth  of  a centimetre.  The  work  and  its 
heat  equivalent  will  be  increased  sixteen-fold.  It  would  there- 
fore be  990  times  as  much  as  that  required  to  warm  the  mass 
by  10  cent.,  which  is  very  much  more  than  can  possibly  be  pro- 
duced by  zinc  and  copper  in  entering  into  molecular  combination. 

Were  there  in  reality  anything  like  so  much  heat  of  combination 
as  this,  a mixture  of  zinc  and  copper  powders  would,  if  melted 
in  any  one  spot,  run  together,  generating  more  than  heat 
enough  to  melt  each  throughout  j just  as  a large  quantity  of 
gunpowder  if  ignited  in  any  one  spot  burns  throughout  without 
fresh  application  of  heat.  Hence  plates  of  zinc  and  copper  of  a 
VOL.  II.  oo 


498 


APPENDIX  F. 


Work  done 
in  stretch- 
ing fluid 
film  against 
surface 
tension. 


Intrinsic 
energy  of 
a mass  of 
water  esti- 
mated from 
the  heat 
required  to 
prevent  film 
from  cool- 
ing as  it 
extends. 


[F. 


three  hundred-millionth  of  a centimetre  thick,  placed  close 
together  alternately,  form  a near  approximation  to  a chemical 
combination,  if  indeed  such  thin  plates  could  be  made  without 
splitting  atoms. 


The  theory  of  capillary  attraction  shows  that  when  a bubble — 
a soap-bubble  for  instance — is  blown  larger  and  larger,  -work  is 
done  by  the  stretching  of  a film  which  resists  extension  as  if  it 
were  an  elastic  membrane  with  a constant  contractile  force. 
This  contractile  force  is  to  be  reckoned  as  a certain  number  of 
units  of  force  per  unit  of  breadth.  Observation  of  the  ascent  of 
water  in  capillary  tubes  shows  that  the  contractile  force  of  a 
thin  film  of  water  is  about  sixteen  milligrammes  weight  per 
millimetre  of  breadth.  Hence  the  work  done  in  stretching  a 
water  film  to  any  degree  of  thinness,  reckoned  in  millimetre- 
milligrammes,  is  equal  to  sixteen  times  the  number  of  square 
millimetres  by  which  the  area  is  augmented,  provided  the  film 
is  not  made  so  thin  that  there  is  any  sensible  diminution  of  its 
contractile  force.  In  an  article  “ On  the  Thermal  effect  of  draw- 
ing out  a Film  of  Liquid,”  published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the 
Royal  Society  for  April  1858,  I have  proved  from  the  second 
law  of  thermodynamics  that  about  half  as  much  more  energy,  in 
the  shape  of  heat,  must  be  given  to  the  film  to  prevent  it  from 
sinking  in  temperature  while  it  is  being  drawn  out.  Hence  the 
intrinsic  energy  of  a mass  of  water  in  the  shape  of  a film  kept 
at  constant  temperature  increases  by  twenty-four  milligramme- 
millimetres  for  every  square  millimetre  added  to  its  area. 


Suppose  then  a film  to  be  given  with  a thickness  of  a milli- 
metre, and  suppose  its  area  to  be  augmented  ten  thousand 
and  one  fold : the  work  done  per  square  millimetre  of  the 
original  film,  that  is  to  say  per  milligramme  of  the  mass 
would  be  240,000  millimetre-milligrammes.  The  heat  equivalent 
of  this  is  more  than  half  a degree  centigrade  of  elevation  of 
temperature  of  the  substance.  The  thickness  to  which  the  film 
is  reduced  on  this  supposition  is  very  approximately  a ten- 
thousandth  of  millimetre.  The  commonest  observation  on  the 
soap-bubble  (which  in  contractile  force  differs  no  doubt  very 
little  from  pure  water)  shows  that  there  is  no  sensible  diminu- 
tion of  contractile  force  by  reduction  of  the  thickness  to  the  ten- 
thousandth  of  a millimetre ; inasmuch  as  the  thickness  which 


P-] 


THE  SIZE  OF  ATOMS. 


499 


gives  the  first  maximum  brightness  round  the  black  spot  seen 
where  the  bubble  is  thinnest,  is  only  about  an  eight-thousandth 
of  a millimetre. 

The  very  moderate  amount  of  work  shown  in  the  preceding 
estimates  is  quite  consistent  with  this  deduction.  But  suppose 
now  the  film  to  be  farther  stretched  until  its  thickness  is  reduced 
to  a twenty-millionth  of  a millimetre.  The  work  spent  in  doing 
this  is  two-thousand  times  moi'e  than  that  which  we  have  just 
calculated.  The  heat  equivalent  is  1,130  times  the  quantity 
required  to  raise  the  temperature  of  the  liquid  by  one  degree 
centigrade.  This  is  far  more  than  we  can  admit  as  a possible 
amoimt  of  work  done  in  the  extension  of  a liquid  film.  A 
smaller  amount  of  work  spent  on  the  liquid  would  convert  it 
into  vapour  at  ordinary  atmospheric  pressure.  The  conclusion 
is  unavoidable,  that  a water-film  falls  off  greatly  in  its  contrac-  Surface 
tile  force  before  it  is  reduced  to  a thickness  of  a twenty-millionth  Schbeforl 
of  a millimetre.  It  is  scarcely  possible,  upon  any  conceivable  Educed  to 
molecular  theory,  that  there  can  be  any  considerable  falling  off  £nd°there’ 
in  the  contractile  force  as  long  as  there  are  several  molecules  in 
the  thickness.  It  is  therefore  probable  that  there  are  not  several  thickness^ 
molecules  in  a thickness  of  a twenty-millionth  of  a millimetre 
of  water. 


The  kinetic  theory  of  gases  suggested  a hundred  years  ago  Kinetic 
by  Daniel  Bernoulli  has,  during  the  last  quarter  of  a century,  gSly°f 
been  worked  out  by  Herapath,  Joule,  Clausius,  and  Maxwell,  to 
so  great  perfection  that  we  now  find  in  it  satisfactory  explana- 
tions of  all  non-chemical  properties  of  gases.  However  difficult  Meaning  of 
it  may  be  to  even  imagine  what  kind  of  thing  the  molecule  is,  Se$?k 
we  may  regard  it  as  an  established  truth  of  science  that  a gas  2^' 
consists  of  moving  molecules  disturbed  from  rectilinear  paths 
and  constant  velocities  by  collisions  or  mutual  influences,  so 
rare  that  the  mean  length  of  nearly  rectilinear  portions  of 
the  path  of  each  molecule  is  many  times  greater  than  the 
average  distance  from  the  centre  of  each  molecule  to  the  centre 
of  the  molecule  nearest  it  at  any  time.  If,  for  a moment,  we 
suppose  the  molecules  to  be  hard  elastic  globes  all  of  one  size, 
influencing  one  another  only  through  actual  contact,  we  have 
for  each  molecule  simply  a zigzag  path  composed  of  rectilinear  Average 
portions,  with  abrupt  changes  of  direction.  On  this  supposition  f^epau! 

Clausius  proves,  by  a simple  application  of  the  calculus  of  nro  ®st^>ated 

t w by  Clausius. 


32 — 2 


500 


APPENDIX  F. 


[F 


Kinetic 
theory  of 
gases. 
Meaning  of 
molecule, 
free  path 
and  colli- 
sion. 


babilities,  that  the  average  length  of  the  free  path  of  a particle 
from  collision  to  collision  bears  to  the  diameter  of  each  globe, 
the  ratio  of  the  whole  space  in  which  the  globes  move,  to  eight 
times  the  sum  of  the  volumes  of  the  globes.  It  follows  that 
the  number  of  the  globes  in  unit  volume  is  equal  to  the  square 
of  this  ratio  divided  by  the  volume  of  a sphere  whose  radius 
is  equal  to  that  average  length  of  free  path.  But  we  cannot 
believe  that  the  individual  molecules  of  gases  in  general,  or  even 
of  any  one  gas,  are  hard  elastic  globes.  Any  two  of  the  moving 
particles  or  molecules  must  act  upon  one  another  somehow,  so 
that  when  they  pass  very  near  one  another  they  shall  produce 
considerable  deflexion  of  the  path  and  change  in  the  velocity  of 
each.  This  mutual  action  (called  force)  is  different  at  different 
distances,  and  must  vary,  according  to  variations  of  the  distance 
so  as  to  fulfil  some  definite  law.  If  the  particles  were  hard 
elastic  globes  acting  upon  one  another  only  by  contact,  the  law 
of  force  would  be — zero  force  when  the  distance  from  centre  to 
centre  exceeds  the  sum  of  the  radii,  and  infinite  repulsion  for 
any  distance  less  than  the  sum  of  the  radii.  This  hypothesis, 
with  its  “ hard  and  fast”  demarcation  between  no  force  and  in- 
finite force,  seems  to  require  mitigation.  Without  entering  on 
the  theory  of  vortex  atoms  at  present,  I may  at  least  say  that 
soft  elastic  solids,  not  necessarily  globular,  are  more  promising 
than  infinitely  hard  elastic  globes.  And,  happily,  we  are  not 
left  merely  to  our  fancy  as  to  what  we  are  to  accept  as  piobable 
in  respect  to  the  law  of  force.  If  the  particles  were  hard  elastic 
globes  the  average  time  from  collision  to  collision  would  be  in- 
versely as  the  average  velocity  of  the  particles.  But  Maxwell’s 
experiments  on  the  variation  of  the  viscosities  of  gases  with 
change  of  temperature  prove  that  the  mean  time  from  collision 
to  collision  is  independent  of  the  velocity  if  we  give  the  name 
collision  to  those  mutual  actions  only  which  produce  something 
more  than  a certain  specified  degree  of  deflection  of  the  line  of 
motion.  This  law  could  be  fulfilled  by  soft  elastic  particles 
(globular  or  not  globular);  but,  as  we  have  seen,  not  by  hard 
elastic  globes.  Such  details,  however,  are  beyond  the  scope  of 
our  present  argument.  What  we  want  now  is  rough  approxi- 
mations to  absolute  values,  whether  of  time  or  space  or  mass— 
not  delicate  differential  results.  From  Joule,  Maxwell,  and 
Clausius  we  know  that  the  average  velocity  of  the  molecules  of 


F.] 


THE  SIZE  OF  ATOMS. 


501 


oxygen  or  nitrogen  or  common  air,  at  ordinary  atmospheric  Kinetic 
temperature  and  pressure,  is  about  50,000  centimetres  per^”Jyof 
second,  and  the  average  time  from  collision  to  collision  a five- 
thousand-millionth  of  a second.  Hence  the  average  length  of  Average 
path  of  each  molecule  between  collisions  is  about  T7r^0  0 of  a io-*cm.h 
centimetre.  Now,  having  left  the  idea  of  hard  globes,  according 
to  which  the  dimensions  of  a molecule  and  the  distinction 
between  collision  and  no  collision  are  perfectly  sharp,  some- 
thing of  circumlocution  must  take  the  place  of  these  simple 
terms. 

First,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  two  molecules  in  collision  will  Meaning  of 
exercise  a mutual  repulsion  in  virtue  of  which  the  distance  anddT- 
between  their  centres,  after  being  diminished  to  a minimum,  molecule, 
will  begin  to  increase  as  the  molecules  leave  one  another.  This 
minimum  distance  would  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  radii,  if  the 
molecules  were  infinitely  hard  elastic  spheres  ; but  in  reality  we 
must  suppose  it  to  be  very  different  in  different  collisions. 
Considering  only  the  case  of  equal  molecules,  we  might,  then, 
define  the  radius  of  a molecule  as  half  the  average  shortest 
distance  reached  in  a vast  number  of  collisions.  The  definition 
I adopt  for  the  present  is  not  precisely  this,  but  is  chosen  so  as 
to  make  as  simple  as  possible  the  statement  I have  to  make  of  a 
combination  of  the  results  of  Clausius  and  Maxwell.  Having 
defined  the  radius  of  a gaseous  molecule,  I call  the  double  of 
the  radius  the  diameter ; and  the  volume  of  a globe  of  the  same 
radius  or  diameter  I call  the  volume  of  the  molecule. 

The  experiments  of  Cagniard  de  la  Tour,  Faraday,  Regnault, 
and  Andrews,  on  the  condensation  of  gases  do  not  allow  us  to 
believe  that  any  of  the  ordinary  gases  could  be  made  forty  thou- 
sand times  denser  than  at  ordinary  atmosphere  pressure  and 
temperature,  without  reducing  the  whole  volume  to  something 
less  than  the  sum  of  the  volume  of  the  gaseous  molecules,  as  now 
defined.  Hence,  according  to  the  grand  theorem  of  Clausius  Free  path 
quoted  above,  the  average  length  of  path  from  collision  to  more  than 
collision  cannot  be  more  than  five  thousand  times  the  diameter  d^ameterof 
of  the  gaseous  molecule ; and  the  number  of  molecules  in  unit  raolecule: 
of  volume  cannot  exceed  25,000,000  divided  by  the  volume  of  a 
globe  whose  radius  is  that  average  length  of  path.  Taking  now 
the  preceding  estimate,  y 77 777575-75-  of  a centimetre,  for  the  average 
length  of  path  from  collision  to  collision  we  conclude  that  the 


502 


APPENDIX  F. 


and  dia- 
meter 
cannot  be 
less  than 
2xl0_9cm, 


Average 
distance 
from  centre 
to  centre  of 
molecules 
insolidsand 
liquids 
between 
7xi0-9  and 
2xl0-9  cm. 


Illustration 
of  size  of 
molecules. 


[F. 


diameter  of  the  gaseous  molecule  cannot  be  less  than  . 0 0 0 ’ 0 - ■ 
of  a centimetre ; nor  the  number  of  molecules  in  a cubic  centi- 
metre of  the  gas  (at  ordinary  density)  greater  than  6 x 1021  (or 
six  thousand  million  million  million). 

The  densities  of  known  liquids  and  sdlids  are  from  five 
hundred  to  sixteen  thousand  times  that  of  atmospheric  air 
at  ordinary  pressure  and  temperature ; and,  therefore,  the 
number  of  molecules  in  a cubic  centimetre  may  be  from  3 x 1024 
to  1026  (that  is,  from  three  million  million  million  million  to  a 
hundred  million  million  million  million).  From  this  (if  we 
assume  for  a moment  a cubic  arrangement  of  molecules),  the 
distance  from  centre  to  nearest  centre  in  solids  and  liquids  may 

be  estimated  at  from  140,000,000  46 0,00 0,000  a centi- 

metre. 


The  four  lines  of  argument  which  I have  now  indicated, 
lead  all  to  substantially  the  same  estimate  of  the  dimensions  of 
molecular  structure.  Jointly  they  establish  with  what  we  can- 
not but  regard  as  a very  high  degree  of  probability  the  conclu- 
sion that,  in  any  ordinary  liquid,  transparent  solid,  or  seemingly 
opaque  solid,  the  mean  distance  between  the  centres  of  contigu- 
ous molecules  is  less  than  the  hundred-millionth,  and  greater 
than  the  two  thousand-millionth  of  a centimetre*. 

To  form  some  conception  of  the  degree  of  coarse-grainedness 
indicated  by  this  conclusion,  imagine  a rain  drop,  or  a globe  of 
glass  as  large  as  a pea,  to  be  magnified  up  to  the  size  of  the 
earth,  each  constituent  molecule  being  magnified  in  the  same 
proportion.  The  magnified  structure  would  be  more  coarse 
grained  than  a heap  of  small  shot,  but  probably  less  coarse 
grained  than  a heap  of  cricket-balls. 


* M.  Lippmann  has  arrived  at  a very  similar  estimate  of  the  average  distance 
of  molecules  from  one  another  by  an  entirely  different  consideration.  See  a 
paper  read  before  the  French  Academy  Oct.  16,  1882. 


TIDAL  FRICTION. 


503 


G,  a,] 


(G.) — On  Tidal  Friction,  by  G.  H.  Darwin,  F.RS. 

(a.)  The  retardation  of  the  earth's  rotation,  as  deduced  from 

the  secular  acceleration  of  the  Moon’s  mean  motion. 

Iu  my  paper  on  the  precession  of  a viscous  spheroid  [Phil. 
Trans.  Pt.  II.,  1879],  all  the  data  are  giveivwhich  are  requisite 
for  making  the  calculations  for  Professor  Adams’  result  in  § 830, 
viz.  : that  if  there  is  an  unexplained  part  in  the  coefficient  of 
the  secular  acceleration  of  the  moon’s  mean  motion  amounting 
to  6",  and  if  this  be  due  to  tidal  friction,  then  in  a century  the 
earth  gets  22  seconds  behind  time,  when  compared  with  an 
ideal  clock,  going  perfectly  for  a century,  and  perfectly  rated  at 
the  beginning  of  the  century.  In  the  paper  referred  to  however 
the  earth  is  treated  as  homogeneous,  and  the  tides  are  supposed 
to  consist  in  a bodily  deformation  of  the  mass.  The  numerical 
results  there  given  require  some  modification  on  this  account. 

If  E,  E' , E"  be  the  heights  of  the  semidiurnal,  diurnal  and 
fortnightly  tides,  expressed  as  fractions  of  the  equilibrium  tides 
of  the  same  denominations  ; and  if  e,  e',  e"  be  the  corresponding 
retardations  of  phase  of  these  tides  due  to  friction ; it  is  shown 
on  p.  47 6 and  in  equation  (48),  that  in  consequence  of  lunar  and 
solar  tides,  at  the  end  of  a century,  the  earth,  as  a time-keeper, 
is  behind  the  time  indicated  by  the  ideal  perfect  clock 

1900'27  E sin  2e  + 423'49  Er  sine7  seconds  of  time (a), 

and  that  if  the  motion  of  the  moon  were  unaffected  by  the 
tides,  an  observer,  taking  the  earth  as  his  clock,  would  note  that 
at  the  end  of  the  century  the  moon  was  in  advance  of  her  place 
in  her  orbit  by 

1043,'-28  E sin  2e  + 232"*50  E'  sin  e' ( b ). 

This  is  of  course  merely  the  expression  of  the  same  fact  as  (a),  in 
a different  form. 

Lastly  it  is  shown  in  equation  (60)  that  from  these  causes  in  a 
century,  the  moon  actually  lags  behind  her  place 

630"-7  E sin  2e  + 108"-6  E'  sin  e'  - 7"'042  E"  sin  2e" (c). 

In  adapting  these  results  to  the  hypothesis  of  oceanic  tides  on  a 
heterogeneous  earth,  we  observe  in  the  first  place  that,  if  the 


Retardation 
of  earth's 
rotation. 
Numerical 
estimates. 


504 


APPENDIX  G. 


Retardation 
of  earth’s 
rotation. 


[G,  a. 


fluid  tides  are  inverted,  that  is  to  say  if  for  example  it  is  low 
water  under  the  moon,  then  friction  advances  the  fluid  tides*, 
and  therefore  in  that  case  the  e’s  are  to  be  interpreted  as 
advancements  of  phase;  and  secondly  that  the  E’s  are  to  be 
multiplied  by  T2T,  which  is  the  ratio  of  the  density  of  water 
to  the  mean  density  of  the  earth.  Next  the  earth’s  moment  of 
inertia  (as  we  learn  from  col.  vii.  of  the  table  in  § 824)  is  about 
'83  of  its  amount  on  the  hypothesis  of  homogeneity,  and  there- 
fore the  results  (a)  and  (6)  have  both  to  be  multiplied  by  1/-83 
or  1 -2;  the  result  (c)  remains  unaffected  except  as  to  the  factor  T2T. 

Thus  subtracting  (c)  from  ( b ) as  amended,  we  find  that  to  an 
observer,  taking  the  earth  as  a true  time-keeper,  the  moon  is,  at 
the  end  of  the  century,  in  advance  of  her  place  by 

t2t{(1-2  x 1043" -28  - 630"-7)  E sin  2e 

+ (1  -2  x 232"-50  - 108" -6)  E'  sin  e'  + 7" '042  E"  sin  2e"}, 
which  is  equal  to 

t2t  {621,/'24  if  sin  2e  + 170"-40  E'  sin  e'  + 7"'04  E"  sin 

and  from  (a)  as  amended  that  the  earth,  as  a time-keeper,  is 
behind  the  time  indicated  by  the  ideal  clock,  perfectly  rated  at 
the  beginning  of  the  century,  by 

jy  {2280'32  jE’sin  2e  + 508T9  i^'sin  e'}  seconds  of  time (e). 

Now  if  we  suppose  that  the  tides  have  their  equilibrium  height, 
so  that  the  E’s  are  each  unity ; and  that  e'  is  one  half  of  e (which 
must  roughly  correspond  to  the  state  of  the  case),  and  that  e"  is 


insensible,  and  e small,  (d)  becomes 

t4t  {621,,-24  + 1 x 170" -40}  e (/) 

and  (e)  becomes 

t4t  {2280'32  + \ x 508 T9}  e seconds  of  time  (g). 

If  (f)  were  equal  to  1",  then  ( g ) would  clearly  be 


2280*32  + £ x 508-19 
.621-24  + £ x 170-40 


seconds  of  time 


(h). 


The  second  term,  both  in  the  numerator  and  denominator  of  ( h ), 
depends  on  the  diurnal  tide,  which  only  exists  when  the  ecliptic 


* That  this  is  true  may  be  seen  from  considerations  of  energy.  If  it  were 
approximately  low  water  under  the  moon,  the  earth’s  rotation  would  be  acce- 
lerated by  tidal  friction,  if  the  tides  of  short  period  lagged;  and  this  would 
violate  the  principles  of  energy. 


TIDAL  FRICTION. 


505 


G,  or,] 


is  oblique.  Now  Adams’  result  was  obtained  on  the  hypothesis  Adams 
that  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  was  nil,  therefore  according  to  rLSuU' 
his  assumption,  1"  in  the  coefficient  of  lunar  acceleration  means 
that  the  earth,  as  compared  with  a perfect  clock  rated  at  the 
beginning  of  the  century,  is  behind  time 

= 3-1  seconds  at  the  end  of  a century. 

621-24  a J 


Accordingly  6"  in  the  coefficient  gives  22  secs,  at  the  end  of  a 
century,  which  is  his  result  given  in  § 830.  If  however  we 
include  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  and  the  diurnal  tide,  we 
find  that  l"  in  the  coefficient  means  that  the  earth,  as  compared 
with  the  perfect  clock,  is  behind  time 


2407-37 

663-80 


= 3-6274  seconds  at  the  end  of  a century. 


Thus  taking  Hansen’s  12"-56  with  Delaunay’s  6"-l,  we  have  the  other 
earth  behind  6-46  x 3-6274  = 23‘4  sec.,  and  taking  Newcomb’s  1LSUlts 
8" -4  with  Delaunay’s  6"*1,  we  have  the  earth  behind  2-3  x 3-6274 
= 8 -3  sec. 


It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  this  result  would  be  only  very 
slightly  vitiated  by  the  incorrectness  of  the  hypothesis  made 
above  as  to  the  values  of  the  E’ s and  e’s ; for  E sin  2e  occurs 
in  the  important  term  both  in  the  numerator  and  denominator 
of  the  result  for  the  earth’s  defect  as  a time-keeper,  and  thus 
the  hypothesis  only  enters  in  determining  the  part  played  by 
the  diurnal  tide.  Hence  the  result  is  not  sensibly  affected  by 
some  inexactness  in  this  hypothesis,  nor  by  the  fact  that  the 
oceans  in  x-eality  only  cover  a portion  of  the  earth’s  surface. 


( b .)  The  Determination  of  the  Secular  Effects  of  Tidal  Fric- 
tion by  a Graphical  Method.  (Portion  of  a paper  published 
in  the  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  No.  197,  1879,  but  with  alterations 
and  additions.) 

Suppose  an  attractive  particle  or  satellite  of  mass  m to  be  General 
moving  in  a circular  orbit,  with  an  angular  velocity  Q,  round  a tidal em  °f 
planet  of  mass  M,  and  suppose  the  planet  to  be  rotating  about  an  fllct10" 
axis  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  orbit,  with  an  angular 
velocity  n ; suppose,  also,  the  mass  of  the  planet  to  be  partially 
or  wholly  imperfectly  elastic  or  viscous,  or  that  there  are  oceans 


506 


APPENDIX  G. 


Special 

units. 


[G,  b. 


on  the  surface  of  the  planet ; then  the  attraction  of  the  satellite 
must  produce  a relative  motion  in  the  parts  of  the  planet,  and 
that  motion  must  be  subject  to  friction,  or,  in  other  words,  there 
must  be  frictional  tides  of  some  sort  or  other.  The  system  must 
accordingly  be  losing  energy  by  friction,  and  its  configuration 
must  change  in  such  a way  that  its  whole  energy  diminishes. 

Such  a system  does  not  differ  much  from  those  of  actual 
planets  and  satellites,  and,  therefore,  the  results  deduced  in  this 
hypothetical  case  must  agree  pretty  closely  with  the  actual  course 
of  evolution,  provided  that  time  enough  has  been  and  will  be 
given  for  such  changes. 

Let  C be  the  moment  of  inertia  of  the  planet  about  its  axis  of 
rotation ; 

r the  distance  of  the  satellite  from  the  centre  of  the  planet; 
h the  resultant  moment  of  momentum  of  the  whole  system ; 
e the  whole  energy,  both  kinetic  and  potential  of  the  system. 

It  will  be  supposed  that  the  figure  of  the  planet  and  the  dis- 
tribution of  its  internal  density  are  such  that  the  attraction  of 
the  satellite  causes  no  couple  about  any  axis  perpendicular  to 
that  of  rotation. 


I shall  now  adopt  a special  system  of  units  of  mass,  length, 
and  time  such  that  the  analytical  results  are  reduced  to  their 
simplest  forms. 

Let  the  unit  of  mass  be  Mm/{M  + to). 

Let  the  unit  of  length  y be  such  a distance,  that  the  moment 
of  inertia  of  the  planet  about  its  axis  of  rotation  may  be  equal  to 
the  moment  of  inertia  of  the  planet  and  satellite,  treated  as  par- 
ticles, about  their  centre  of  inertia,  when  distant  y apart  from 
one  another.  This  condition  gives 


whence 


= C 


Let  the  unit  of  time  t be  the  time  in  which  the  satellite  revolves 
through  570,3  about  the  planet,  when  the  satellite’s  radius  vector 
is  equal  to  y.  In  this  case  1/r  is  the  satellite’s  orbital  angular 


TIDAL  FRICTION. 


507 


G,  b.] 


velocity,  and  by  the  law  of  periodic  times  we  have 

t~ 3 y3  = /x  ( M + m) 

where  fx  is  the  attraction  between  unit  masses  at  unit  distance. 
Then  by  substitution  for  y 

fx2(. Mmf  ) ■ 

This  system  of  units  will  be  found  to  make  the  three  following 
functions  each  equal  to  unity,  viz.  /x-Mm  (M  + m)~ fxMm , and  C. 
The  units  are  in  fact  derived  from-  the  consideration  that  these 
functions  are  each  to  be  unity. 

In  the  case  of  the  earth  and  moon,  if  we  take  the  moon’s  mass 
as  y-Vnd  of  the  earth’s,  and  the  earth’s  moment  of  inertia  as 
•jy  Mar  [see  § 824],  it  may  easily  be  shown  that  the  unit  of  mass 
is  -gJg-  of  the  earth’s  mass,  the  unit  of  length  is  5'26  earth’s  radii 
or  33,506  kilometres,  and  the  unit  of  time  is  2 hrs.  41  minutes. 
In  these  units  the  present  angular  velocity  of  the  earth’s 
diurnal  rotation  is  expressed  by  *7044,  and  the  moon’s  present 
radius  vector  by  1T454. 

The  two  bodies  being  supposed  to  revolve  in  circles  about 
their  common  centre  of  inertia  with  an  angular  velocity  O,  the 
moment  of  momentum  of  orbital  motion  is 


Numerical 
values  of 
the  units  for 
earth  and 
moon. 


Moment  of 
momentum 
and  energy 
of  system. 


M 


mr 


n ( Mr 
12  + m ( -Y7- — 

\M + 


O 


Mm 


r2a 


\M  + m)  \M  + mj  M + m 

Then,  by  the  law  of  periodic  times,  in  a circular  orbit, 

OV3  = fx  {M  + to) 
whence  fir2  = ^(i¥+m)-r-. 

And  the  moment  of  momentum  of  orbital  motion 

= /x2  Mm  (. M + m)-2  r-, 
and  in  the  special  units  this  is  equal  to  r-. 

The  moment  of  momentum  of  the  planet’s  rotation  is  Cn,  and 
0 = 1,  in  the  special  units. 

Therefore  h=n  + r ^ ( 1 ). 

Again,  the  kinetic  energy  of  orbital  motion  is 


Q2  + °2  = ^ 

\M  + mj  “ \M  + mj  1 M + m 2 


fxMm 


508 


APPENDIX  G. 


Moment  of 
momentum 
and  energy 
of  system. 


Two  con- 
figurations 
of  maxi- 
mum and 
minimum 
energy 
for  given 
momentum, 
determined 
by  quartic 
equation, 


[G,  b. 


The  kinetic  energy  of  the  planet’s  rotation  is  \Cn\ 

The  potential  energy  of  the  system  is  - yMm/r. 

Adding  the  three  energies  together,  and  transforming  into  the 
special  units,  we  have 


2e  = n2  - - 
r 


(2). 


Since  the  moon’s  present  radius  vector  is  11-454,  it  follows 
that  the  orbital  momentum  of  the  moon  is  3-384.  Adding  to 
this  the  rotational  momentum  of  the  earth  which  is  -704,  we 
obtain  4 "08 8 for  the  total  moment  of  momentum  of  the  moon 
and  earth.  The  ratio  of  the  orbital  to  the  rotational  momentum 
is  4 "80,  so  that  the  total  moment  of  momentum  of  the  system 
would,  but  for  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  be  5-80  times  that 
of  the  earth’s  rotation.  In  § 276,  where  the  obliquity  is  taken 
into  consideration,  the  number  is  given  as  5-38. 

Now  let  x = r^,  y = n,  Y = 2e. 

' 

It  will  be  noticed  that  x,  the  moment  of  momentum  of  orbital 
motion,  is  equal  to  the  square  root  of  the  satellite’s  distance  from 


the  planet. 

Then  the  equations  (1)  and  (2)  become 

h = y + x (3). 

Y=,/-±  = (h-xy-± (4). 


(3)  is  the  equation  of  conservation  of  moment  of  momentum,  or 
shortly,  the  equation  of  momentum ; (4)  is  the  equation  of  energy. 

Now,  consider  a system  started  with  given  positive  (or  say 
clockwise*)  moment  of  momentum  h ; we  have  all  sorts  of  ways 
in  which  it  may  be  started.  If  the  two  rotations  be  of  opposite 
kinds,  it  is  clear  that  we  may  start  the  system  with  any  amount 
of  energy  however  great,  but  the  time  maxima  and  minima  of 
energy  compatible  with  the  given  moment  of  momentum  are 
given  by  dY /dx  = 0, 

or  x — h + - 5 = 0, 

oc 

that  is  to  say,  x*  - hxa  +1  = 0 (5). 

* This  is  contrary  to  the  ordinary  convention,  hut  I leave  this  passage  as  it 
stood  originally. 


G,  6.]  TIDAL  FRICTION.  500 

I We  shall  presently  see  that  this  quartic  has  either  two  real 

roots  and  two  imaginary,  or  all  imaginary  roots*. 

This  quartic  may  be  derived  from  quite  a different  con- 
sideration, viz.,  by  finding  the  condition  under  which  the 
satellite  may  move  round  the  planet,  so  that  the  planet  shall 
always  show  the  same  face  to  the  satellite,  in  fact,  so  that  they 
move  as  parts  of  one  rigid  body. 

The  condition  is  simply  that  the  satellite’s  orbital  angular 
velocity  O = n the  planet’s  angular  velocity  of  rotation ; or  since 

n-y  and  r'~  = = x,  therefore  y = 1 /a?3. 

By  substituting  this  value  of  y in  the  equation  of  momentum 
(3),  we  get  as  before 

x*-hx8  + 1=0  (5). 

In  my  paper  on  the  “Precession  of  a Viscous  Spheroid f,”  I 
obtained  the  quartic  equation  from  this  last  point  of  view 
only,  and  considered  analytically  and  numerically  its  bearings 
on  the  history  of  the  earth. 

Sir  William  Thomson,  having  read  the  paper,  told  me  that  he 
thought  that  much  light  might  be  thrown  on  the  general  physical 
meaning  of  the  equation,  by  a comparison  of  the  equation  of 
conservation  of  moment  of  momentum  with  the  energy  of  the 
system  for  various  configurations,  and  he  suggested  the  appro- 
priateness of  geometrical  illustration  for  the  purpose  of  this 
comparison.  The  method  which  is  worked  out  below  is  the 
result  of  the  suggestions  given  me  by  him  in  conversation. 

The  simplicity  with  which  complicated  mechanical  interactions 
may  be  thus  traced  out  geometrically  to  their  results  appears 
truly  remarkable. 

At  present  we  have  only  obtained  one  result,  viz. : that  if  with 
given  moment  of  momentum  it  is  possible  to  set  the  satellite  and 
planet  moving  as  a rigid  body,  then  it  is  possible  to  do  so  in  two 
ways,  and  one  of  these  ways  requires  a maximum  amount  of 
energy  and  the  other  a minimum ; from  which  it  is  clear  that 
one  must  be  a rapid  rotation  with  the  satellite  near  the  planet, 
and  the  other  a slow  one  with  the  satellite  remote  from  the 
planet. 

* I have  elsewhere  shown  that  when  it  has  real  roots,  one  is  greater  and  the 
other  less  than  £ h.  Proc.  Roy.  Soe.  No.  202,  1880. 
t Trans . Roy.  Soc.  Part  i.  1879. 


In  these 
configura- 
tions the 
satellite 
moves  as 
though 
rigidly 
connected 
with  the 
planet. 


510 


APPENDIX  G. 


In  these 
configura- 
tions the 
satellite 
moves  as 
though 
rigidly 
connected 
with  the 
planet. 


Graphical 

solution. 


[G,6. 


Now,  consider  the  three  equations, 

h = y + x 


Y—(Jb  - x)~  — 


1 


x~ 


(6), 

(7), 


x*y  = 1 (8). 

(C)  is  the  equation  of  momentum  ; (7)  that.of  energy;  and  (8) 
we  may  call  the  equation  of  rigidity,  since  it  indicates  'that  the 
two  bodies  move  as  though  parts  of  one  rigid  body. 

Now,  if  we  wish  to  illustrate  these  equations  geometrically, 
we  may  take  as  abscissa  x,  which  is  the  moment  of  momentum 
of  orbital  motion ; so  that  the  axis  of  x may  be  called  the  axis 
of  orbital  momentum.  Also,  for  equations  (6)  and  (8)  we  may 
take  as  ordinate  y , which  is  the  moment  of  momentum  of  the 
planet  s rotation ; so  that  the  axis  of  y may  be  called  the  axis 
of  rotational  momentum.  For  (7)  we  may  take  as  ordinate  Y, 
which  is  twice  the  energy  of  the  system;  so  that  the  axis 
of  Y may  be  called  the  axis  of  energy.  Then,  as  it  will  be 
convenient  to  exhibit  all  three  curves  in  the  same  figure,  -with 
a parallel  axis  of  x,  we  must  have  the  axis  of  energy  identical 
with  that  of  rotational  momentum. 


It  will  not  be  necessary  to  consider  the  case  where  the 
resultant  moment  of  momentum  h is  negative,  because  this 
would  only  be  equivalent  to  reversing  all  the  rotations;  thus 
h is  to  be  taken  as  essentially  positive. 

Then  the  line  of  momentum,  whose  equation  is  (6),  is  a 
straight  line  inclined  at  45°  to  either  axis,  having  positive  inter- 
cepts on  both  axes. 

The  curve  of  rigidity,  whose,  equation  is  (8),  is  clearly  of 
the  same  nature  as  a rectangular  hyperbola,  but  having  a 
much  more  rapid  rate  of  approach  to  the  axis  of  orbital  mo- 
mentum than  to  that  of  rotational  momentum. 


The  intersections  (if  any)  of  the  curve  of  rigidity  with  the 
line  of  momentum  have  abscissae  which  are  the  two  roots 
of  the  quartic  tc4  — hxs  +1  = 0.  The  quartic  has,  therefore, 
two  real  roots  or  all  imaginary  roots.  Then,  since  x — Jr, 
the  intersection  which  is  more  remote  from  the  origin,  indicates 
a configuration  where  the  satellite  is  remote  from  the  plauet; 
the  other  gives  the  configuration  where  the  satellite  is  closer 


TIDAL  FRICTION. 


511 


G,  6.] 

to  the  planet.  We  have  already  learnt  that  these  two  cor- 
respond respectively  to  minimum  and  maximum  energy. 

When  x is  very  large,  the  equation  to  the  curve  of  energy 
is  Y=  (h-  x)2,  which  is  the  equation  to  a parabola,  with  a 
vertical  axis  parallel  to  Y and  distant  h from  the  origin,  so 
that  the  axis  of  the  parabola  passes  through  the  intersection 
of  the  line  of  momentum  with  the  axis  of  orbital  momentum. 

When  x is  very  small  the  equation  becomes  Y ~ - 1/ar. 


Fig.  1. 


Hence,  the  axis  of  Y is  asymptotic  on  both  sides  to  the  curve 
of  energy. 

Then,  if  the  line  of  momentum  intersects  the  curve  of 
rigidity,  the  curve  of  energy  has  a maximum  vertically  under- 
neath the  point  of  intersection  nearer  the  origin,  and  a minimum 
underneath  the  point  more  remote.  But  if  there  are  no  inter- 
sections, it  has  no  maximum  or  minimum. 

It  is  not  easy  to  exhibit  these  curves  well  if  they  are  drawn 
to  scale,  without  making  a figure  larger  than  it  would  be 


Graphical 

solution. 


TIDAL  FRICTION. 


G,  b.  J 


513 


convenient  to  print,  and  accordingly  fig.  1 gives  them  as  drawn  Graphical 
with  the  free  hand.  As  the  zero  of  energy  is  quite  arbitrary,  Bolution' 
the  origin  for  the  energy  curve  is  displaced  downwards,  and 
this  prevents  the  two  curves  from  crossing  one  ahother  in 
a confusing  manner.  The  same  remark  applies  also  to  fms 
2 and  3. 


Fig.  1 is  erroneous  principally  in  that  the  curve  of  rigidity 
ought  to  approach  its  horizontal  asymptote  much  more  rapidly, 
so  that  it  would  be  difficult  in  a drawing  to  scale  to  distinguish 
the  points  of  intersection  B and  D. 

Fig.  2 exhibits  the  same  curves,  but  drawn  to  scale,  and 
designed  to  be  applicable  to  the  case  of  the  earth  and  moon, 
that  is  to  say,  when  h = 4 nearly. 


i*ig.  3 shows  the  curves  when  h—  1,  and  when  the  line  of 
momentum  does  not  intersect  the  curve  of  rigidity ; and  here 
there  is  no  maximum  or  minimum  in  the  curve  of  energy. 

These  figures  exhibit  all  the  possible  methods  in  which  the 
bodies  may  move  with  given  moment  of  momentum,  and  they 
differ  in  the  fact  that  in  figs.  1 aud  2 the  quartic  (5)  has 
real  roots,  but  in  the  case  of  fig.  3 this  is  not  so.  Every  point 
°f  the  line  of  momentum  gives  by  its  abscissa  and  ordinate 
the  square  root  of  the  satellite’s  distance  and  the  rotation  of 
VOL.  II. 


514 


APPENDIX  G. 


[G,  b. 


Graphical 

solution. 


Critical 
value  of 
moment  of 
momentum. 


the  planet,  and  the  ordinate  of  the  energy  curve  gives  the 
energy  corresponding  to  each  distance  of  the  satellite. 

Parts  of  these  figures  have  no  physical  meaning,  for  it  is 
impossible  for  the  satellite  to  move  round  the  planet  at  a 
distance  which  is  less  than  the  sum  of  the  radii  of  the  planet 
and  satellite.  Accordingly  in  fig.  1 a strip  is  marked  off  and 
shaded  on  each  side  of  the  vertical  axis,  within  which  the  figure 
has  no  physical  meaning. 

Since  the  moon’s  diameter  is  about  2,200  miles,  and  the 
earth’s  about  8,000,  therefore  the  moon’s  distance  cannot  be 
less  than  5,100  miles;  and  in  fig.  2,  which  is  intended  to  apply 
to  the  earth  and  moon  and  is  drawn  to  scale,  the  base  of  the 
strip  is  only  shaded,  so  as  not  to  render  the  figure  confused. 

The  point  P in  fig.  2 indicates  the  present  configuration  of 
the  earth  and  moon. 

The  curve  of  rigidity  x3y  — 1 is  the  same  fur  all  values  of 
h,  and  by  moving  the  line  of  momentum  parallel  to  itself  neai’er 
or  further  from  the  origin,  we  may  represent  all  possible 
moments  of  momentum  of  the  whole  system. 

The  smallest  amount  of  moment  of  momentum  with  which  it 
is  possible  to  set  the  system  moving  a.s  a rigid  body,  with  cen- 
trifugal force  enough  to  balance  the  mutual  attraction  is  when 
the  line  of  momentum  touches  the  curve  of  rigidity.  The  con- 
dition for  this  is  clearly  that  the  equation  x 4 - hx3  +1=0 
should  have  equal  roots.  If  it  has  equal  roots,  each  root  must 
be  | h,  and  therefore 

(P)4-A(fA)3+l  = 0, 

whence  h*  --  44/33  or  h — 4/34  = l-75. 

The  actual  value  of  h for  the  moon  and  earth  is  about  4,  and 
hence  if  the  moon-earth  system  were  started  with  less  than  ^ of 
its  actual  moment  of  momentum,  it  would  not  be  possible  for 
the  two  bodies  to  move  so  that  the  earth  should  always  show 
the  same  face  to  the  moon. 

Again  if  we  travel  along  the  line  of  momentum  there  must  be 
some  point  for  which  yx3  is  a maximum,  and  since  yx  = 7j/QB 
there  must  be  some  point  for  which  the  number  of  planetary 
rotations  is  greatest  during  one  revolution  of  the  satellite,  or 
shortly  there  must  be  some  configuration  for  which  there  is  a 
maximum  number  of  days  in  the  month. 


TIDAL  FRICTION. 


5 1 5 


G,  6.] 

Now  yx 8 is  equal  to  x\h-x),  and  this  is  a maximum  when  Maximum 
x~Th  aiul  the  maximum  number  of  days  in  the  month  is  dJSta'the 
(¥l * *Y  (A  - £A)  or  37i4/44 ; if  A is  equal  to  4,  as  is  nearly  the  case  month' 
for  the  earth  and  moon,  this  becomes  27. 

Hence  it  follows  that  we  now  have  very  nearly  the  maximum 
number  of  days  in  the  month.  A more  accurate  investigation 
in  my  paper  on  the  “Precession  of  a Viscous  Spheroid,”  showed 
that  taking  account  of  solar  tidal  friction  and  of  the  obliquity 
to  the  ecliptic  the  maximum  number  of  days  is  about  29,  and 
that  we  have  already  passed  through  the  phase  of  maximum. 

We  will  now  consider  the  physical  meaning  of  the  several 
parts  of  the  figures. 

It  will  be  supposed  that  the  resultant  moment  of  momentum 
of  the  whole  system  corresponds  to  a clockwise  rotation. 

Now  imagine  two  points  with  the  same  abscissa,  one  on  the 
momentum  line  and  the  other  on  the  energy  curve,  and  suppose 
the  one  on  the  energy  curve  to  guide  that  on  the  momentum  line. 

Then  since  we  are  supposing  frictional  tides  to  be  raised  on 
the  planet,  therefore  the  energy  must  degrade,  and  however  the 
two  points  are  set  initially,  the  point  on  the  energy  curve  must 
always  slide  down  a slope  carrying  with  it  the  other  point. 

Now  looking  at  fig.  1 or  2,  we  .see  that  there  are  four  slopes  Various 
m the  energy  curve,  two  running  down  to  the  planet,  and  two  de^daton 
others  which  run  down  to  the  minimum.  In  fig.  3 on  the  other 

hand  there  are  only  two  slopes,  both  of  which  run  down  to  the 
planet. 

In  the  first  case  there  are  four  ways  in  which  the  system  may 

degrade,  according  to  the  way  it  was  started ; in  the  second  only 
two  ways. 

i.  Then  m fig.  1,  for  all  points  of  the  line  of  momentum 

from  C through  E to  infinity,  x is  negative  and  y is  positive; 

therefore  this  indicates  an  anti-clockwise  revolution  of  the  satel- 

lite, and  a clockwise  rotation  of  the  planet,  but  the  moment  of 
momentum  of  planetary  rotation  is  greater  than  that  of  the  orbital 
motion.  The  corresponding  part  of  the  curve  of  energy  slopes 
uniformly  down,  hence  however  the  system  be  started,  for  this 
part  of  the  line  of  momentum,  the  satellite  must  approach  the 
planet,  and  will  fall  into  it  when  its  distance  is  given  by  the 
point  k. 


5 1 G 


APPENDIX  G. 


Various 
modes  of 
degradation 
according 
to  initial 
circum- 
stances. 


Case  of 

Martian 

Satellite. 


General 
case  for 
satellites 
of  solar 
system. 


[(i,  h. 


ii.  For  all  points  of  the  line  of  momentum  from  L>  through 
F to  infinity,  x is  positive  and  y is  negative  ; therefore  the 
motion  of  the  satellite  is  clockwise,  and  that  of  the  planetary 
rotation  anti  clockwise,  but  the  moment  of  momentum  of  the 
orbital  motion  is  greater  than  that  of  the  planetary  rotation. 
The  corresponding  part  of  the  energy  curve  slopes  down  to  the 
minimum  b.  Hence  the  satellite  must  approach  the  planet  until 
it  reaches  a certain  distance  where  the  two  will  move  round  as  a 
rigid  body.  It  will  be  noticed  that  as  the  system  passes  through 
the  configuration  corresponding  toD,  the  planetary  rotation  is  zero, 
and  from  D to  B the  rotation  of  the  planet  becomes  clockwise. 

If  the  total  moment  of  momentum  had  been  as  shown  in  fig. 
3,  then  the  satellite  would  have  fallen  into  the  planet,  because 
the  energy  curve  would  have  no  minimum. 

From  i and  ii  we  learn  that  if  the  planet  and  satellite  are  set 
in  motion  with  opposite  rotations,  the  satellite  will  fall  into  the 
planet,  if  the  moment  of  momentum  of  oi'bital  motion  be  less 
than  or  equal  to  or  only  greater  by  a certain  critical  amount 
(viz.  4/3^  in  our  special  units),  than  the  moment  of  momentum 
of  planetary  rotation,  but  if  it  be  greater  by  more  than  a certain 
critical  amount  the  satellite  will  approach  the  planet,  the  rotation 
of  the  planet  will  stop  and  reverse,  and  finally  the  system  will 
come  to  equilibrium  when  the  two  bodies  move  round  as  a rigid 
body,  with  a long  periodic  time. 

iii.  We  now  come  to  the  part  of  the  figure  between  C and 
I).  For  the  parts  AC  and  BD  of  the  line  AB  in  fig.  1,  the 
planetary  rotation  is  slower  than  that  of  the  satellite’s  revolu- 
tion, or  the  month  is  shorter  than  day,  as  in  one  of  the  satellites 
of  Mars.  In  fig.  3 these  parts  together  embrace  the  whole.  In  all 
cases  the  satellite  approaches  the  planet.  In  the  case  of  fig.  3, 
the  satellite  must  ultimately  fall  into  the  planet;  in  the  case 
of  figs.  1 and  2 the  satellite  will  fall  in  if  its  distance  from  the 
planet  is  small,  or  move  round  along  with  the  planet  as  a rigid 
body  if  its  distance  be  large. 

For  the  part  of  the  line  of  momentum  AB,  the  month  is 
longer  than  the  day,  and  this  is  the  case  of  all  known  satellites 
except  the  nearer  one  of  Mars.  As  this  part  of  the  line  is  non- 
existent in  fig.  3,  we  see  that  the  case  ot  all  existing  satellites 
(except  the  Martian  one)  is  comprised  within  this  part  ot  figs.  1 
and  2.  Now  if  a satellite  be  placed  in  the  condition  A,  that  is 


TIDAL  FRICTION. 


517 


G,  b.] 


to  say,  moving  rapidly  round  a planet,  which  always  shows  the 
same  face  to  the  satellite,  the  condition  is  clearly  dynamically 
unstable,  for  the  least  disturbance  will  determine  whether  the 
S‘  stem  shall  degrade  down  the  slopes  ac  or  ab,  that  is  to  say, 
whether  it  falls  into  or  recedes  from  the  planet.  If  the  equili-  Compare 
brium  breaks  down  by  the  satellite  receding,  the  recession  will  §7'8" 
go  on  until  the  system  has  reached  the  state  corresponding  to  B. 

The  point  P,  in  fig.  2,  shows  approximately  the  present  state 
of  the  earth  and  moon,  viz.,  when  x = 3 2,  y = *8*. 

It  is  clear  that,  if  the  point  t,  which  indicates  that  the  satel-  Suggested 
lite  is  just  touching  the  planet,  be  identical  with  the  point  A,  tEoon. 
then  the  two  bodies  are  in  effect  parts  of  a single  body  in  an 
unstable  configuration.  If,  therefore,  the  moon  was  originally 
part  of  the  earth,  we  should  expect  to  find  A and  l identical. 

The  figuie  2,  which  is  drawn  to  represent  the  earth  and  moon, 
shows  that  there  is  so  close  an  approach  between  the  edge  of  the 
shaded  band  and  the  intersection  of  the  line  of  momentum  and 
curve  of  rigidity,  that  it  would  be  scarcely  possible  to  distinguish 
them  on  the  figure.  Plence,  there  seems  a considerable  jn-oba- 
bility  that  the  two  bodies  once  formed  parts  of  a single  one,  Compare 
which  broke  up  in  consequence  of  some  kind  of  instability.  §7'8"0)- 
This  view  is  confirmed  by  the  more  detailed  consideration  of  the 
case  in  the  paper  on  the  “Precession  of  a Viscous  Spheroid,” 
and  subsequent  papers,  which  have  appeared  in  the  Philoso- 
phical Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society. 

The  remainder  of  the  paper,  of  which  this  Appendix  forms  Double-star 
a part,  is  occupied  with  a similar  graphical  treatment  of  the  system- 
problem  involved  in  the  case  of  a planet  and  satellite  or  a system 
of  two  stars,  each  raising  frictional  tides  in  the  other,  and 
revolving  round  one  another  orbitally.  This  problem  involves 
the  construction  of  a surface  of  energy. 

Ov 

* The  proper  values  for  the  present  configuration  of  the  earth  and  moon  are 
i = 3'4,  y = - 7.  Figure  (2)  was  drawn  for  the  paper  as  originally  presented  to 
the  Roj-al  Society,  and  is  now  merely  reproduced. 


INDEX  . 


The  arabic  numbers  refer  to  sections.  The  numbers  i.  and  n.  preceding  them  indicate 
the  volume  (parts  of  the  original  first  volume)  in  which  they  will  be  found.  The 
capital  letters  refer  to  the  Appendixes.  In  the  case  of  the  Appendixes  A0,  A,  B, 
references  are  given  to  the  pages  of  i. ; the  other  Appendixes  are  at  the  ends  of 
their  respective  volumes. 


Acceleration,  defined,  i.  28 

measure  of,  when  uniform,  i.  28 
measure  of,  when  variable,  i.  29 
average,  i.  29 

analytical  expressions  for,  i.  29,  31 
composition  and  resolution  of,  i.  30,  31 
examples  of,  i.  35,  36 
angular,  defined,  i.  42 
angular,  analytical  expressions  for, 
i.  42 

Action,  defined,  i.  326 

principle  of  least,  i.  327;  Lagrange’s 
equations  derived  from,  i.  327 
principle  of  stationary,  i.  328 
principle  of  varying,  i.  330 ; examples 
of,  i.  333—336 

differential  equation  satisfied  by  the, 
i.  330 ; equations  of  motion  derived 
from,  i.  330 
surfaces  of  equal,  i.  332 
Activity,  i.  263 

Anchor-ring,  motion  on  an,  i.  351,  355,  366 
Angles,  measurement  of,  i.  404 
solid,  n.  463 — 470 

Area,  projection  of  plane  or  curved,  i.  233 
conservation  of  (see  Momentum) 
Atoms,  size  of,  n.  (F) 

Attraction,  universal  law  of,  it.  458 

integral  of  normal,  over  a closed  sur- 
face, n.  492,  493 

variation  of,  in  crossing  attracting 
surface,  ii.  478 

of  a uniform  spherical  shell  on  an  in- 
ternal particle,  n.  462,  477;  on  an 
external  particle,  ii.  471,  477;  on 
an  element  of  the  shell,  ii.  472. 


Attraction  of  a spherical  surface  with  den- 
sity varying  inversely  as  the  cube 
of  the  distance  from  a given  point, 
ii.  474—476 

of  a sphere  whose  density  varies 
inversely  as  tho  fifth  power  of  the 
distance  from  a point,  n.  518 
of  a sjihere  composed  of  concentric 
shells  of  uniform  density,  n.  480, 
491  (d) 

of  a uniform  circular  disc  on  a par- 
ticle in  its  axis,  ii.  477,  517 
of  a cylinder  on  a particle  in  its  axis, 
ii.  477 

of  a right  cone  on  a particle  at  its 
vertex,  ii.  477 

of  a uniform  circular  arc,  n.  481 
of  a straight  line,  n.  481 
of  a uniform  hemisphere  on  a particle 
at  its  edge,  n.  478 

of  matter  arranged  in  infinite  jiaralle 
planes  of  uniform  density,  n.  491 
(./') 

of  coaxal  cylinders  of  uniform  density 
to  infinite  lengths,  ii.  491  (e) 
of  a homogeneous  ellipsoid,  ti.  494  (j) 
— (o);  ii.  519—532 
of  a shell  bounded  by  similar  con- 
centric and  similarly  situated  ellip- 
soids, ii.  519—521,  523 
of  an  infinite  homogeneous  elliptic 
cylinder,  n.  494  (p)  (q) 
of  a heterogeneous  ellipsoid,  ii.  527 
of  a particle  on  a distant  body,  ii. 
540,  541 

inverse  problem  of,  ii.  494  (a) — (/) 


.520 


INDEX. 


Balance,  i.  430,  431 ; ii.  572 
torsion,  i.  432,  433 
bifilar,  x.  435 

Bending  ol  a bar,  plate,  &c.;  see  Flexure 


Cardioid,  i.  49 
Catenary,  defined,  n.  574 

equation  of  common,  ir.  580 
of  uniform  strength,  n.583 
Cathetometer,  i.  429 

Central  axis  of  a system  of  forces,  ii. 
559  ( g ) 

Centrobaric  bodies,  n.  534;  possess  Ki- 
netic symmetry  about  their  centre 
of  inertia,  ix.  535 

Clamp,  geometrical,  defined,  1. 198 ; exam- 
ples of,  i.  198 
Clocks,  i.  414 — 417 

Compressibility,  defined,,  ii.  680;  ii..(C)  l. 
Conservative  system,  defined,,  i.  271 
Constraint,  of  a point  witli  two  or  one 
degrees  of  freedom,  r.  196 
of  a rigid  body  with  various  degrees 
of  freedom,  i.  197,  199 
of  a rigid  body,  five  degrees  of,  i.  198 
of  a rigid  body,  one  degree  of,  most 
general  form  of,  i.  200 ; mechanical 
illustration  of,  i..  201 ; analytical 
expression  of,  x.  201 
Gauss’s  principle  of  least,  i.  293 
kinetic,  cases  of  motion  governed  by, 
i.  319 

Continuity,  integral  equation  of,  i.  192 
differential  equation  of,  i.  193,  194 
Co-ordinates,  Rodrigues,  i.  95 

generalized,  of  a point,  i.  202,  203 
generalized,  of  a system,  i,  204 
generalized,  kinetic  energy  expressed 
in,  i.  313 

generalized,  equations  of  motion  in, 
i.  318 

ignoration  of,  i.  319 
generalized  orthogonal  transforma- 
tion of,  i.  337  note 
Cord,  see  String. 

Couples,  defined,  i.  234;  moment  of,  i. 
234;  axis  of,  i.  234  ; ii.  559 
composition  of,  n.  559  (5);  with 
forces,  ii.  559  (/) 

Curvature,  defined,  i.  5 
of  a circle,  i.  5 

of  any  plane  curve,  analytical  expres- 
sions for,  i.  6 

of  any  curve,  analytical  expressions 
for,  i.  9 

integral,  of  a curve,  i.  10,  12 
average,  of  a curve,  i.  10,  12 
synclastic  and  anticlastic,  of  a sur- 
face, defined,  i.  128,  n.  639 
line  of,  defined,  i.  130 


Curvature,  integral,  of  a portion  of  a 
surface,  defined,  i.  136 
average,  of  a portion  of  a surface,  de- 
fined, i.  136 

specific,  at  a point  of  a surface,  de- 
fined, i.  136;  analytical  expression 
for,  i.  138 

Curvatura  Integra,  defined,  i.  136;  proved 
the  same  as  Integral  Curvature,  i 
137 

Curve,  plane,  i.  7 
tortuous,  i.  7 
osculating  plane  of,  i.  8 
mechanical  tracing  of,  i.  16 
of  pursuit,  i.  40 
of  flight,  x.  40 

representation  of  experimental  re- 
sults by  means  of  a,  i.  395—397 

Cycloid,  i.  49,  92 

properties  of,  i.  93 


D’Alembert’s  principle,  i.  264 
Density,  line,  surface  and  volume,  ii.  460 
of  the  Earth,  n.  774,  831 
Determinant,  expression  for  the  square  of, 
i.  p.-r6 6 A0  (k) 
minors  of  a,  i.  343  ( b ) 
relations  between  the  minors  of  an 
evanescent,  i.  343  (b) 
square  root  of  skew  symmetidc,  i. 
345  (ix) 

Diagonal  scale,  i.  419 
Direction,  integral  change  of,  in  a surface, 
i.  135 

Displacement,  in  one  plane,  equivalent  to 
a rotation,  i.  79,  80, .83;  or  a trans- 
lation, i.  81 

in  one  plane,  examples  of,  i.  84, 
85 

of  a non-rigid  solid  with  one  point 
fixed,  general  analytical  investiga- 
tion of,  x.  181,  190  («),.(/),  (t) 
tangential,  defined,  i.  186 ; of  dis- 
placed and  undisplaced  curve  com- 
pared, i.  187 — 189  ; of  a closed 
eurve,  due  to  l’otation,  i,  190  ; of 
a closed  curve  due  to  strain,,  i.  190 
{a)—(d) 

Dissipativity,  i.  345  (ii) 


Earth,  The,  as  a time-keeper,. ii.  830 

figure  of,  as  determined  by  geodesy, 
ii.  797 

rigidity  of.  it.  832  — 848 
distribution  of  land  on,  ii.  848 
secular  cooling  of,  ii.  (D) 

Edge  of  regression,  i.  148 
Elastic  curve,  n.  611,  612 
Elastic  body,  perfectly,  defined,  n.  672 


INDEX. 


521 


Elasticity,  of  volume,  n.  680 
of  figure,  n.  680 

Elastic  solid,  equations  of  equilibrium  of, 
ii.  697,  698;  ii.  (C) 
integration  of  equations  of  equi- 
librium of  infinite,  ii.  730 
displacements  of,  by  stress  applied  to 
an  infinitely  small  part,  n.  731 
displacements  of,  by  stress  applied 
over  the  boundary,  ii.  732 — 734 
displacement  of,  when  the  strain  is 
plane,  n.  739 

Green’s  theory  of,  n.  (C)  (;/),  (h) 
sphere,  deformation  of,  by  rotation, 
ii.  837,  838 

spherical  shell,  equilibrium  of,  under 
surface  tractions,  it.  735 — 737 
Ellipticity  of  strata  of  equal  density  within 
the  earth  resulting  from  Laplace’s 
law,  ii.  824,  824' 

Energy,  kinetic,  defined,,  i..  213 

kinetic,  rate  of  change  of,  I..  214 ; 

. analytical  expression  for,  I..280 
potential,  defined  and  explained,  i. 
241,  273,  274 

conservation  of,  i.  269 — 278 
apparent  loss  of,  i.  275 — 277 
equation  of,  1.  293,  318 
kinetic  and  potential,  expi-essed  as 
functions  of  the  time  in  the  case  of 
small  motions,  i.  337 
potential,  exhaustion  of,  ii.. 547 — 549 
Eolotropy,  ii.  676 — 678 
Epicycloid,  i.  49,  94 

Equilibrant,  of  a system  of  forces,  ii..558 
Equilibrium,  neutral,  stable  and  unstable, 
examples  of,  i.  291 
of  a particle,  n.  455,  456 
of  three  forces,  n.  564 
of  forces  proportional  and  perpen- 
dicular to  the  sides  of  a polygon 
at  their  middle  points,  or  the  faces 
of  a polyhedron  at  their  centres  of 
inertia,  n.  559  (<?) 
of  a free  rigid  body,  ii.  551 — 553 
of  a constrained  rigid  body,  n.  554 — 
557 

of  a body  moveable  about  an  axis,  ii. 
567 

of  a body  resting  on  a fixed  surface, 
ii.  568 

of  a body  capable  of  a single  screw 
motion,  n.  556 
simple  examples  of,  ji.  572 
of  a floating  body,  stability  of,  ii.  763 
— 768 

of  a rotating  gravitational  fluid  ellip- 
soid of  equilibrium,  ii.  770 — 773 
775—777,  778' 

of  a rotating  gravitational  fluid  ellip- 
soid with  three  unequal  axes,  n.  778 


Plquilibrrum  of  a rotating  fluid  mass  gene- 
rally, ii.  778' 

of  a rotating  heterogeneous  liquid 
spheroid,  enclosing  a rigid  spherical 
nucleus  and  subjected  to  disturb- 
ance, ii.  822 — 824 

of  rotating  spheroid  of  two  incom- 
pressible non-mixing  fluids,  n.  831 
energy  criterion  for,  i.  289,  290,  292 
slightly  disturbed,  application  of  the 
Lagrange  equation  to,  i.  337 
general  solution  of  any  case  of  slightly 
disturbed,  i.  343  (/) — (p) 
Equipotential  surfaces,  defined,  ii.  491  ({/) 
of  homogeneous  harmonic  spheroids, 
ii.  7S9,  790 

for  approximately  spherical  mass  due 
to  gravitation  and  rotation  con- 
jointly, ii.  794 

of  rotating  fluid  covering  a spherical 
nucleus,  n.  800 — 802 
of  fluid  covering  a fixed  spherical 
nucleus,  and  disturbed  by  the  attrac- 
tion of  a' distant  body,  ii.  803 
Ergometer,  i.  436,.  437 
Error,  law  of,  i.  391 

probable,  i.  392,  393 
Errors,  theory  of,  i.  387—394 
E volute,  i..  17 — 19 

Experiment,  remarks  on,  i.  373—382 

Flexure,  of  a bar,  ii.  711 — 713 
of  a plate,  ii.  719 — 729 
of  a plate  bounded  by  an  infinite 
plane  edge,,n.  728 

Fluid,  perfect,  defined,  I..320;  ii.  742 

cases  of  motion  in  a perfect,  i.  320 — 
325 

equations  of  equilibrium,  of  a perfect 
ii.  753 

equilibrium  of,  in  a closed  vessel,  ii. 
754,.  755 

equilibrium  of,,  under  non-conserva- 
tive forces,  ii.  757 — 759 
equilibrium  of,  possibility  of,  under 
given  forces,  ii.  755,. 756 
density  of,  in  terms  of  jiotential  of 
applied  forces,  ii.  760 
impulsive  generation  of  motion  in  an 
incompressible,  I.  312,  317. 

Fluxions,  i.  24,  203- 
Foci,  kinetic,  i.  357 — 364 
Force,  measure  of,  i.  220,  413- 
specification  of,  i.  218 
accelerative  effect  of,  i.  219 
measurement  of,  i.  258 
unit  of,  i.  221 

Gauss’s  absolute  unit  of,  i.  223 
British  absolute  unit  of,  i.  225 
ideal  units  of,  i.  223 


INDEX. 


522 


Force,  comparison  of  absolute  and  gravi- 
tational measures  of,  i.  226 
effective  component  of,  i.  228 
moment  of,  i.  232 
time-integral  of,  i.  297 
line  of,  defined  and  illustrated,  ii. 
489,  490 

Forces,  composition  of,  i.  255 

parallel,  composition  of,  ii.  561,  563 
parallelogram  and  polygon  of,  i.  256 
system  of,  reduced  to  two,  ii.  560 
system  of,  reduced  to  a force  and  a 
coup'e,  ii.  559  (,c) 

Freedom,  degrees  of,  i.  195—201 ; ( see 
Constraint) 

Friction,  laws  of,  between  solids,  ii.  450 
—452 

laws  of  fluid,  i.  340 

Function,  simple  harmonic,  i.  54 

complex  harmonic,  i.  75,  76  ; repre- 
sentation  of  the  results  of  experi- 
ment by  means  of  a,  i.  398' 
plane  harmonic,  n.  739 
displacement,  i.  190  (k) 
spherical  harmonic,  i.  p.  171  B,  (see 
Spherical  harmonics) 

Laplace’s,  1.  p.  208  B.  (e')  ( see  Sphe- 
rical harmonics) 

Hamilton’s  characteristic,  1.  331  ; 
complete  solution  derived  from  a 
knowledge  of,  i-  331 
cyclic,  11.  755,  note 


Geodetic  line  defined,  1, 132 

trigonometry  on  a surface  of  uni- 
form specific  curvature,  1.  153 
Gravity,  Clairaut’s  formula  for,  in  terms 
of  the  latitude,  1.  222 
centre  of,  defined,  11.  534 ; 11.  562 
lunar  and  solar  influence  on  apparent, 
11.  812 

experimental  investigation  of  lunar 
disturbance  of,  11.  818' 

Green’s  problem,  11.  499 — 506 
examples  of,  11.  507 — 509 
Gauss’s  method  of  treating,  11.  55Q 
Gyration,  radius  of,  1.  281 

Harmonic  motion,  definition  of,  1.  53 
amplitude  of,  1.  54 
argument  of,  1.  54 
epoch  of,  1.  54 
period  of,  1.  54 
phase  of,  1.  54 
practical  examples  of,  1.  55 
velocity  in,  1.  56 
acceleration  in,  1.  57 
composition  of,  in  one  line,  1.  53,  59; 
examples,  1.  60,  61 


Harmonic  motions,  mechanical  composi- 
tion of,  in  one  line,  1.  62 
graphical  representation  of,  1.  62,  69 
72,  74 

composition  of,  in  different  lines,  1. 
63—73 

Harmonic,  spheroid,  defined,  11.  779 

nodal  cone,  defined,  11.  779  ; proper- 
ties of,  11.  780 

spherical  (see  Spherical  harmonics) 
Heat,  specific,  defined,  11.  (E)  1 note 
Hodograph,  definition  of,  1.  37 
elementary  properties  of,  1.  37 
for  the  undisturbed  motion  of  a planet 
is  a circle,  1.  38 
physical  applications  of,  1.  39 
Homogeneousness,  defined,  11.  675 
Hooke’s  joint,  1.  109 
Horograph,  defined,  1.  136 
exercises  on,  1.  137 
Horse-power,  1.  268 
Hypocycloid,  1.  91,  94 
Hypotheses,  use  of,  1.  383 — 386 


Images,  electric,  11.  510 — 518 
Impact,  1.  294 — 296 

of  spheres,  direct,  1.  300 — 302 
loss  of  energy  in,  1.  301 
distribution  of  energy  after,  1. 302 — 306 
moment  of,  1.  307 
work  done  by,  r.  308 
of  a smooth  rigid  plane  on  a free 
rigid  body  at  rest,  1.  317 
Indicatrix,  1.  130 
Iuertia,  1.  216 

centre  of,  defined,  1.  230  ; and  found, 
1.  230 

moment  of,  1.  281 

principal  axes  of,  defined,  1.  282; 
found  analytically,  1.  283 
Interpolation,  1.  398 
Inversion,  11.  513 — 516 
Involute,  1.  17 — 19 
Isotrophy,  11.  676 — 679 


Laplace’s  law  of  density  of  the  earth’s 
strata,  11.  824;  applied  to  determine 
the  constant  of  precession,  11.  827, 
828;  compressibility  involved  in, 
11.  829 

Laplace’s  differential  equation  for  the 
potential,  etc.,  with  Poisson’s  ex- 
tension, 11.  491  (b)  ( c ) 
expressed  in  generalized  co-ordinates 
by  physical  considerations,  1.  A0 
p.  160  (a) — (e) 

expressed  in  generalized  co-ordinates 
by  algebraical  transformation,  1. 
p.  166  A0  (j)—(m) 


INDEX. 


523 


Laplace’s  equation  expressed  in  generalized 
rectangular  co-ordinates,  i.  p.  164 
A0  (/)  ; in  polar  co-ordinates,  1. 
p.  164  A0  {(]) ; in  columnar  co-ordi- 
nates, 1.  p.  165  An  (h) 
solution  proved  possible  and  unique 
when  the  function  is  given  in  value 
at  every  point  of  a given  surface, 
1.  p.  169  A (b) — ( e ) 

Latitude,  effect  of  hill,  cavity,  or  crevasse 
on,  11.  478,  479 

Length,  measures  of,  1.  407 — 409 
Level  surface,  see  Equipotential  surface 

Machine,  Tide-predicting,  1.  B'  1. 

for  solving  simultaneous  linear  equa- 
tions, 1.  B'  11. 

for  calculating  the  integral  of  a given 
function,  1.  B'  hi. 

for  calculating  the  integral  of  the 
product  of  two  given  functions,  1. 
B'  iv. 

for  solving  the  general  linear  differ- 
ential equation  of  the  second  order, 
1.  B'  v. 

for  solving  any  linear  differential  equa- 
tion, 1,  B'  vi. 

for  calculating  the  harmonic  com- 
ponents of  a periodic  function,  1.  B 

VII. 

Magnetometer,  bifilar,  1.  435 
Mass,  connexion  of,  with  volume  and 
density,  1.  208 
unit  of,  1.  209 

measurement  of,  1.  258,  412 
gravitational  unit  of,  11.  459 
negative,  11.  401 
Metacentre,  11.  708 
Moment,  virtual,  1.  237 
Momental  ellipsoid,  1.  282 
Momentum,  defined,  1.  210 
change  of,  1.  211 
rate  of  change  of,  1.  212 
conservation  of,  1.  207 
moment  of,  1.  235 

moment  of,  composition  and  resolution 
of,  1.  235,  230 

moment  of,  conservation  of,  1.  207 
generalized  expression  for  components 
of,  1.  313 

Motion,  direction  of,  1.  4 

rate  of  change  of  direction  of,  1.  5 
quantity  of  (see  Momentum) 
resultant,  1.  50 

resultant,  mechanical  arrangement 
for,  1.  51 
relative,  1.  45 

relative,  examples  of,  1.  47,  48,  49 
Newton’s  Laws  of,  1.  244—209 
superposition  of  small,  1.  89 


Motion,.  Harmonic  (see  Harmonic  Mo(ion) 
of  a rigid  body  about  a fixed  point,  1. 
95,  100,  101 

general,  of  a rigid  body,  1.  102,  103 
general,  of  one  rigid  body  on  another, 
1.  110 

of  translation  and  rotation,  independ- 
ence of,  1.  206 

equations  of,  formation  of,  1.  293 
equations  of  impulsive,  1.  310 
general  indeterminate  equation  of,  1. 
293 

equations  of,  Lagrange’s  generalized 
form  of,  1.  318;  examples  of,  1.  319 
equations  of,  Hamilton’s  form,  1.  318, 
319 

Hamilton’s  characteristic  equation  of, 
1..  330 

complete  solution  of  a complex  cy- 
cloidal, 1.  343  (a)—(e);  1.  345  (i)— (v). 
infinitely  small,  of  a dissipative  sys- 
tem, 1.  342 

ideal,  of  an  accumulative  system,  1. 
344,  345 

of  a gyrostatic  conservative  system, 
1.  345  (vi) — (ix);  with  two  degrees 
of  freedom,  1.  345  (x);  with  three 
degrees  of  freedom,  1.  345  (xi)ir 
with  four  degrees  of  freedom,  1.  345 
(xii) — (xxi) ; with  any  number  of 
freedoms,  1.  345  (xxii) — (xxviii) 
disturbed,  general  investigation  of,  1.. 
356 

equations  of,  of  a single  particle  in 
polar  co-ordinates,  1.  319 
equations  of,  of  a single  particle  re- 
ferred to  moving  axes,  1.  319 
of  a sphere  in  an  incompressible  fluid 
bounded  by  an  infinite  plane,  1.  320 
321 

of  a solid  of  revolution  with  its  axis 
parallel  to  a plane  through  an  un- 
bounded fluid,  1.  320 — 325 
ot  solids  in  fluids,  practical  observa- 
tions on,  1.  325 


Normal  modes  of  vibration,  or  of  falling' 
away  from  a position  of  unstable- 
equilibrium,  1.  338  ; case  of  equality 
between  the  periods  of  two- or  more- 
modes,  1.  339 

Ocean,  stability  of  the,  11.  816 
Optics,  application  of  varying  action  to  a 
question  of  geometrical,  1.  335 


Pendulum,  1.  431 

ballistic,  1.  298,  307 


524 


INDEX. 


Pendulum,  motion  of  a jointed,  i.  3 It) 
motion  of  a gyroscoiiic,  i.  311) 
quadrantal,  i.  322 

Physical  problems,  approximate  treatment 
of,  ii.  438 — 447 

Planets,  distribution  of  density  in,  ii.  824 

Plate,  stretching  of,  by  flexure,  ii.  629 — 
631 

laws  of  flexure  of,  ii.  632 — 636 
principal  axes  of  bending  of,  ii.  637, 
638 

potential  energy  of  a bent,  ii.  640, 
641 

of  equal  flexibility  in  all  directions 
subjected  to  uniform  stress,  ii.  642 
equilibrium  of  infinite,  subjected  to 
any  forces,  n.  643,  644 
boundary  conditions  of  a finite,  n. 
645,  648 

equilibrium  of,  under  circularly  dis- 
tributed load,  ii.  649 — 651 
equilibrium  of  circular,  with  concen- 
tric circular  aperture,  ii.  652 — 655 
equilibrium  of  rectangular,  ii.  656 
flexural  rigidities  of,  ii.  720 

Poisson’s  equation  (see  Laplace’s  differ- 
ential equation,  etc.) 

Potential,  defined  and  explained,  n.  482 — 
486 

force  in  terms  of,  ii.  486,  491 
analytical  expression  for,  ii.  491  (a) 
cannot  have  a maximum  or  minimum 
value  in  free  space,  ii.  495 
mean  of,  over  a spherical  surface,  ii. 
496 

determination  of,  through  external 
space  from  its  value  over  a spherical 
surface,  ii.  793 

determination  of,  from  the  form  of  a 
nearly  spherical  equipotential  sur- 
face, ii..  793 

of  a shell  bounded  by  similar  con- 
centric and  similarly  situated  ellip- 
soids, ii.  524,  525 
of  a homogeneous-  ellipsoid,  n.  526 
of  a heterogeneous  ellipsoid,  ii.  526 
of  an  ellipsoid  of  revolution,  ii.  527 
comparison  between,  of  two  confocal 
shells  each  bounded  by  similar  and 
similarly  s.tuated  ellipsoids,  ii.  532 
of  any  spherical  shell,  expressed  in 
spherical  harmonics,  ii.  536 — 538 
of  a distant  body,  found  by  spherical 
harmonic  analysis,  it.  539 
of  a solid  sphere  with  harmonic  distri- 
bution of  density,  ii.  543,  545 
of.  any  mass,  expressed  in  harmonic 
series,  ii.  542,  544 

of  a distribution  of  mass  symmetrical 
round  an  axis,  expressed  in  zonal 
harmonics,,  ii.  546 


Potential,  of  a circular  ring,  ii.  546 
of  a circular  disc,  ii.  546 
of  a circular  galvanometer  coil,  ii.  540 
of  a solid  sphere  with  variation  from 

average  density  in  one  limited  region 
ii.  786—788,  791,  792 
for  other  masses  of  definite  form  (see 
Attraction) 

Precession  and  Nutation,  ii.  825 

Precession  in  connection  with  the  distribu- 
tion of  density  within  the  Earth,  ii. 
826 

constant  of, determined  from  Laplace’s 
law,  ii.  827 

Pressure,  fluid,  at  a point,  ii.  743;  proved 
equal  in  all  directions,  n.  744,  745, 
747 

in  a fluid  under  the  action  of  no 
external  forces  equal  in  all  direc- 
tions, ii.  745,  747 

rate  of  increase  of,  in  terms  of  the 
external  force,  ii.  752,  753 
resultant  fluid,  on  a plane  area,  ii.  761 
resultant  fluid,  on  a body  of  any 
shape,  ii.  762 
equations  of  fluid,  n.  753 
of  the  atmosphere  at  different  heights, 
ii.  753 

centre  of,  ii.  746,  761 


Resilience,  ii.  691  (b) — (/) 

Resistance,  varying  as  the  velocity  in  a 
simple  motion,  i.  341 
Restitution,  coefficient  of,  i.  300 
Resultant,  of  forces  acting  along  and  pro- 
portional to  the  sides  of  a polygon 
is  a couple,  ii.  559  ( d ) 

Rigidity,  defined,  ii.  680,  n.  (C)  (/) 

torsional,  of  circular  cylinder,  ii.  701 
torsional,  of  various  prisms,  ii.  709 
of  the  Earth,  ii.  832 — S40 
Rocking  stones,  it.  566 
Rolling,  of  one  curve  on  another  will  give 
any  motion  of  a plane  figure  in  its 
own  plane,  i.  90 
of  circle  on  straight  line,  i.  92 
of  cone  on  cone,  i.  99,  104,  105 ; ex- 
amples of,  i.  106 — 108 
of  one  plane  curve  on  another  iu  the 
same  plane,  i.  112 ; in  different 
planes,  i.  113 

of  a curve  on  a surface,  i.  115,  116 
of  one  rigid  body  on  another,  i.  110, 
111,  117 ; analytical  investigation 
of,  when  one  or  both  traces  are 
given,  i.  124,  125 

Rotations,  composition  of,  about  parallel 
axes,  i.  86 

composition  of  with  a translation  in 
plane  perpendicular  to  axis,  i.  87 


INDEX. 


52.3 


notations,  finite,  composition  of,  i.  97, 
98 


Screw,  for  measurement,  i.  424,  425 
micrometer,  i.  426 

Secular  acceleration  of  the  Moon’s  mean 
motion,  n.  830 

Sea-level,  disturbance  of,  by  a region  of 
density  greater  or  less  than  the 
average,  ii.  786 — 788,  791,  792 
figure  of,  determined  from  measure- 
ments of  gravity,  n.  795,  796 
figure  of,  determined  from  results  of 
geodesy,  ii.  797 

Shear,  synthesis  of,  i.  169 

principal  properties  of,  i.  170 — 172 
axes  of,  173 

various  specifications  of,  i.  174 — 176 
combination  of,  with  simple  elonga- 
tion and  expansion,  i.  177 

Slide,  geometrical,  defined,  i.  198;  ex- 
amples of,  i.  198 

Spherical  excess,  of  a triangle,  i.  134  ; of 
a polygon,  i 134 

Spherical  harmonics,  defined,  i.  p.  171  B 
(a) 

Examples  of,  1.  p.  1 7 1 B (a) 
partial,  1.  p.  176  B ( c ) 
differential  equations  satisfied  by,  1. 
p.  178  B(e)  (g) 

surface  integral  of  product  of  two  or 


parts  of  two,  1.  pp.  178,  205  B (y) 

(*)  (*) 

when  complete  are  rational  integral 
functions  of  x,  y , z ; or  can  be  made 
so  by  a factor  rm,  1.  p.  181  B 
(h) 

general  expressions  for,  when  com- 
plete, obtained  by  differentiation,  1. 
p.  162  B (j) 

general  expressions  for,  obtained  by 
solution  of  Laplace’s  equation,  1. 
p.  207  B (o') — (7?/);  examples,  1.  p. 
213  B(nf )—(«') 

algebraical  transformations  of  the 
general  expressions,  1.  p.  189  B ( l ) 
degrees  of,  for  solution  of  special 
problems,  1.  p.  196  B (771)— (0) 
vanishing  of,  1.  p.  198  B (p) 
expansion  of  an  arbitrary  function  in 
terms  of,  1.  p.  198  B (r)— (<),  (a') 
biaxal,  defined,  1.  p.  201  B(m);  ex- 
pressions for,  1.  p.  202  B (v) — (7/); 
11.  782 


tesseral,  1.  p.  189  B (l) ; 11.  782 
sectorial,  n.  781 

degradation  of,  when  the  spherical 
surface  becomes  plane,  n.  7«3 
Spherometer,  1.  427,  428 
Spiral  springs,  11.  604 — 608 


Squares,  transformation  of  two  quadratic 
functions  to  sums  of,  1.  337  note 
method  of  least,  1.  394 
Stability,  energy  criterion  of,  1.  292 

kinetic,  1.  346,  347 ; examples  of,  1. 
348—354 

kinetic,  of  a particle  in  a circular 
orbit,  1.  350 

kinetic,  of  a particle  moving  on  a 
smooth  surface,  1.  351 — 353 
kinetic,  of  a projectile,  1.  354 
kinetic,  general  criterion  of,  1.  355, 
358—361 

Strain,  homogeneous,  defined,  1.  155 
principal  properties  of,  1.  156—159 
ellipsoid,  1.  160—163;  168 
axes  of,  1.  163 

change  of  length  and  direction  of  a 
line  in,  1.  164 

change  of  orientation  of  a plane  in,  r. 
165 

planes  of  no  distortion  in,  1.  167 
analysis  of,  1.  177_179)  182 
pure  homogeneous,  analytical  con- 
ditions for,  1.  183 
composition  of,  1.  184,  185 
specification  of,  by  six  elements,  11. 
(C)  (a) 

produced  by  a single  longitudinal 
stress,  11.  682,  683 

components  of,  in  terms  of  stress- 
components,  11.  673,  694 
potential  energy  of  elastie  body  in 
terms  of,  11.  695;  11.  (C)  ( d ) 
plane,  11.  738 
Stress,  defined,  1-1.  658 
homogeneous,  11.  659 
specification  of,  11.  660,  662,  669 
average,  11.  674 
shearing,  11.  662 
composition  of,  667 
quadric,  11.  663,  665,  666 
principal  axes  of,  11.  664 
potential  energy  of,  11.  670,  671,  673, 
695  _ 

analogies  of  strain  with,  11.  668 
components  of,  in  terms  of  strain- 
components,  11.  673,  693,  11.  (C)  l 
required  for  a single  longitudinal 
strain,  11.  692 

due  to  the  gravitation  of  an  approxi- 
mately spherical  mass,  11.  832' 
-difference,  11.  832' 

String,  general  equations  of  equilibrium 
of,  11.  576—579 

kinetic  analogue  to  equilibrium  of,  11. 

581 ; examples  on,  11.  582 
on  smooth  surface,  equilibrium  of,  n. 
584 

on  rough  surface,  equilibrium  of,  11 
585—587 


520 


INDEX. 


String,  impulsive  generation  of  motion 
in,  i.  317 

St  Yenant’s  torsion  problems,  n.  G99 — 710 

Sun,  The,  secular  cooling  of,  ii.  (E)  i 
present  temperature  of,  ir.  (E)  n 
origin  and  amount  of  heat  of,  n. 
(E)  in 

Surface,  flexible  and  inextensible,  prac- 
tical approximations  to,  i.  139 — 
143  ; general  property  of,  i.  150 
developable,  defined,  1. 139;  practical 
construction  of,  i.  149 
measure  of,  i.  410 

equipotential,  defined,  ii.  487,  491  (g) ; 

( see  Equipotential  surfaces) 
of  equal  pressure,  properties  of,  ii.  749, 
750 

Symmetry,  kinetic,  i.  285 

Theorem,  Bertrand’s,  on  the  kinetic  energy 
of  a system  moving  from  rest  under 
given  impulses,  i.  311,  314,  315 
Binet’s,  on  the  principal  axes  at  any 
point  of  a body,  i.  283,  284 
Cavendish’s,  n.  533 
Clairaut’s,  n.  795 

Euler’s,  on  curvature  of  surfaces,  i. 
130 

Fourier’s,  i.  75 — 77 
Gauss’s,  on  the  potential,  n.  497 
Green’s,  extended  form  of,  i.  p.  167 
A (a) 

Guldinus’  or  Pappus’,  11.  567 
Ivory’s,  11.  530,  531 
Liouville’s,  kinetic,  1.  368 
Maclaurin’s,  on  attraction  of  homo- 
geneous focaloid,  11.  494  (£),  522 
Meunier’s,  1.  129 

Stokes’s,  on  the  transformation  of  an 
integral  over  a bounded  surface  into 
one  round  the  boundary,  1.  190  ( j ) 
Thomson’s,  on  the  kinetic  energy  of 
a system  moving  from  rest  with 
given  velocities,  1.  312,  316,  317 
of  maximum  action,  1.  364 

Tidal  friction,  effect  of,  on  Earth’s  rota- 
tion, 1.  276;  11.  830,  11.  (G)  (a) 
secular  effects  of,  determined  by  a 
graphical  method,  11.  (G)  (b) 

Tides,  equilibrium  theory  of  the,  11.  804 
— 811 

theory  of  the,  taking  the  Earth’s 
rotation  into  account,  11.  813,  814 
augmentation  of,  due  to  the  mutual 
gravitation  of  the  disturbed -waters, 
11.  815,  817;  819— 821 
influence  of,  on  the  direction  of  gravity, 
11.  818 

in  an  elastic  solid  sphere,  11.  833 — • 
841 


Tides,  effects  of  elastic  yielding  in  the 
Earth  on  the,  11.  842,  846 
of  long  period,  11.  848 
Time,  foundation  of  our  measure  of,  1 
247,  405,  406 

Torsion,  of  prism  or  cylinder  by  a simple 
twist,  general  solution  of,  1.  700, 
702,  703,  706 ; hydrokinetic  ana- 
logue of,  11.  704,  705 
of  elliptic  cylinder,  11.  707,  703 
of  equilateral  prism,  11.  707,  708 
of  curvilinear  square,  11.  707,  708 
of  rectangular  prism,  11.  707 
Tortuosity,  1.  7 

analytical  expression  for,  1.  9 
Triangle,  kinetic,  difference  between  two 
sides  and  a third  of,  1.  361 
Trochoid,  1.  49,  92 

Twist,  explanation  and  definition  of,  1. 
119,  120 

integral,  of  a rod  in  a plane  curve,  1. 

122 ; in  a tortuous  curve,  1.  123 
examples  of,  1.  126 


Velocity,  defined,  1.  20 

measure  of,  when  uniform,  1.  20 
measure  of,  when  variable,  1.  24 
average  of,  1.  23 

analytical  expressions  for,  1.  24,  25,  27 
resolution  of,  1.  25,  26 
composition  of,  1.  27 
examples  of,  1.  34 
angular,  defined,  1.  41 
angular,  measure  of,  1.  42 
angular,  mean,  1.  43 
angular,  of  a plane,  1.  44 
angular,  composition  of,  1.  95,  96 
angular,  parallelogram  of,  1.  95 
generalized  expression  for  compo- 
nents of,  in  terms  of  momenta,  1. 
313 

reciprocal  relation  between  compo- 
nents of  velocity  and  momentum 
in  two  motions,  1.  313 
of  sound,  etc.,  in  terms  of  modulus 
of  elasticity,  11.  691,  («) 
virtual,  1.  237 
Vernier,  1.  420 — 423 
Viscosity,  of  solids,  11.  741 
of  fluids,  11.  741 
Volume,  measure  of,  1.  411 


Wire,  defined,  11.  588 

kinematical  representation  of  the  cur- 
vatures and  torsion  of,  11.  590 
laws  of  flexure  and  torsion  of,  11.  591 
—593 

principal  torsion-flexure  rigidities  of, 
11.  596,  715 


INDEX. 


527 


Wire,  potential  energy  of  strained,  it. 


equilibrium  of,  ir.  009,  CIO;  ex- 
amples of,  ii.  611,  013 


5 94,  595 


equilibrium  of,  under  opposing  couples, 


Work,  defined,  i.  238 — 240 
practical  unit  of,  i.  238 
scientific  unit  of,  i.  238 


ii.  598—601 


equilibrium  of,  under  opposing  sys- 
tems of  forces  at  its  extremities 
when  the  principal  rigidities  against 


rate  of  doing,  i.  268;  scientific  unit 
of,  i.  268 


flexure  are  equal,  ii.  600 — 604 
equilibrium  of,  under  any  forces  and 

couples  applied  along  its  length,  ir.  Young’s  modulus  of  elasticity,  ii.  086 
. 614  — 691 

infinitely  little  bent  from  straight  line, 
ii.  616 

bent  by  its  own  weight,  it.  617—620  Zonal  harmonics,  defined,  n.  781 


rotation  of,  round  elastic  central  line, 


Murphy’s  analysis  for,  n.  782 
tables  and  graphical  illustrations  of, 
ii.  784 


ii.  621—626 


Ivirchhoff’s  kinetic  analogue  to  the 


CAMBRIDGI: 


University  Press,  Cambridge, 
March,  1883. 


CATALOGUE  OF 

WORKS 

rUBLISHED  FOR  THE  SYNDICS 


OF  THE 

Camimijje  3Hnt\)ersttp 


Uonfcon : c.  j.  clay,  m.a.  and  son. 

CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  WAREHOUSE, 
17  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 

Cambritige : DEIGHTON,  BELL,  AND  CO. 

IDtpjig:  F.  A.  BROCKHAUS. 

IOOO 

24/3/83 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


Cl )t  Cambridge  ftUulm'gftp 


THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES,  &c. 

THE  CAMBRIDGE  PARAGRAPH  BIBLE 

of  the  Authorized  English  Version,  with  the  Text  Revised  by  a Colla- 
tion of  its  Early  and  other  Principal  Editions,  the  Use  of  the  Italic 
Type  made  uniform,  the  Marginal  References  remodelled,  and  a Criti- 
cal Introduction  prehxed,  by  the  Rev.  F.  H.  Scrivener,  M.A.,LL.D., 
Editor  of  the  Greek  Testament,  Codex  Augiensis,  See.,  and  one  of 
the  Revisers  of  the  Authorized  Version.  Crown  4to.  gilt.  21s. 


From  the  Times. 

“Students  of  the  Bible  should  be  particu- 
larly grateful  to  (the  Cambridge  University 
Press;  for  having  produced,  with  the  able  as- 
sistance of  Dr  Scrivener,  a complete  critical 
edition  of  the  Authorized  Version  of  the  Eng- 
lish Bible,  an  edition  such  as,  to  use  the  words 
of  the  Editor,  ‘would  have  been  executed 
long  ago  had  this  version  been  nothing  more 
than  the  greatest  and  best  known  of  English 
classics.’  Falling  at  a time  when  the  formal 
revision  of  this  version  has  been  undertaken 
by  a distinguished  company  of  scholars  and 
divines,  the  publication  of  this  edition  must 
be  considered  most  opportune.” 

From  the  Athenceunt. 

"Apart  from  its  religious  importance,  the 
English  Bible  has  the  glory,  which  but  few 
sister  versions  indeed  can  claim,  of  being  the 
chief  classic  of  the  language,  of  having,  in 
conjunction  with  Shakspeare,  and  in  an  im- 
measurable degree  more  than  he,  fixed  the 
language  beyond  any  possibility  of  important 
change.  Thus  the  recent  contributions  to  the 
literature  of  the  subject,  by  such  workers  as 
M r Francis  Fry  and  Canon  Westcott,  appeal  to 
a wide  range  of  sympathies;  and  to  these  may 
now  be  added  Dr  Scrivener,  well  known  for 
his  labours  in  the  cause  of  the  Greek  Testa- 
ment criticism,  w'ho  has  brought  out,  for  the 


Syndics  of  the  Cambridge  University  Press, 
an  edition  of  the  English  Bible,  according  to 
the  text  of  1611,  revised  by  a comparison  with 
later  issues  on  principles  stated  by  him  in  his 
Introduction.  Here  he  enters  at  length  into 
the  history  of  the  chief  editions  of  the  version, 
and  of  such  features  as  the  marginal  note.-,, 
the  use  of  italic  type,  and  the  changes  of  or- 
thography, as  well  as  into  the  most  interesting 
question  as  to  the  original  texts  from  which 
our  translation  is  produced.” 

From  the  Methodist  Recorder. 

“This  noble  quarto  of  over  1300  pages  is 
in  every  respect  worthy  of  editor  and  pub- 
lishers alike.  The  name  of  the  Cambridge 
University  Press  is  guarantee  enough  for  its 
perfection  in  outward  form,  the  name  of  the 
editor  is  equal  guarantee  for  the  worth  and 
accuracy  of  its  contents.  Without  question, 
it  is  the  best  Paragraph  Bible  ever  published, 
and  its  reduced  price  of  a guinea  brings  it 
within  reach  of  a large  number  of  students.” 

From  the  Londo?i  Quarterly  Review. 

“The  work  is  worthy  in  every  respect  of 
the  editor’s  fame,  and  of  the  Cambridge 
University  Press.  The  noble  English  Ver- 
sion, to  which  our  country  and  religion  owe 
so  much,  was  probably  never  presented  be- 
fore in  so  perfect  a form.” 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  PARAGRAPH  BIBLE. 
Student’s  Edition,  on  good  writing  paper,  with  one  column  of 
print  and  wide  margin  to  each  page  for  MS.  notes.  This  edition  will 
be  found  of  great  use  to  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  task  of 
Biblical  criticism.  Two  Vols.  Crown  4to.  gilt.  31J.  6d. 

THE  LECTIONARY  BIBLE,  WITH  APOCRYPHA, 

divided  into  Sections  adapted  to  the  Calendar  and  Tables  of  Lessons 
of  1871.  Crown  8vo.  y.  6 d. 

THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES, 


With  Notes  and  Introduction.  By 
D.D.,  Dean  of  Wells.  Large  Paper 

“ No  one  can  say  that  the  Old  Testament 
is  a dull  or  worn-out  subject  after  reading 
this  singularly  attractive  and  also  instructive 
commentary.  Its  wealth  of  literary  and  his- 
torical illustration  surpasses  anything  to 


the  Very  Rev.  E.  H.  Plumptre, 
Edition.  Demy  8vo.  7s.  6 d. 

which  we  can  point  in  English  exegesis  of 
the  Old  Testament;  indeed,  even  Delitzsch, 
whose  pride  it  is  to  leave  no  source  of  illus- 
tration unexplored,  is  far  inferior  on  this  head 
to  Dr  Plumptre.” — Academy,  Sept.  10,  1881. 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse,  17  Paternoster  Row. 


CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  BOOKS. 


BREVIARIUM 

ad  usum  insignis  ecclesiae  sarum. 

Juxta  Editionem  maximam  pro  Claudio  Chevallon  et  Francisco 
Kegnault  a.d.  mdxxxi.  in  Alma  Parisiorum  Academia  impressam  • 
labore  ac  studio  Francisci  Procter,  A.M.,  et  Christo phori 
Wordsworth,  A.M.  u™or‘ 

I'ASCICULUS  I.  In  quo  continents  Kalendarium,  et  Ordo 
i emporal^  sive  Proprium  de  Tempore  totius  anni,  una  cum 
ordinal!  suo  quod  usitato  vocabulo  dicitur  Pica  sive  Directorium 
Sacerdotum.  Demy  8vo.  i8j. 

Th®  v?lue  of  this  reprint  is  considerable  made  its  cost  prohibitory  to  all  but  a few 

if tl  hiloTof  Se  whicKrT  th0hUgh  ti,e  ttpnditions  binder 

L[T^nia»  Commune  Sanctorum,  Ordinarium  Missaf 
cum  Canone  et  xiii  Missis,  &c.  &c.  Demy  8vo.  12, 

rP^0t:°?:Le!Cp.fr^,n!iturFiolo&y>  but  all  this  volume,  wecan  only  speak  in  terms  of  the 

very  highest  commendation." — The  Ex- 
aminer. 

•<i5'?mor‘cIge  bas  w?rthily  taken  the  lead 
with  the  Breviary,  which  is  of  especial  value 
for  that  part  of  the  reform  of  the  Prayer-Book 
which  will  fit  it  for  the  wants  of  our  time 
for  all  persons  of  religious  tastes  the  Brevi- 
ary, with  its  mixture  of  Psalm  and  Anthem 
and  Prayer  and  Hymn,  all  hanging  one  on 
the  other,  and  connected  into  a harmonious 
whole,  must  be  deeply  interesting.”— Church. 
Quarterly  Review. 


persons  interested  in  the  history* of  the 
Anglican  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  will  be 
grateful  to  the  Syndicate  of  the  Cambridge 
University  Press  for  forwarding  the  publica- 
tion of  the  volume  which  bears  the  above 
title,  and  which  has  recently  appeared  under 
their  auspices. " —Notes and  Queries. 

“ We  have  here  the  first  instalment  of  the 
celebrated  Sarum  Breviary,  of  which  no  en- 
tire  edition  has  hitherto  been  printed  since 
the  year  1557.  . . Of  the  valuable  explanatory 
notes,  as  well  as  the  learned  introduction  to 

Fasciculus  III.  Nearly  ready. 

GREEK  AND  ENGLISH  TESTAMENT 

\t  aP"S  Columns  on  the  same  page.  Edited  by  J.  Scholefield, 
\1.A.  late  Regius  Professor  of  Greek  in  the  University  Small 

?rSaV°*-  ?kW  n dc10n?  With  the  MarSinaI  References  as  'arranged 
and  revised  by  Dr  Scrivener.  Cloth,  red  ed°-es  is  6d  & 

GREEK  AND  ENGLISH  TESTAMENT 

Jto.E  f™DENT’S  EDITI0n  of  the  above,  on  large  writing  paper. 

GREEK  TESTAMENT, 

ex  editione  Stephani  tertia,  1550.  Small  8vo.  v.  6d. 

THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  IN  GREEK 

according  to  the  text  followed  in  the  Authorised  Version,  with  the 
Variations  adopted  in  the  Revised  Version.  Edited  by  F H A 

orTmp.NThM-A-’  D-CL”  LL  D-  Crown  8vo-  6*  Morocco  boards 

THE  PARALLEL  NEW  TESTAMENT  GREEK 

AND  ENGLISH. 

being  the  Authorised  Version  set  forth  in  1611  Arranged  in  Parallel 
Columns  with  the  Revised  Version  of  1881,  and  with  the  original 
Cieek,  as  edited  by  F.  H.  A.  Scrivener,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  LL  D °Pre- 
benc  ary  of  Exeter  and  Vicar  of  Hendon.  The  Revised  Version  is  the 
8voU  W °f  l lC  Universities  of  Cambridge  and  Oxford.  Crown 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


1 — -2 


4 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  MATTHEW 

in  Anglo-Saxon  and  Northumbrian  Versions,  synoptically  arranged: 
with  Collations  of  the  best  Manuscripts.  By  J.  M.  Kemble,  M.A. 
and  Archdeacon  Hardwick.  Demy  4to.  10s. 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  MARK 

in  Anglo-Saxon  and  Northumbrian  Versions  synoptically  arranged: 
with  Collations  exhibiting  all  the  Readings  of  all  the  MSS.  Edited 
by  the  Rev.  Professor  Skeat,  M.A.  late  Fellow  of  Christ’s  College, 
and  author  of  a Mceso-Gothic  Dictionary.  Demy  4to.  10s. 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  LUKE, 

uniform  with  the  preceding,  by  the  same  Editor.  Demy  4to.  ioj. 


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  JOHN, 
uniform  with  the  preceding,  by  the  same  Editor.  Demy4to.  ioj-. 


“ The  Gospel  according  to  St  John,  in 
Anglo-Saxon  and  Northumbrian  Versions: 
Edited  for  the  Syndics  of  the  University 
Press,  by  the  Rev.  Walter  W.  Skeat,  M.A. , 
Elrington  and  Bosworth  Professor  of  Anglo- 
Saxon  in  the  University  of  Cambridge, 
completes  an  undertaking  designed  and 
commenced  by  that  distinguished  scholar, 


J.  M.  Kemble,  some  forty  years  ago.  Of 
the  particular  volume  now  before  us,  we  can 
only  say  it  is  worthy  of  its  two  predecessors. 
We  repeat  that  the  service  rendered  to  the 
study  of  Anglo-Saxon  by  this  Synoptic  col- 
lection cannot  easily  be  overstated.” — Con- 
temporary Review. 


THE  POINTED  PRAYER  BOOK, 

being  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  with  the  Psalter  or  Psalms  of 
David,  pointed  as  they  are  to  be  sung  or  said  in  Churches.  Royal 
241T10.  Cloth,  ij.  6d. 

The  same  in  square  32mo.  cloth.  6d. 


“The  ‘Pointed  Prayer  Book’  deserves  and  still  more  for  the  terseness  and  dear- 

mention  for  the  new  and  ingenious  system  ness  of  the  directions  given  for  using  it.” — 

on  which  the  pointing  has  been  marked,  Times. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  PSALTER, 

for  the  use  of  Choirs  and  Organists.  Specially  adapted  for  Congre- 
gations in  which  the  “ Cambridge  Pointed  Prayer  Book”  is  used. 
Demy  8vo.  cloth  extra,  3J.  6 d.  Cloth  limp,  cut  flush.  2 s.  6 d. 

THE  PARAGRAPH  PSALTER, 
arranged  for  the  use  of  Choirs  by  Brooke  Foss  Westcott,  D.D., 
Canon  of  Peterborough,  and  Regius  Professor  of  Divinity  in  the 
University  of  Cambridge.  Fcap.  4to.  5^. 

The  same  in  royal  32mo.  Cloth  Is.  Leather  Is.  6d. 


“ The  Paragraph  Psalter  exhibits  all 
the  care,  thought,  and  learning  that  those 
acquainted  with  the  works  of  the  Regius 
Professor  of  Divinity  at  Cambridge  would 


expect  to  find,  and  there  is  not  a clergyman 
or  organist' in  England  who  should  be  with- 
out this  Psalter  as  a work  of  reference.” — 
Morning  Post. 


THE  MISSING  FRAGMENT  OF  THE  LATIN 
TRANSLATION  of  the  FOURTH  BOOK  of  EZRA, 


discovered,  and  edited  with  an  Introduction  and  Notes,  and  a 
facsimile  of  the  MS.,  by  Robert  L.  Bf.nsly,  M.A.,  Sub-Librarian 
of  the  University  Library,  and  Reader  in  Hebrew,  Gonville  and  Caius 
College,  Cambridge.  Demy  4to.  io.r. 


“ Edited  with  true  scholarly  complete- 
ness. ” — IV estminster  Review. 

“It  has  been  said  of  this  book  that  it  has 
added  a new  chapter  to  the  Bible,  and,  start- 
ling as  the  statement  may  at  first  sight  ap- 
pear, it  is  no  exaggeration  of  the  actual  fact. 


if  by  the  Bible  we  understand  that  of  the 
larger  size  which  contains  the  Apocrypha, 
and  if  the  Second  Book  of  Esdras  can  be 
fairly  called  a part  of  the  Apocrypha.” — 
Saturday  Review. 


London;  Cambridge  Warehouse,  17  Paiernosier  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


5 


THEOLOGY— (ANCIENT). 

THE  GREEK  LITURGIES. 

Chiefly  from  original  Authorities.  By  C.  A.  SWAINSON,  D D Master 
of  Christ's  College.  [/„  the  Press. 

THE  PALESTINIAN  MISHNA, 

By  W.  H.  Lowe,  M.A.  Lecturer  in  Hebrew  at  Christ’s  College 
Cambridge.  Royal  8vo.  2IJ-. 

SAYINGS  OF  THE  JEWISH  FATHERS, 

comprising  Pirqe  Aboth  and  Pereq  R.  Meir  in  Hebrew  and  English 
with  Critical  and  Illustrative  Notes.  By  Charles  Taylor  Id.d! 
Master  of  St  John’s  College,  Cambridge,  and  Honorary  Fellow  of 
King  s College,  London.  Demy  8vo.  ioj. 


‘The  ‘Masseketh  Aboth’  stands  at  the 
head  of  Hebrew  non-canonical  writings.  It 
is  of  ancient  date,  claiming  to  contain  the 
dicta  of  teachers  who  flourished  from  B.c.  200 
to  the  same  year  of  our  era.  The  precise 
time  of  its  compilation  in  its  present  form  is, 
of  course,  in  doubt.  Mr  Taylor’s  explana- 
tory and  illustrative  commentary  is  very  full 
and  satisfactory.” — Spectator. 

“If  we  mistake  not,  this  is  the  first  pre- 
cise translation  into  the  English  language 
accompanied  by  scholarly  notes,  of  any  por- 
tion of  the  Talmud.  In  other  words,  it  is 
the  first  instance  of  that  most  valuable  and 
neglected  portion  of  Jewish  literature  being 
treated  in  the  same  wav  as  a Greek  classic 


in  an  ordinary  critical  edition.  . . The  Tal- 
mudic books,  which  have  been  so  strangely 
neglected,  we  foresee  will  be  the  most  im- 
portant aids  of  the  future  for  the  proper  un- 
ders  tan  ding  0f  the  Bible.  . . The  Sayings  of 
the  Jewish  Fathers  may  claim  to  be  scholar- 
ly, and,  moreover,  of  a scholarship  unusually 
thorough  and  finished."— Dublin  Univer- 
sity Magazine. 

“A  careful  and  thorough  edition  which 
does  credit  to  English  scholarship,  of  a short 
treatise  from  the  Mishna,  containing  a series 
of  sentences  or  maxims  ascribed  mostly  to 
Jewish  teachers  immediately  preceding  or 
immediately  following  the  Christian  era.  . . ” 
— Contemporary  Review. 


THEODORE  OF  MOPSUESTIA’S  COMMENTARY 
ON  THE  MINOR  EPISTLES  OF  S.  PAUL. 

3,hth  VersJon  wTith  tke  G.reek  Fragments,  edited  from  the  MSS. 
a ^ 0tCTS'  anc  an  Introduction,  by  LI.  B.  Swete,  D.D.,  Rector  of 
Ashdon,  Essex,  and  late  Fellow  of  Gonville  and  Caius  Colle°-e 
Cambridge.  In  Two  Volumes.  Vol.  I.,  containing  the  Introduction ’ 

Colissians™  Demy  “vo  Land  ““  C°mmentaly  “P°n  GalatiansJ 

handschriften  . . sind  vortrefflidie  photo- 
graplnsche  Facsimile's  beigegeben,  wic  iibei- 
haupt  das  ganze  Werk  von  der  University 
Fress  zu  Cambridge  mit  bekannter  Elemanz 
ausgestattet  ist.” -T/ieologische  Literalur- 
zeitnng. 

1 • A ’s.  a KopeAiI  sign,  amid  forebodings 
which  arise  about  the  theological  learning 
of  the  Universities,  that  we  have  before  us 
the  first  instalment  of  a thoroughly  scientific 
and  patnstaking  work,  commenced  at  Cam- 
bridge and  completed  at  a country  rectory  " 
— „ /t  Quarterly  Review  (J an.  1881). 

...  , • jnn  S'yete’s  Leistung  ist  eine  so 
tucht.ge  dass  wir  das  Werk  in  keinen  besseren 
Handen  wissen  mochten,  und  mit  den  sich- 
ersten  Lrwartungen  auf  das  Gelingen  der 
I1  ortselzung  entgegen  sehen  ’’-Gottingische 
gelehrte  Anzeigen  (Sept.  1881).  4 


“In  dem  oben  verzeichneten  Buche  liegt 
uns  die  erste  Halfte  einer  vollstandigen, 
ebenso  sorgfahig  gearbeiteten  wie  schon 
ausgestatteten  Ausgabe  des  Commentars  mit 
ausfiihrlichcn  Prolegomena  und  reichhaltigen 
kritischen  und  crlauterndeu  Anmerkungcn 
vor.” — Literarisches  Centralblatt. 

. K is  the  result  of  thorough,  careful,  and 
patient  investigation  of  all  the  points  bearing 
on  the  subject,  and  the  results  are  presented 
with  admirable  good  sense  and  modesty  — 
Guardian.  ' 

“Auf  Grund  dieser  Quellen  ist  dcr  Text 
bei  swete  nut  musterhafter  Akribie  herge- 
steilt.  Aber  auch  sonst  hat  der  Herausgeber 
mit  unermudlichem  Fleisse  und  eingehend- 
ster  Sachkenntniss  sein  Werk  mit  alien  den- 
jenigen  Zugaben  ausgerustet,  welche  bei  einer 
solchen  I ext-Ausgabe  nur  irgend  erwartet 


werden  konnen.  .“.  . Vonde  n ~ d re  f H a u pt - 

Volume  II  containing  the  Commentary  on  r Thessalonians— 

. I hilemon,  Appendices  and  Indices.  I2j. 

ganglichen  HMfsmittei rhafte^Weise  bei'  dern'clTtmi'^uf^'1  ,die  w!r 

zeitung  (Sept.  23,  1882). 


London : 


Cami  ridije 


Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


6 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


SANCTI  IRENMU  EPISCOPI  LUGDUNENSIS 

libros  quinque  adversus  Haereses,  versione  Latina  cum  Codicibus 
Claromontano  ac  Arundeliano  denuo  collata,  praemissa  de  placitis 
Gnosticorum  prolusione,  fragmenta  necnon  Graece,  Syriace,  Armeniace, 
commentatione  perpetua  et  indicibus  variis  edidit  W.  Wigan  Harvey, 
S.T.B.  Collegii  Regalis  olim  Socius.  2 Vols.  Demy  8vo.  i8j. 

M.  MINUCII  FELICIS  OCTAVIUS. 

The  text  newly  revised  from  the  original  MS.,  with  an  English  Com- 
mentary, Analysis,  Introduction,  and  Copious  Indices.  Edited  by 
H.  A.  Holden,  LL.D.  late  Head  Master  of  Ipswich  School,  formerly 
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  Crown  8vo.  ys.  6 d. 

THEOPHILI  EPISCOPI  ANTIOCHENSIS 
LIBRI  TRES  AD  AUTOLYCUM 

edidit,  Prolegomenis  Versione  Notulis  Indicibus  instruxit  Gulielmus 
Gilson  Humphry,  S.T.B.  Collegii  Sandliss.  Trin.  apud  Cantabri- 
gienses  quondam  Socius.  Post  8vo.  5J. 

THEOPHYLACTI  IN  EVANGELIUM 
S.  MATTHAU  COMMENTARIES, 

edited  by  W.  G.  Humphry,  B.D.  Prebendary  of  St  Paul’s,  late 
Fellow  of  Trinity  College.  Demy  Svo.  ys.  6 d. 

TERTULLIANUS  DE  CORONA  MILITIS,  DE 
SPECTACULIS,  DE  IDOLOLATRIA, 
with  Analysis  and  English  Notes,  by  George  Currey,  D.D.  Preacher 
at  the  Charter  House,  late  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  St  John’s  College. 
Crown  Svo. 


THEOLOGY— (ENGLISH). 

WORKS  OF  ISAAC  BARROW, 

compared  with  the  Original  MSS.,  enlarged  with  Materials  hitherto 
unpublished.  A new  Edition,  by  A.  Napier,  M.A.  of  Trinity  College, 
Vicar  of  Holkham,  Norfolk.  9 Vols.  Demy  8vo.  £3.  3 s. 

TREATISE  OF  THE  POPE’S  SUPREMACY, 


and  a Discourse  concerning  the  Unity  of  the  Church,  by  Isaac 
Barrow.  Demy  8vo.  ys.  6 d. 

PEARSON’S  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  CREED, 


edited  by  Temple  Chevallier,  B.D.  late  Fellow  and  Tutor  of 
St  Catharine’s  College,  Cambridge.  New  Edition.  Revised  by 
R.  Sinker.  B.D.,  Librarian  of  Trinity  College.  Demy  Svo.  12.?. 


“A  new  edition  of  Bishop  Pearson’s  fa- 
mous work  On  the  Creed  lias  j list  been  issued 
by  the  Cambridge  University  Press.  It  is 
the  well-known  edition  of  Temple  Chevallier, 
thoroughly  overhauled  by  the  Rev.  R.  Sinker, 
of  Trinity  College.  The  whole  text  and  notes 
have  been  most  carefully  examined  and  cor- 
rected, and  special  pains  have  been  taken  to 
verify  the  almost  innumerable  references. 
These  have  been  more  clearly  and  accurately 
given  in  very  many  places,  and  the  citations 


themselves  have  been  adapted  to  the  best 
and  newest  texts  of  the  several  authors — 
texts  which  have  undergone  vast  improve- 
ments within  the  last  two  centuries.  The 
Indices  have  also  been  revised  and  enlarged. 

Altogether  this  appears  to  be  the  most 

complete  and  convenient  edition  as  yet  pub- 
lished of  a work  which  has  long  been  recog- 
nised in  all  quarters  as  a standard  one.” — 
Guardian. 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


AN  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  EXPOSITION  OF 

THE  CREED 

written  by  the  Right  Rev.  John  Pearson,  D.D.  late  Lord  Bishnn 
of  Chester,  by  W.  H.  Mill,  D.D.  late  Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew 
in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Demy  8vo.  $s. 

WHEATLY  ON  THE  COMMON  PRAYER, 

edited  by  G E Corrie  D.D.  Master  of  Jesus  College,  Examining 
Chaplain  to  the  late  Lord  Bishop  of  Ely.  Demy  8vo  js  6 d “ 

CAESAR  MORGAN’S  INVESTIGATION  OF  THE 
TRINITY  OF  PLATO, 

and  of  Philo  Judaeus,  and  of  the  effects  which  an  attachment  to  their 
writings  had  upon  the  principles  and  reasonings  of  the  Fathers  of  the 
Christian  Church.  Revised  by  H.  A.  Holden,  LL.D.  late  Head  Master 

Crown  8vo  ’ f°rmerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

TWO  FORMS  OF  PRAYER  OF  THE  TIME  OF 

QUEEN  ELIZABETH.  Now  First  Reprinted.  Demy  8vo  6 d 

th?t~‘,A  very  remarkable  volume,  in  the 
original  vellum  cover,  and  containing  25 
forms  of  Prayer  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth, 
each  with  the  autograph  of  Humphrey  Dyson, 
has  lately  fallen  into  the  hands  of  my  friend 
Mr  H.  Pyne.  It  is  mentioned  specially  in 
the  Preface  to  the  Parker  Society’s  volume 


been  lost  sight  of  for  200  years.’  By  the 
kindness  of  the  present  possessor  of  this 
valuable  volume,  containing  in  all  25  distinct 
publications,  I am  enabled  to  reprint  in  the 
following  pages  the  two  Forms  of  Praver 
b'en 


SELECT  DISCOURSES, 


H GWlS  aVf,0"^  Queens’  Cambridge.  Edited  by 

H.  G.  \Y  illiams,  B.D.  late  Professor  of  Arabic.  Royal  8vo  7s  6d  * 

“The ‘Select  Discourses’ of  John  Smith,  * ' 

collected  and  published  from  his  papers  after 
his  death,  are,  in  my  opinion,  much  the  most 


. , ...  ...  ^ ***“'-n  U1C  lUtJbL 

considerable  work  left  to  us  by  this  Cambridge 
School  [the  Cambridge  Platonists],  They 
have  a right  to  a place  in  English  literary 
history.”— Mr  Matthew  Arnold,  in  the 
Contemporary  Review. 

“Of  all  the  products  of  the  Cambridge 
School,  the  ‘Select  Discourses’  are  perhaps 
the  highest,  as  they  are  the  most  accessible 
and  the  most  widely  appreciated. ..and  indeed 
no  spiritually  thoughtful  mind  can  read  them 
unmoved.  They  carry  us  so  directly  into  an 
atmosphere  of  divine  philosophy,  luminous 


with  the  richest  lights  of  meditative  genius... 
He  was  one  of  those  rare  thinkers  in  whom 
largeness  of  view,  and  depth,  and  wealth  of 
poetic  and  speculative  insight,  only  served  to 
evoke  more  fully  the  religious  spirit,  and 
while  he  drew  the  mould  of  his  thought  from 
PlotinuS’^he  vmfied  the  substance  of  it  from 
St  Paul.  —Principal  Tulloch,  Rational 
theology  in  England  in  the  i7th  Century. 

wn-.  may-  1"sta,.’?e  Mr  Henry  Griffin 
Williams s revised  edition  of  Mr  John  Smith's 
Select  Discourses,’  which  have  won  Mr 
Matthew  Arnold’s  admiration,  as  an  example 
of  worthy  work  for  an  University  Press  to 
undertake.  — Times. 


THE  HOMILIES, 

wrth  Various  Readings,  and  the  Quotations  from  the  Fathers  Riven 

* ZgthJ?  the  r uginal  ^nSuaSes-  Edited  by  G.  E.  Corrie,  D.D. 
Master  of  Jesus  College.  Demy  8vo.  js.  6d. 

DE  OBLIGATIONE  CONSCIENTLE  PRvELEC- 

riONES  decern  Oxonii  in  Schola  Theologica  habitae  a Roberto 
Sanderson,  SS.  Theologiae  ibidem  Professore  Regio.  With  English 
Notes,  including  an  abridged  Translation,  by  W.  Whewell  D D 
late  Master  of  Trinity  College.  Demy  8vo.  js.  6 d. 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


8 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


ARCHBISHOP  USHER’S  ANSWER  TO  A JESUIT, 

with  other  Trails  on  Popery.  Edited  by  J.  Scholefield,  M.A.  late 
Regius  Professor  of  Greek  in  the  University.  Demy  8vo.  js.  6 d. 

WILSON’S  ILLUSTRATION  OF  THE  METHOD 

of  explaining  the  New  Testament,  by  the  early  opinions  of  Jews  and 
Christians  concerning  Christ.  Edited  by  T.  Turton,  D.D.  late  Lord 
Bishop  of  Ely.  Demy  8vo.  5^. 

LECTURES  ON  DIVINITY 

delivered  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  by  John  Hey,  D.D. 
Third  Edition,  revised  by  T.  Turton,  D.D.  late  Lord  Bishop  of  Ely. 
2 vols.  Demy  8vo.  15J. 


ARABIC,  SANSKRIT  AND  SYRIAC. 

POEMS  OF  BEHA  ED  DIN  ZOHEIR  OF  EGYPT. 


With  a Metrical  Translation,  Notes  and  Introduction,  by  E.  H. 
Palmer,  M.A.,  Barrister-at-Law  of  the  Middle  Temple,  late  Lord 
Almoner’s  Professor  of  Arabic,  formerly  Fellow  of  St  John’s  College 
in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  3 vols.  Crown  4to. 

Vol.  I.  The  Arabic  Text,  ioj.  6 d.\  Cloth  extra.  15J. 

Vol.  II.  English  Translation,  ioj.  6d. ; Cloth  extra.  15J. 


“We  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  in 
both  Prof.  Palmer  has  made  an  addition  to  Ori- 
ental literature  for  which  scholars  should  be 
grateful ; and  that,  while  his  knowledge  of 
Arabic  is  a sufficient  guarantee  for  his  mas- 
tery of  the  original,  his  English  compositions 
are  distinguished  by  versatility,  command  of 
language,  rhythmical  cadence,  and,  as  we 
have  remarked,  by  not  unskilful  imitations  of 
the  styles  of  several  of  our  own  favourite 
poets,  living  and  dead.’’ — Saturday  Review. 


“ This  sumptuous  edition  of  the  poems  of 
Beha-ed-din  Zoheir  is  a very  welcome  addi- 
tion to  the  small  series  of  Eastern  poets 
accessible  to  readers  who  are  not  Oriental- 
ists. ...  In  all  there  is  that  exquisite  finish  of 
which  Arabic  poetry  is  susceptible  in  so  rare 
a degree.  The  form  is  almost  always  beau- 
tiful, be  the  thought  what  it  may  . . . Alto- 
gether the  inside  of  the  book  is  worthy  of  the 
beautiful  arabesque  binding  that  rejoices  the 
eye  of  the  lover  of  Arab  art.” — Academy. 


yuu.j,  ** ' ‘“a  * ^ •» 

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  JOSHUA  THE  STYLITE, 

composed  in  Syriac  A.D.  507  with  an  English  translation  and  notes,  by 
W.  Wright,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Arabic.  Demy  8vo.  ioy.  6d. 


“ Die  lehrreiche  kleine  Chronik  Josuas  hat 
nach  Assemani  und  Martin  in  Wright  einen 
dritten  Bearbeiter  gefunden,  der  sich  um  die 
Emendation  des  Textes  wie  um  die  Erkla- 
rung  der  Realien vvesentlich  verdient  gemacht 
hat . . . Ws.  Josua-Ausgabe  ist  eine  sehr  dan- 
kenswerte  Gabe  und  besonders  empfehlens- 
wert  als  ein  Lehrmittel  fur  den  syrischen 


Unterricht ; es  erscheint  auch  gerade  zttr 
rechten  Zeit,  da  die  zweite  Ausgabe  von 
Roedigers  syrischer  Chrestomathie  im  Bucli- 
handel  vollstandig  vergriffen  und  diejenige 
von  Kirsch-Bernstein  nur  noch  in  wenigen 
Exemplareu  vorhanden  lit.”— Deutsche  Lit- 
ter at  ter  zeit  ung. 


WCIL  Hlb  cm  

NALOPAKHYAnAM,  OR,  THE  TALE  OF  NALA; 

containing  the  Sanskrit  Text  in  Roman  Characteis,  followed  by  a 
Vocabulary  in  which  each  word  is  placed  under  its  loot,  with  leferenccs 
to  derived  words  in  Cognate  Languages,  and  a sketch  of  Sanskrit 
Grammar.  By  the  late  Rev.  Thomas  Jarrett,  M.A.  1 rimty  College, 
Recrius  Professor  of  Hebrew,  late  Professor  of  Arabic,  and  formeily 
Fellow  of  St  Catharine’s  College,  Cambridge.  Demy  8vo.  ioy. 

NOTES  ON  THE  TALE  OF  NALA, 

for  the  use  of  Classical  Students,  by  J.  Peile,  M.A.  Fellow  and  Tutor 
of  Christ’s  College.  Demy  8vo.  iM;mT,TTT._  P.XTCri)TT 

CATALOGUE  OF  THE  BUDDHIS1  SANSKRIT 

MANUSCRIPTS  in  the  University  Library,  Cambridge.  Edited 

by  C Bendall,  B.A.,  Fellow  of  Gonville  and  Cains  College. 

7 [In  the  Press. 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


9 


GREEK  AND  LATIN  CLASSICS,  &c.  (See  also  pp.  24-27.) 
A SELECTION  OF  GREEK  INSCRIPTIONS, 

With  Introductions  and  Annotations  by  E.  S.  Roberts  MA 
Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Cains  College.  [Preparing. 


THE  AGAMEMNON  OF  AESCHYLUS. 

With  a Translation  m English  Rhythm,  and  Notes  Critical  and  Ex- 
planatory. New  Edition  Revised.  By  Benjamin  Hall  Kennedy 
D.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek.  Crown  8vo.  6s. 


One  of  the  best  editions  of  the  master- 
piece of  Greek  tragedy.  ” — A thenteum. 

“It  is  needless  to  multiply  proofs  of  the 


value  of  this  volume  alike  to  the  poetical 
translator,  the  critical  scholar,  and  the  ethical 
student.” — Sat.  Rev. 


THE  CEDIPUS  TYRANNUS  OF  SOPHOCLES  with 

a 1 ranslation  and  Notes  by  the  same  Editor.  Crown  8vo.  6s. 


‘Dr  Kennedy’s  edition  of  the  CEdipus 
Tyrannies  is  a worthy  companion  to  his 
Agamemnon , and  we  may  say  at  once  that 


no  more  valuable  contribution  to  the  study 
of  Sophocles  has  appeared  of  late  years.” — 
Saturday  Review. 


THE  THEiETETUS  OF  PLATO  with  a Translation 

and  Notes  by  the  same  Editor.  Crown  8vo.  js.  6 d. 


PLATO’S  PHyEDO, 

literally  translated,  by  the  late  E.  M.  Cope,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College 
Cambridge.  Demy  8vo.  $s. 


ARISTOTLE. — IIEPI  AIKAIOSTNHS. 

THE  FIFTH  BOOK  OF  THE  NICOMACFIEAN  ETHICS  OF 
ARISTOTLE.  Edited  by  Henry  Jackson,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity 
College,  Cambridge.  Demy  8vo.  6s. 


“It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  some  of 
the  points  he  discusses  have  never  had  so 
much  light  thrown  upon  them  before.  . . . 


Scholars  will  hope  that  this  is  not  the  only 
portion  of  the  Aristotelian  writings  which  he 
is  likely  to  edit.” — A thenceum. 


ARISTOTLE.— IIEPI  TTXHS. 
ARISTOTLE’S  PSYCHOLOGY,  in  Greek  and  English,  with  Intro- 
duction and  Notes,  by  Edwin  Wallace,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor 
of  Worcester  College,  Oxford.  Demy  8vo.  i8j. 


In  an  elaborate  introduction  Mr  Wallace 
collects  and  correlates  all  the  passages  from 
the  various  works  of  Aristotle  bearing  on 
these  points,  and  this  he  does  with  a width 
of  learning  that  marks  him  out  as  one  o. 
our  foremost  Aristotlic  scholars,  and  with  a 
critical  acumen  that  is  far  from  common.”— 
Glasgow  Herald. 

“As  a clear  exposition  of  the  opinions  of 
Aristotle  on  psychology,  Mr  Wallace’s  work 
is  of  distinct  value— the  introduction  is  ex- 
cellently wrought  out,  the  translation  is  good, 
the  notes  are  thoughtful,  scholarly,  and  full. 
We  therefore  can  welcome  a volume  like  this, 
which  is  useful  both  to  those  who  study  it  as 
scholars, and  to  those  who  read  it  as  students 
of  philosophy.” — Scotsman. 


“ He  possesses  a hermeneutical  talent  of 
the  very  highest  order.  . . . Everywhere  we 
meet  with  evidences  of  a long  and  careful 
study  of  the  works  of  Aristotle,  and  a patient 
endeavour  to  arrive  at  his  real  meaninsr  ” — 
Mind. 

“The  notes  are  exactly  what  such  notes 
ought  to  be, — helps  to  the  student,  not  mere 
displays  of  learning.  By  far  the  more  valu- 
able parts  of  the  notes  are  neither  critical 
nor  literary,  but  philosophical  and  expository 
of  the  thought,  and  of  the  connection  of 
thought,  in  the  treatise  itself.  In  this  rela- 
tion the  notes  are  invaluable.  Of  the  trans- 
lation, it  may  be  said  that  an  English  reader 
may  fairly  master  by  means  of  it  this  great 
treatise  of  Aristotle.  "—Spectator. 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 

1—5 


IO 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


ARISTOTLE. 

THE  RHETORIC.  With  a Commentary  by  the  late  E.  M.  Cope, 
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  revised  and  edited  by  J.  E. 
S ANDYS,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  St  John’s  College,  Cambridge, 
and  Public  Orator.  With  a biographical  Memoir  by  H.  A.  J.  Munro, 
M.A.  Three  Volumes,  Demy  8vo.  £i.  i nr.  6 d. 

“ This  work  is  in  many  ways  creditable  to 
the  University  of  Cambridge.  If  an  English 
student  wishes  to  have  a full  conception  of 
what  is  contained  in  the  Rhetoric  of  Aris- 
totle, to  Mr  Cope’s  edition  he  must  go.”— 

Academy. 

PRIVATE  ORATIONS  OF  DEMOSTHENES, 

with  Introductions  and  English  Notes,  by  F.  A.  Paley,  M.A.  Editor 
of  Aeschylus,  etc.  and  J.  E.  Sandys,  M.A.  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  St 
John’s  College,  and  Public  Orator  in  the  University  of  Cambridge. 

Part  I.  Contra  Phormionem,  Lacritum,  Pantaenetum,  Boeotum  de 
Nomine,  Boeotum  de  Dote,  Dionysodorum.  Crown  8vo.  6s. 

“Mr  Paley’s  scholarship  is  sound  and  literature  which  bears  upon  his  author,  and 


Mr  Sandys  has  performed  his  arduous 
duties  with  marked  ability  and  admirable 

tact In  every  part  of  his  work 

— revising,  supplementing,  and  completing — 
he  has  done  exceedingly  well.” — Examiner. 


accurate,  his  experience  of  editing  wide,  and 
if  he  is  content  to  devote  his  learning  and 
abilities  to  the  production  of  such  manuals 
as  these,  they  will  be  received  with  gratitude 
throughout  the  higher  schools  of  the  country. 
Mr  Sandys  is  deeply  read  in  the  German 


the  elucidation  of  matters  of  daily  life,  in  the 
delineation  of  which  Demosthenes  is  so  rich, 

obtains  full  justice  at  his  hands We 

hope  this  edition  may  lead  the  way  to  a mote 
general  study  of  these  speeches  in  schools 
than  has  hitherto  been  possible.” — A cademy. 


Part  II.  Pro  Phormione,  Contra  Stephanum  I.  II. ; Nicostratum, 
Cononem,  Calliclem.  *js.  6d. 


in  the  needful  help  which  enables  us  to 
form  a sound  estimate  of  the  rights  of  the 

case It  is  long  since  we  have  come 

upon  a work  evincing  more  pains,  scholar- 
ship, and  varied  research  and  illustration  than 
Mr  Sandys’s  contribution  to  the  ‘Private 
Orations  of  Demosthenes’.”— Sat.  Rev. 

“ the  edition  reflects  credit  on 

Cambridge  scholarship,  and  ought  to  be  ex- 
tensively used.  ” — A thenceum. 


1 To  give  even  a brief  sketch  of  these 
speeches  \Pro  Phormione  and  Contra  Ste- 
j>hanuni\  would  be  incompatible  with  our 
limits,  though  we  can  hardly  conceive  a task 
more  useful  to  the  classical  or  professional 
scholar  than  to  make  one  for  himself.  .... 

It  is  a great  boon  to  those  who  set  them- 
selves to  unravel  the  thread  of  arguments 
pro  and  con  to  have  the  aid  of  Mr  Sandys’s 
excellent  running  commentary  ....  and  no 
one  can  say  that  he  is  ever  deficient 

DEMOSTHENES  AGAINST  ANDROTION  AND 
AGAINST  TIMOCRATES,  with  Introductions  and  English  Com- 
mentary, by  William  Wayte,  M.A.,  late  Professor  of  Greek, 
University  College,  London,  Formerly  Fellow  of  King’s  College, 
Cambridge,  and  Assistant  Master  at  Eton.  Crown  8vo.  7s.  6 d. 

“The  editor  has  devoted  special  atten-  full  help  without  unduly  encouraging  ‘the 
tion  to  the  principles  and  practice  of  Attic 
law,  of  which  these  speeches  afford  many 
rich  illustrations.  In  the  notes,  which  in- 
clude serviceable  abstracts  of  the  speeches, 
his  object,  he  tells  us,  has  been  “ to  afford 

PINDAR. 

OLYMPIAN  AND  PYTHIAN  ODES.  With  Notes  Explanatory 
and  Critical,  Introductions  and  Introductory  Essays.  Edited  by 
C.  A.  M.  Fennell,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Jesus  College.  Crown  8vo. 

QS. 

— -•  ■ ’ ’ - -c  -11  “Considered  simply  as  a contribution  to 

the  study  and  criticism  of  Pindar,  Mr  Fen- 
nell’s edition  is  a work  of  great  merit..  .Alto- 
gether, this  edition  is  a welcome  and  whole- 
some sign  of  the  vitality  and  development  of 
Cambridge  scholarship,  and  we  are  glad  to 
see  that  it  is  to  be  continued.”—  Saturday 
Review. 


less  industrious  sort ; ’ ” and  they  certainly 
afford  as  much  help,  and  of  the  right  kind, 
as  any  reasonable  student  is  likely  to  de- 
sire.”— The  Scotsman. 


“Mr  Fennell  deserves  the  thanks  of  all 
classical  students  for  his  careful  and  scholarly 
edition  of  the  Olympian  and  Pythian  odes. 

He  brings  to  his  task  the  necessary  enthu- 
siasm for  his  author,  great  industry,  a sound 
judgment,  and,  in  particular,  copious  and 
minute  learning  in  comparative  philology. 

To  his  qualifications  in  this  last  respect  every 
page  bears  witness.” — A thenceum. 

THE  NEMEAN  AND  ISTHMIAN  ODES. 


[Nearly  ready. 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Roto. 


II 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 


THE  BACCHAE 

with  Introduction,  Critical  Notes, 
by  J.  E.  Sandys,  M.A.,  Fellow  and 
bridge,  and  Public  Orator.  Crown 

“ Of  the  present  edition  of  the  Racchee  by 
Mr  Sandys  we  may  safely  say  that  never 
before  has  a Greek  play,  in  England  at 
least,  had  fuller  justice  done  to  its  criti- 
cism, interpretation,  and  archaiological  il- 
lustration, whether  for  the  young  student  or 
the  more  advanced  scholar.  The  Cambridge 
Public  Orator  may  be  said  to  have  taken  the 
lead  m issuing  a complete  edition  of  a Greek 
play,  which  is  destined  perhaps  to  gain  re- 
doubled favour  now  that  the  study  of  ancient 
monuments  has  been  applied  to  its  illustra- 
tion.”— Saturday  Review. 

“ Mr  Sandys  has  done  well  by  his  poet  and 
by  his  University.  He  has  given  a most 
welcome  gift  to  scholars  both  at  home  and 
abroad.  The  illustrations  are  aptly  chosen 
and  delicately  executed,  and  the  apparatus 
crittcus , in  the  way  both  of  notes  and  indices 
is  very  complete.”— Notes  atid  Queries. 

“The  volume  is  interspersed  with  well- 
executed  woodcuts,  and  its  general  attractive- 
ness of  form  reflects  great  credit  on  the 
University  Press.  In  the  notes  Mr  Sandys 
has  more  than  sustained  his  well-earned 
reputation  as  a careful  and  learned  editor 
aud  shows  considerable  advance  in  freedom 
and  lightness  of  style Under  such  cir- 


OF  EURIPIDES. 

and  Archaeological  Illustrations, 
Tutor  of  St  John’s  College,  Cam- 
8vo.  i oj.  6d. 

cumstances  it  is  superfluous  to  say  that  for 
the  purposes  of  teachers  and  advanced  stu- 
dents this  handsome  edition  tar  surpasses  all 
its  predecessors.  The  volume  will  add  to  the 
already  wide  popularity  of  a unique  drama 
and  must  be  reckoned  among  the  most  im- 
portant classical  publications  of  the  year  ” 

A theneewm. 

“ I t has  not,  like  so  many  such  books,  been 
hastily  produced  to  meet  the  momentary 
need  of  some  particular  examination  ; but  it 
has  employed  for  some  years  the  labour  and 
thought  of  a highly  finished  scholar,  whose 
aim  seems  to  have  been  that  his  book  should 
go  forth  pot  us  teres  atgue  rotundus,  armed 
at  all  points  with  all  that  may  throw  light 
upon  its  subject.  The  result  is  a work  which 
will  not  only  assist  the  schoolboy  or  under- 
graduate in  his  tasks,  but  will  adorn  the 
library  of  the  scholar.”  . . “The  description 
ol  the  woodcuts  abounds  in  interesting  and 
suggestive  information  upon  various  points 
of  ancient  art,  and  is  a further  instance 
of  the  very  thorough  as  well  as  scholar- 
hke  manner  in  which  Mr  Sandys  deals 
with  his  subject  at  every  point.” — The 
Guardian. 


NE™I  aYf  nF  GEEEK  COINS.  By  Percy  Gard- 

ner, M.A.,  F.S.A.,  Disney  Professor  of  Archaeology.  With  16  Auto- 

WPorlPd  I^nTnf-F'T°erPhSr  °f  C°inS  °f  «" V*  of  Greek 
W orld.  I mpl  4to.  Cloth  e«ra,  £,. uj.  6 d;  Morocco  backs.  £2.  2 s. 

ESSAYS  ON  THE  ART  OF  PHEIDIAS 

inyt£  ™ALDS™N’  M-A-.  Phil-  D-,  Reader  in  Classical  Amlueoloo-y 
m the  University  of  Cambridge.  Royal  8vo.  With  Illustrations.  ° 

M.  TULLI  CICERONIS  DE  FINIBUS  BONORUM 
plL^dAWkhUfTLIBf!-  QV'NtQUE'  The  text  revised^™ 

plained,  With  a Translation  by  James  S.  Reid  M L Fellow  and 
M T a"ALs  College.  ’ \llte 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  DE  OFFICIIS  LIBRI  TRFS 

byH  ^Holden  aLLD  ^ EnglisJj  ^namentary,  and  copious  Indices, 
low  of^»LL^’  u eJHead  Master  of  IP®wich  School,  late  Fel- 
of  London  ' Fourth  ^aT1?nd&eJ  Cla.ssical  Examiner  to  the  University 
Crown  8vo  gs  ^ Edltl0n'  Revised  aad  considerably  enlarged. 


Dr  Holden  truly  states  that  ‘Text, 

Analysis,  and  Commentary  in  this  edition 
have  been  again  subjected  to  a thorough 

I™?"  11  cert?in'y  the  best  edition 

extant  The  Introduction  (after Heine) 
and  notes  leave  nothing  to  be  desired  in  point 
of  fulness,  accuracy,  and  neatness  ; the  tvpo- 
graphical  execution  will  satisfy  the  most  fas- 
tidious eye.  — Notes  and  Queries.  - ~ - - 

E^EEI  CICERONIS  PRO  C RABIRTO  rPFRF) 

du^tionIOandISADD^nd  ORhTIw  rD  QVIRITES  With  Notes  Introi 

turer  of  s“fohnPs  Cnlieve  C S HEITLAND  Ma.  Fellow  and  Lee- 
rurer  ot  bt  John s College, ^ambndge.  Demy  8vo.  ys.  6 d. 

London:  Cambridge  wHUSde,  17  Paternoster  Row. 


“ Dr  Holden  has  issued  an  edition  of  what 
is  perhaps  the  easiest  and  most  popular  of 
Cicero  s philosophical  works,  the  de  Opiciis, 
which, especially  in  the  form  which  it  has  now 
assumed  after  two  most  thorough  revisions, 
leaves  little  or  nothing  to  be  desired  in  the 
fullness  and  accuracy  of  its  treatment  alike 
of  the  matter  and  the  language.  ”—A  cadcuty. 


12 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


M.  TULLII  CICERONIS  DE  NATURA  DEORUM 

Libri  Tres,  with  Introduction  and  Commentary  by  Joseph  B.  Mayor, 
M.A.,  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  at  King’s  College,  London, 
formerly  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  St  John’s  College,  Cambridge,  together 
with  a new  collation  of  several  of  the  English  MSS.  by  J.  H.  Swainson, 
M.  A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  Coll.,  Cambridge.  Vol.  I.  Demy  8vo. 
i or\  6 d.  [Vol.  II.  In  the  Press. 

“Such  editions  as  that  of  which  Prof.  and  is  in  every  way  admirably  suited  to  meet 

Mayor  has  given  us  the  first  instalment  will  the  needs  of  the  student The  notes  of 


doubtless  do  much  to  remedy  this  undeserved 
neglect.  It  is  one  on  which  great  pains  and 
much  learning  have  evidently  been  expended, 


the  editor  are  all  that  could  be  expected 
from  his  well-known  learning  and  scholar- 
ship.”— Academy. 


P.  VERGILI  MARONIS  OPERA 

cum  Prolegomenis  et  Commentario  Critico  pro  Syndicis  Preli 
Academici  edidit  Benjamin  Hall  Kennedy,  S.T.  P.,  Graecae 
Linguae  Professor  Regius.  Extra  Fcap.  8vo.  5r. 

MATHEMATICS,  PHYSICAL  SCIENCE,  &c. 

MATHEMATICAL  AND  PHYSICAL  PAPERS. 
By  Sir  W.  Thomson,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Natural 
Philosophy,  in  the  University  of  Glasgow.  Collected  from  different 
Scientific  Periodicals  from  May  1841,  to  the  present  time.  Vol.  I. 

[Vol.  II.  In  the  Press. 

borated  and  promulgated  a series  of  rules  and 
units  which  are  but  the  detailed  outcome,  of 
the  principles  laid  down  in  these  papers.” — 
The  Times. 

“We  are  convinced  that  nothing  has  had 
a greater  effect  on  the  progress  of  the 
theories  of  electricity  and  magnetism  during 
the  last  ten  years  than  the  publication  of  Sir 
W.  Thomson’s  reprint  of  papers  on  electro- 
statics and  magnetism,  and  we  believe  that 
the  present  volume  is  destined  in  no  less 
degree  to  further  the  advancement  of  phsi- 
cal  science.  We  owe  the  modern  dynamical 
theory  of  heat  almost  wholly  to  Joule  and 
Thomson,  and  Clausius  and  Rankine,  and  we 
have  here  collected  together  the  whole  of 
Thomson’s  investigations  on  this  subject, 
together  with  the  papers  published  jointly 
by  himself  and  Joule.  We  would  fain  linger 
over  this  fascinating  subject,  but  space  does 
not  permit ; and  we  can  only  ask  those  who 
really  wish  to  study  thermo-dynamics  to 
know  something  of  the  great  theory  of  the 
dissipation  of  energy  originated  by  the  author 
to  give  his  days  and  nights  to  the  volume 
before  us.” — Glasgow  Herald. 


Demy  8vo.  i8.r. 

“ Wherever  exact  science  has  found  a fol- 
lower Sir  William  Thomson’s  name  is  known 
as  a leader  and  a master.  For  a space  of  40 
years  each  of  his  successive  contributions  to 
knowledge  in  the  domain  of  experimental 
and  mathematical  physics  has  been  recog- 
nized as  marking  a stage  in  the  progress  of 
the  subject.  But,  unhappily  for  the  mere 
learner,  he  is  no  writer  of  text-books.  His 
eager  fertility  overflows  into  the  nearest 
available  journal  . . . The  papers  in  this 
volume  deal  largely  with  the  subject  of  the 
dynamics  of  heat.  They  begin  with  two  or 
three  articles  which  were  in  part  written  at 
the  age  of  17,  before  the  author  had  com- 
menced residence  as  an  undergraduate  in 
Cambridge  ...  No  student  of  mechanical 
engineering,  who  aims  at  the  higher  levels 
of  his  profession,  can  afford  to  be  ignorant 
of  the  principles  and  methods  set  forth  in 
these  great  memoirs  . . . The  article  on  the 
absolute  measurement  of  electric  and  gal- 
vanic quantities  (1851)  has  borne  rich  and 
abundant  fruit.  Twenty  years  after  its  date 
the  International  Conference  of  Electricians 
at  Paris,  assisted  by  the  author  himself,  ela- 


MATHEMATICAL  AND  PHYSICAL  PAPERS, 
By  George  Gabriel  Stokes,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Fellow 
of  Pembroke  College,  and  Lucasian  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  the 
University  of  Cambridge.  Reprinted  from  the  Original  Journals  and 
Transactions,  with  Additional  Notes  by  the  Author.  Vol.  I.  Demy 


8vo.  1 5-y. 

“ The  volume  of  Professor  Stokes’s  papers 
contains  mucli  more  than  his  hydrodynamical 
papers.  The  undulatory  theory  of  light  is 
treated,  and  the  difficulties  connected  with 
its  application  to  certain  phenomena,  such  as 
aberration,  are  carefully  examined  and  re- 
solved. Such  difficulties  are  commonly  passed 
over  with  scant  notice  in  the  text-books.... 
Those  to  whom  difficulties  like  these  are  real 
stumbling-blocks  will  still  turn  for  enlighten- 
ment to  Professor  Stokes’s  old,  but  still  fresh 


and  still  necessary,  dissertations.  There  no- 
thing is  slurred  over,  nothing  extenuated. 
Wc  learn  exactly  the  weaknesses  of  the 
theory,  and  the  direction  in  which  the  com- 
pleter theory  of  the  future  must  be  sought 
for.  The  same  spirit  pervades  the  papers 
on  pure  mathematics  which  are  included  in 
the  volume.  They  have  a severe  accuracy 
of  style  which  well  befits  the  subtle  nature 
of  the  subjects,  and  inspires  the  completest 
confidence  in  their  author.” — The  Times. 


Vol.  II.  Nearly  ready. 

London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


13 


THE  SCIENTIFIC  PAPERS  OF  THE  LATE  PROF. 
J.  CLERK  MAXWELL.  Edited  by  W.  D.  Niven,  M A In  2 vols 
R°yal  4to.  [/u  the  Press\ 

A TREATISE  ON  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY 

By  Sir  W.  Thomson,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Natural 
Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Glasgow,  and  P.  G.  Tait  M.A. 
Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh’ 
Vol.  I.  Part  I.  Demy  8vo.  16 s. 


“ In  this,  the  second  edition,  we  notice  a 
large  amount  of  new  matter,  the  importance 
of  which  is  such  that  any  opinion  which  we 


could  form  within  the  time  at  our  disposal 
would  be  utterly  inadequate.” — Nature. 


Part  II.  Demy  8vo.  i8j. 

ELEMENTS  OF  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY 

By  Professors  Sir  W.  THOMSON  and  P.  G.  Tait.  Part  I.  Demy'svo 
Second  Edition.  9 s. 

A TREATISE  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  DETER- 
MINANTS AND  THEIR  APPLICATIONS  IN  ANALYSIS 
AND  GEOMETRY,  by  Robert  Forsyth  Scott,  M.A.,  of 
St  Johns  College,  Cambridge.  Demy  8vo.  12^. 

• n ulh'S,able  comprehensive  treatise  tant  researches  on  this  subject  which  have 

will  be  welcomed  by  the  student  as  bringing  hitherto  been  for  the  most  part  inaccessible 
within  his  reach  the  results  of  many  impor-  to  him ."-Atkeumim  ‘"accessible 

HYDRODYNAMICS, 

A Treatise  on  the  Mathematical  Theory  of  the  Motion  of  Fluids  bv 
Horace  Lamb  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge; 
Pi  ofessor  of  Mathematics  in  the  University  of  Adelaide.  Demy8vo.  12s. 

THE  ANALYTICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT, 

By  Joseph  Fourier.  Translated,  with  Notes,  by  A.  Freeman,  M.A. 
Fellow  of  St  Johns  College,  Cambridge.  Demy  8vo.  i6j. 

Contemporary 


It  is  time  that  Fourier’s  masterpiece. 
Hie  Analytical  Theory  of  Heat , trans- 
lated by  Mr  Alex.  Freeman,  should  be  in- 
troduced to  those  English  students  of  Mathe- 
matics who  do  not  follow  with  freedom  a 
treatise  in  any  language  but  their  own.  It 
is  a model  of  mathematical  reasoning  applied 
to  physical  phenomena,  and  is  remarkable  for 
the  ingenuity  of  the  analytical  process  em- 


ployed by  the  author.’ 

Review,  October,  1878. 

“There  cannot  be  two  opinions  as  to  the 
value  and  importance  of  the  Thiorie  de  la 
Chaleur.... It  is  still  the  text-book  of  Heat 
Conduction,  and  there  seems  little  present 
prospect  of  its  being  superseded,  though 
it  is  already  more  than  half  a century  old 
Nature. 


THE  ELECTRICAL  RESEARCHES  OF  THE 
HONOURABLE  HENRY  CAVENDISH,  F.R.S. 

Written  between  1771  and  1781,  Edited  from  the  original  manuscripts 
in  the  possession  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  K.  G.,  by  T Clerk 
Maxwell,  F.R.S.  Demy  8vo.  1 8s.  } J' 

Every  department  of  editorial  duty  satisfaction  to  Prof  Maxwell  to  c..,.  n,;. 

« - u^’K.p-sa  hu  “■ 

An  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  on  QUATERNIONS 

By  P.  ' a Tait,  M.A.  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the  Univer-' 
sity  of  Edinburgh.  Second  Edition.  Demy  8vo.  14J. 

THE  MATHEMATICAL  WORKS  OF 
ISAAC  BARROW,  D.D 
Edited  by  W.  Whewell,  D.D.  Demy  8vo.  7,.  6d 

London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row . 


H 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


NOTES  ON  QUALITATIVE  ANALYSIS. 

Concise  and  Explanatory.  By  H.  J.  H.  Fenton,  M.A.,  F.I.C.,  F.C.S., 
Demonstrator  of  Chemistry  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Late 
Scholar  of  Christ’s  College.  [Nearly  ready. 

A TREATISE  ON  THE  PHYSIOLOGY  OF  PLANTS, 

by  S.  H.  Vines,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Christ’s  College.  [In  the  Press. 

THE  FOSSILS  AND  PALAEONTOLOGICAL  AF- 
FINITIES OF  THE  NEOCOMIAN  DEPOSITS  OF  UPWARE 
AND  BRICKHILL  with  Plates,  being  the  Sedgwick  Prize  Essay  for 
the  Year  1879.  By  Walter  Keeping,  M.A.,  F.G.S.  Demy  8vo. 

COUNTERPOINT. 

A Practical  Course  of  Study,  by  Professor  G.  A.  Macfarren,  M.A., 
Mus.  Doc.  Fourth  Edition,  revised.  Demy  4to.  ys.  6d. 

ASTRONOMICAL  OBSERVATIONS 

made  at  the  Observatory  of  Cambridge  by  the  Rev.  James  Chai  lis, 
M.A.,  F.R.S.,  F.R.A.S.,  Plumian  Professor  of  Astronomy  and  Experi- 
mental Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  and  Fellow  of 
Trinity  College.  For  various  Years,  from  1846  to  i860. 

ASTRONOMICAL  OBSERVATIONS 

from  1861  to  1865.  Vol.  XXI.  Royal  4to.  15-5-. 

A CATALOGUE  OF  THE  COLLECTION  OF  BIRDS 

formed  by  the  late  H.  E.  Strickland,  now  in  the  possession  of  the 
University  of  Cambridge.  By  Osbert  Salvin,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  &c. 
Strickland  Curator  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  DemySvo.  £1.  is. 

“ The  discriminating  notes  which  Mr  “The  author  has  formed  a definite  and, 
Salvin  has  here  and  there  introduced  make  as  it  seems  to  us,  a righteous  idea  of  what 
the  book  indispensable  to  every  worker  on  the  catalogue  of  a collection  should  be,  and, 
what  the  Americans  call  “the  higher  plane ” allowing  for  some  occasional  slips,  has  effec- 
of  the  science  of  birds.” — Academy.  tively  carried  it  out.” — Notes  and  Queries. 

A CATALOGUE  OF  AUSTRALIAN  FOSSILS 

(including  Tasmania  and  the  Island  of  Timor),  Stratigraphically  and 
Zoologically  arranged,  by  Robert  Etheridge,  Jun.,  F.G.S. , Acting 
Palaeontologist,  H.M.  Geol.  Survey  of  Scotland,  (formerly  Assistant- 
Geologist,  Geol.  Survey  of  Victoria).  Demy  8vo.  io.s\  6 d. 

“The  work  is  arranged  with  great  clear-  papers  consulted  by  the  author,  and  an  index 
ness,  and  contains  a full  list  of  the  books  and  to  the  genera.” — Saturday  Review. 

ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  COMPARATIVE  ANA- 
TOMY, VERTEBRATE  AND  INVERTEBRATE, 

for  the  Use  of  Students  in  the  Museum  of  Zoology  and  Comparative 
Anatomy.  Second  Edition.  Demy  8vo.  2 s.  6 d. 

A SYNOPSIS  OF  THE  CLASSIFICATION  OF 
THE  BRITISH  PALAEOZOIC  ROCKS, 
by  the  Rev.  Adam  Sedgwick,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  and  Frederick 
McCoy,  F.G.S.  One  vol.,  Royal  4to.  Plates,  Z1-  !«?• 

A CATALOGUE  OF  THE  COLLECTION  OF 
CAMBRIAN  AND  SILURIAN  FOSSILS 

contained  in  the  Geological  Museum  of  the  University  of  Cambridge, 
by  J.  W.  Salter,  F.G.S.  With  a Portrait  of  Professor  Sedgwick. 
Royal  4to.  ys.  6 d. 

CATALOGUE  OF  OSTEOLOGICAL  SPECIMENS 

contained  in  the  Anatomical  Museum  of  the  University  of  Cam- 
bridge. Demy  8vo.  2 s.  6 d. 

London  : Cambridge  Warehouse , 1 7 Paternoster  Bow. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


15 


LAW. 

AN  ANALYSIS  OF  CRIMINAL  LIABILITY. 

By  E.  C.  Clark,  LL.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Civil  Law  in  the 
University  of  Cambridge,  also  of  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Barrister  at  Law 
Crowm  8vo.  7s.  6 d. 

"Prof  Clark’s  little  book  is  the  sub-  sanctions”...  Students  of  iurisnn,H*nr. 
stance  of  lectures  delivered  by  him  upon  will  find  much  to  interest  and  instruct^hem 
those  portions  of  Austin  s work  on  juris-  in  the  work  of  Prof.  Clark .’’-Alhen^um 
prudence  which  deal  with  the  “operation  of  neruenm. 

PRACTICAL  JURISPRUDENCE 

A COMMENT  ON  AUSTIN.  By  E.  C.  Clark,  LL.D.  Regius 
Professor  of  Civil  Law.  rjn  the  Pretv 

A SELECTION  OF  THE  STATE  TRIALS 
By  J.  W.  Willis-Bund,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  Barrister-at-Law,  Prolessor  of 
Constitutional  Law  and.  History } University  College.  London  Vol  I 
Trials  for  Treason  (1327— 1660).  Crown  8vo.  i8j 

“Mr  Willis-Bund  has  edited  ‘ A Selection  those  of  impeachment  for  treason  before  Par- 

1 1 o m on f U « «... _ _ _ . * « 


of  Cases  from  the  State  Trials’  which  is 
likely  to  form  a very  valuable  addition  to 
the  standard  literature.  . . There  can 
be  no  doubt,  therefore,  of  the  interest  that 
can  be  found  in  the  State  trials.  But  they 
are  large  and  unwieldy,  and  it  is  impossible 
for  the  general  reader  to  come  across  them. 

Mr  Willis-Bund  has  therefore  done  good 
service  in  making  a selection  that  is  in  the 
first  volume  reduced  to  a commodious  form.” 

— The  Examiner. 

“This  work  is  a very  useful  contribution 
to  that  important  branch  of  the  constitutional 
history  of  England  which  is  concerned  with 
the  growth  and  development  of  the  law  of 
treason,  as  it  may  be  gathered  from  trials  be- 
fore the  ordinary  courts.  The  author  has 
very  wisely  distinguished  these  cases  from 

Vol.  II.  In  two  parts.  Price  14s.  each 

But,  although  the  book  is  most  interest- 
ing to  the  historian  of  constitutional  law,  it 
is  also  not  without  considerable  value  to 
those  who  seek  information  with  regard  to 
procedure  and  the  growth  of  the  law  of  evi- 
dence. We  should  add  that  Mr  Willis-Bund 
has  given  short  prefaces  and  appendices  to 
the  trials,  so  as  to  form  a connected  narrative 
of  the  events  in  history  to  which  they  relate. 

We  can  thoroughly  recommend  the  book.” 

— Law  Times. 

“ To  a large  class  of  readers  Mr  Willis- 
Bund  s compilation  will  thus  be  of  great 
assistance,  for  he  presents  in  a convenient 


liament,  which  he  proposes  to  treat  in  a future 
volume  under  the  general  head  ‘ Proceedings 
in  Parliament ."’—The  Academy. 

This  is  a work  of  such  obvious  utility 
that  the  only  wonder  is  that  no  one  should 

have  undertaken  it  before In  many 

respects  therefore,  although  the  trials  are 
more  or  less  abridged,  this  is  for  the  ordinary 
student  s purpose  not  only  a more  handy 
but  a more  useful  work  than  Howell’s.”— 
Saturday  Review . 

“Of  the  importance  of  this  subject,  or  of 
the  want  of  a book  of  this  kind,  referring 
not  vaguely  but  precisely  to  the  grounds  of 
constitutional  doctrines,  both  of  past  and 
present  times,  no  reader  of  history  can  feel 
any  doubt.” — Daily  News. 


form  a uidicious  selection  of  the  principal 
statutes  and  the  leading  cases  bearing  on 

the  crime  of  treason For  all  classes  of 

readers  these  volumes  possess  an  indirect 
intei est,  arising  from  the  nature  of  the  cases 
themselves,  from  the  men  who  were  actors 
in  them,  and  from  the  numerous  points  of 
social  life  which  are  incidentally  illustrated 
in  the  course  of  the  trials.  On  these  features 
we  have  not  dwelt,  but  have  preferred  to  show 
that  the  book  is  a valuable  contribution  to  the 
study  of  the  subject  with  which  it  professes 
to  deal,  namely,  the  history  of  the  law  of  trea- 
son. — Athenceum. 


Vol.  III.  In  the  Press. 

THE  FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  PERPETUAL 
EDICT  OF  SALVIUS  JULIANUS, 

collected,  arranged,  and  annotated  by  Bryan  Walker,  M.A  LI  D 
Law  Lecturer  of  St  John’s  College,  and  late  Fellow  of  Corpus  Christ! 
College,  Cambridge.  Crown  8vo.  6s.  1 


“ In  the  present  book  we  have  the  fruits 
of  the  same  kind  of  thorough  and  well- 
ordered  study  which  was  brought  to  bear 
upon  the  notes  to  the  Commentaries  and 
the  Institutes  . . . Hitherto  the  Edict  has 
been  almost  inaccessible  to  the  ordinary 


English  student,  and  such  a student  will  be 
interested  as  well  as  perhaps  surprised  to  find 
how  abundantly  the  extant  fragments  illus- 
trate and  clear  up  points  which  have  attracted 
Ins  attention  in  the  Commentaries,  or  the 
Institutes,  or  the  Digest.”-/;™  Times. 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


i6 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


THE  COMMENTARIES  OF  GAIUS  AND  RULES 
OF  ULPIAN.  (New  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.) 

With  a Translation  and  Notes,  by  J.  T.  Abdy,  LL.D.,  Judge  of  County 
Courts,  late  Regius  Professor  of  Laws  in  the  University  of  Cambridge, 
and  Bryan  Walker.  M.A.,  LL.D.,  Law  Lecturer  of  St  John’s 
College,  Cambridge,  formerly  Law  Student  of  Trinity  Hall  and 
Chancellor’s  Medallist  for  Legal  Studies.  Crown  8vo.  i6.r. 

“ As  scholars  and  as  editors  Messrs  Abdy  explanation.  Thus  the  Roman  jurist  is 
and  Walker  have  done  their  work  well.  allowed  to  speak  for  himself,  and  the  reader 

For  one  thing  the  editors  deserve  feels  that  he  is  really  studying  Roman  law 

special  commendation.  They  have  presented  in  the  original,  and  not  a fanciful  representa- 
Gaius  to  the  reader  with  few  notes  and  those  tion  of  it.” — A thenceum. 
merely  by  way  of  reference  or  necessary 


THE  INSTITUTES  OF  JUSTINIAN, 


translated  with  Notes  by  J.  T.  Abdy,  LL.D.,  Judge  of  County  Courts, 
late  Regius  Professor  of  Laws  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  and 
formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  Hall ; and  Bryan  Walker,  M.A.,  LL.D., 
Law  Lecturer  of  St  John’s  College,  Cambridge;  late  Fellow  and 
Lecturer  of  Corpus  Christi  College  ; and  formerly  Law  Student  of 
Trinity  Hall.  Crown  8vo.  16s. 


“We  welcome  here  a valuable  contribution 
to  the  study  of  jurisprudence.  The  text  of 
the  Institutes  is  occasionally  perplexing,  even 
to  practised  scholars,  whose  knowledge  of 
classical  models  does  not  always  avail  them 
in  dealing  with  the  technicalities  of  legal 
phraseology.  Nor  can  the  ordinary  diction- 
aries be  expected  to  furnish  all  the  help  that 
is  wanted.  This  translation  will  then  be  of 
great  use.  To  the  ordinary  student,  whose 


attention  is  distracted  from  the  subject-matter 
by  the  difficulty  of  struggling  through  the 
language  in  which  it  is  contained,  it  will  be 
almost  indispensable.” — Spectator. 

“The  notes  are  learned  and  carefully  com- 
piled, and  this  edition  will  be  found  useful 
to  students.” — Law  Times. 

“Dr  Abdy  and  Dr  Walker  have  produced 
a book  which  is  both  elegant  and  useful.” — 
A thenceum. 


SELECTED  TITLES  FROM  THE  DIGEST, 

annotated  by  B.  Walker,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Part  I.  Mandati  vel 
Contra.  Digest  xvn.  i.  Crown  8vo.  5s. 

“This  small  volume  is  published  as  an  ex-  say  that  Mr  Walker  deserves  credit  for  the 

periment.  The  author  proposes  to  publish  an  way  in  which  he  has  performed  the  task  un- 

annotated edition  and  translation  of  several  dertaken.  The  translation,  as  might  be  ex- 
books of  the  Digest  if  this  one  is  received  pected,  is  scholarly.” — Law  Times. 
with  favour.  We  are  pleased  to  be  able  to 

Part  II.  De  Adquirendo  rerum  dominio  and  De  Adquirenda  vel  amit- 
tenda  possessione.  Digest  XLI.  1 and  1 1.  Crown  8vo.  6s. 

Part  III.  De  Condictionious.  Digest  XII.  1 and  4 — 7 and  Digest  xm. 
1 — 3.  Crown  8vo.  6^. 


DIGEST.  Book  VII.  Title  I.  De  Usufructu. 

With  Introduction  and  full  Explanatory  Notes,  intended  as  an  Intro- 
duction to  the  study  of  the  Digest.  By  Henry  John  Roby,  M.A., 
Formerly  Fellow  of  St  John’s  College.  [Preparing. 


GROTIUS  DE  JURE  BELLI  ET  PACIS, 

with  the  Notes  of  Barbeyrac  and  others ; accompanied  by  an  abridged 
Translation  of  the  Text,  by  W.  Whewell,  D.D.  late  Master  of  Trinity 
College.  3 Vols.  Demy  8vo.  12s.  The  translation  separate,  6s 


London  • Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


1 7 


HISTORY. 


THE  GROWTH  OF  ENGLISH  INDUSTRY 
AND  COMMERCE, 

by  W.  Cunningham,  M.A.,  late  Deputy  to  the  Knightbridge  Pro- 
fessor in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  With  Maps  and  Charts. 
Crown  8vo.  12 s. 


“He  is,  however,  undoubtedly  sound  in 
the  main,  and  his  work  deserves  recognition 
as  the  result  of  immense  industry  and  re- 
search in  a field  in  which  the  labourers  have 
hitherto  been  comparatively  few.’’ — Scots- 
man. 

“ Mr  Cunningham  is  not  likely  to  dis- 
appoint any  readers  except  such  as  begin  by 
mistaking  the  character  of  his  book.  He 
does  not  promise,  and  does  not  give,  an 


account  of  the  dimensions  to  which  English 
industry  and  commerce  have  grown.  It  is 
with  the  process  of  growth  that  he  is  con- 
cerned ; and  this  process  he  traces  with  the 
philosophical  insight  which  distinguishes  be- 
tween what  is  important  and  what  is  trivial. 
He  thus  follows  with  care,  skill,  and  de- 
liberation a single  thread  through  the  maze 
of  general  English  history.” — Guardian. 


LIFE  AND  TIMES  OF  STEIN,  OR  GERMANY 
AND  PRUSSIA  IN  THE  NAPOLEONIC  AGE, 

by  J.  R.  Seeley,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Modern  History  in 
the  University  of  Cambridge,  with  Portraits  and  Maps.  3 Vols. 
Demy  8vo.  48.L 


If  we  could  conceive  anything  similar 
to  a protective  system  in  the  intellectual  de- 
partment, we  might  perhaps  look  forward  to 
a time  when  our  historians  would  raise  the 
cry  of  protection  for  native  industry.  Of 
the  unquestionably  greatest  German  men  of 
modern  history — I speak  of  Frederick  the 
Great,  Goethe  and  Stein — the  first  two  found 
long  since  in  Carlyle  and  Lewes  biographers 
who  have  undoubtedly  driven  their  German 
competitors  out  of  the  field.  And  now  in  the 
ear  just  past  Professor  Seeley  of  Cambridge 
as  presented  us  with  a biography  of  Stein 
which,  though  it  modestly  declines  competi- . 
tion  with  German  works  and  disowns  the 
presumption  of  teaching  us  Germans  our  own 
history,  yet  casts  into  the  shade  by  its  bril- 
liant superiority  all  that  we  have  ourselves 
hitherto  written  about  Stein.” — Deutsche 
R utidschau. 

“ Dr  Busch’s  volume  has  made  people 
think  and  talk  even  more  than  usual  of  Prince 
Bismarck,  and  Professor  Seeley’s  very  learned 
work  on  Stein  will  turn  attention  to  an  earlier 
and  an  almost  equally  eminent  German  states- 
man  It  is  soothing  to  the  national 

self-respect  to  find  a few  Englishmen,  such 
as  the  late  Mr  Lewes  and  Professor  Seeley, 
doing  for  German  as  well  as  English  readers 
what  many  German  scholars  have  done  for 
us.” — Times. 

“ In  a notice  of  this  kind  scant  justice  can 


be  done  to  a work  like  the  one  before  us;  no 
short  resume  can  give  even  the  most  meagre 
notion  of  the  contents  of  these  volumes,  which 
contain  no  page  that  is  superfluous,  and 
none  that  is  uninteresting To  under- 

stand the  Germany  of  to-day  one  must  study 
the  Germany  of  many  yesterdays,  and  now 
that  study  has  been  made  easy  by  this  work, 
to  which  no  one  can  hesitate  to  assign  a very 
high  place  among  those  recent  histories  which 
have  aimed  at  original  research.” — Athe- 
tieeum. 

“The  book  before  us  fills  an  important 
gap  in  English — nay,  European — historical 
literature,  and  bridges  over  the  history  of 
Prussia  from  the  time  of  Frederick  the  Great 
to  the  days  of  Kaiser  Wilhelm.  It  thus  gives 
the  reader  standing  ground  whence  he  may 
regard  contemporary  events  in  Germany  in 
their  proper  historic  light We  con- 

gratulate Cambridge  and  her  Professor  of 
History  on  the  appearance  of  such  a note- 
worthy production.  And  we  may  add  that  it 
is  something  upon  which  we  may  congratulate 
England  that  on  the  especial  field  of  the  Ger- 
mans, history,  on  the  history  of  their  own 
country,  by  the  use  of  their  own  literary 
weapons,  an  Englishman  has  produced  a his- 
tory of  Germany  in  the  Napoleonic  age  far 
superior  to  any  that  exists  in  German.”— 
Examiner. 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CAMBRIDGE  FROM 
THE  EARLIEST  TIMES  TO  THE  ROYAL 
INJUNCTIONS  OF  1535, 


by  James  Bass  Mullinger,  m.a 

“We  trust  Mr  Mullinger  will  yet  continue 
his  history  and  bring  it  down  to  our  own 
day.” — Academy. 

“ He  has  brought  together  a mass  of  in- 
structive details  respecting  the  rise  and  pro- 
gress, not  only  of  his  own  University,  but  of 
all  the  principal  Universities  of  the  Middle 

Ages We  hope  some  day  that  he  may 

continue  his  labours,  and  give  us  a history  of 

Vol.  II.  In 


,.  Demy  8vo.  (734  pp.),  12 s. 

the  University  during  the  troublous  times  of 
the  Reformation  and  the  Civil  War.” — Atht- 
nceum. 

“Mr  Mullinger' s work  is  one  of  great 
learning  and  research,  which  can  hardly  fail 
to  become  a standard  book  of  reference  on 
the  subject We  can  most  strongly  recom- 

mend this  book  to  our  readers  ."—Spectator. 

the  Press. 


London  : Cambridge  Warehouse , 1 7 Paternoster  Row. 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


18 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLES  of  GREEK  HISTORY. 

Accompanied  by  a short  narrative  of  events,  with  references  to  the 
sources  of  information  and  extracts  from  the  ancient  authorities,  by 
Carl  Peter.  Translated  from  the  German  by  G.  Chawner,  M.A, 
Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  King’s  College,  Cambridge.  Demy  4to.  ioj! 

“As  a handy  book  of  reference  for  gen- 
uine students,  or  even  for  learned  men  who 
want  to  lay  their  hands  on  an  authority  for 


some  particular  point  as  quickly  as  possible, 
the  Tables  are  useful.”— Academy. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  COLLEGE  OF  ST  JOHN 
THE  EVANGELIST, 

by  Thomas  Baker,  B.D.,  Ejected  Fellow.  Edited  by  John  E.  B. 
Mayor,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  St  John’s.  Two  Vols.  Demy  8vo.  24-r 


“To  antiquaries  the  book  will  be  a source 
of  almost  inexhaustible  amusement,  by  his- 
torians it  will  be  found  a work  of  considerable 
service  on  questions  respecting  our  social 
progress  in  past  times  ; and  the  care  and 
thoroughness  with  which  Mr  Mayor  has  dis- 
charged his  editorial  functions  are  creditable 
to  his  learning  and  industry.” — A thenceum. 


The  work  displays  very  wide  reading, 
and  it  will  be  of  great  use  to  members  of  the 
college  and  of  the  university,  and,  perhaps, 
of  still  greater  use  to  students  of  English 
history,  ecclesiastical,  political, social, literary 
and  academical,  who  have  hitherto  had  to  be 
content  with  ‘Dyer.’” — Academy. 


HISTORY  OF  NEPAL, 

translated  by  Munshi  Shew  Shunker  Singh  and  Pandit  ShrI 
Gunanand  ; edited  with  an  Introductory  Sketch  of  the  Country  and 
People  by  Dr  D.  Wright,  late  Residency  Surgeon  at  Kathmandu, 
and  with  facsimiles  of  native  drawings,  and  portraits  of  Sir  Jung 
Bahadur,  the  King  of  Nepal,  &c.  Super- royal  8vo.  21s. 

“The  Cambridge  University  Press  have 
done  well  in  publishing  this  work.  Such 
translations  are  valuable  not  only  to  the  his- 
torian but  also  to  the  ethnologist; Dr 


Wright’s  Introduction  is  based  on  personal 
inquiry  and  observation,  is  written  intelli- 
gently and  candidly,  and  adds  much  to  the 
value  of  the  volume.  The  coloured  litho- 


graphic plates  are  interesting.” — Nature. 

“The  history  has  appeared  at  a very  op- 
portune moment. ..The  volume... is  beautifully 
printed,  and  supplied  with  portraits  of  Sir 
Jung  Bahadoor  and  others,  and  with  excel- 
lent coloured  sketches  illustrating  Nepaulese 
architecture  and  religion.” — Examiner. 


SCHOLAE  ACADEMICAE: 

Some  Account  of  the  Studies  at  the  English  Universities  in  the 
Eighteenth  Century.  By  CHRISTOPHER  WORDSWORTH,  M.A., 
Fellow  of  Peterhouse ; Author  of  “ Social  Life  at  the  English 
Universities  in  the  Eighteenth  Century.”  Demy  8vo.  15L 

“Only  those  who  have  engaged  in  like  la- 
bours will  be  able  fully  to  appreciate  the 
sustained  industry  and  conscientious  accuracy 
discernible  in  every  page.  ...  Of  the  whole 
volume  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  a genuine 
service  rendered  to  the  study  of  University 
history,  and  that  the  habits  of  thought  of  any 
writer  educated  at  either  seat  of  learning  in 
the  last  century  will,  in  many  cases,  be  far 
better  understood  after  a consideration  of  the 
materials  here  collected.” — Academy. 


“The  general  object  of  Mr  Wordsworth’s 
book  is  sufficiently  apparent  from  its  title. 
He  has  collected  a great  quantity  of  minute 
and  curious  information  about  the  working 
of  Cambridge  institutions  in  the  last  century, 
with  an  occasional  comparison  of  the  corre- 
sponding state  of  things  at  Oxford.... To  a 
great  extent  it  is  purely  a book  of  reference, 
and  as  such  it  will  be  of  permanent  value 
for  the  historical  knowledge  of  English  edu- 
cation and  learning.” — Saturday  Review. 


THE  ARCHITECTURAL  HISTORY  OF  THE 
UNIVERSITY  AND  COLLEGES  OF  CAMBRIDGE, 

By  the  late  Professor  Willis,  M.A.  With  numerous  Maps,  Plans, 
and  Illustrations.  Continued  to  the  present  time,  and  edited 
by  John  Willis  Clark,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow 

of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  [In  the  Press 


London : Cambridge  Warehouse , 1 7 Paternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


19 


MISCELLANEOUS. 

A CATALOGUE  OF  ANCIENT  MARBLES  IN 
GREAT  BRITAIN,  by  Prof.  Adolf  Michaelis.  Translated  by 
C.  A.  M.  Fennell,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Jesus  College.  Royal  8vo. 

£,2.  2S. 

Michaelis  performs  the  same  office  for  the 
still  less  known  private  hoards  of  antique 
sculptures  for  which  our  country  is  so  re- 
markable.  Ihe  book  is  beautifully  executed, 
and  with  its  few  handsome  plates,  and 
excellent  indexes,  does  much  credit  to  the 
Cambridge  Press.  It  has  not  been  printed 
in  German,  but  appears  for  the  first  time  in 
the  English  translation.  All  lovers  of  true 
art  and  of  good  work  should  be  grateful  to 
the  Syndics  of  the  University  Press  for  the 
libei  al  facilities  afforded  by  them  towards 


_ “ The  object  of  the  present  work  of 
Michaelis  is  to  describe  and  make  known  the 
vast  treasures  of  ancient  sculpture  now  accu- 
mulated in  the  galleries  of  Great  Britain,  the 
extent  and  value  of  which  are  scarcely  appre- 
ciated, and  chiefly  so  because  there  has 
hitherto  been  little  accessible  information 
about  them.  To  the  loving  labours  of  a 
learned  German  the  owners  of  art  treasures 
in  England  are  for  the  second  time  indebted 
for  a full  description  of  their  rich  possessions. 
Waagen  gave  to  the  private  collections  of 
pictures  the  advantage  of  his  inspection  and 
cultivated  acquaintance  with  art,  and  now 


the  production  of  this  important  volume  by 
1 rofessor  Michaelis.’* — Saturday  Review. 


THE  WOODCUTTERS  OF  THE  NETHERLANDS 

during  the  last  quarter  of  the  Fifteenth  Century.  In  two  parts 
I.  History  of  the  Woodcutters.  II.  Catalogue  of  their  Woodcuts. 
By  William  Martin  Conway.  [/„  tjLe  press_ 

A GRAMMAR  OF  THE  IRISH  LANGUAGE. 

By  Prof.  Windisch.  Translated  by  Dr  Norman  Moore.  Crown 
ovo.  js.  6 a. 

LECTURES  ON  TEACHING, 

Delivered  in  the  University  of  Cambridge  in  the  Lent  Term,  1880. 
By  J.  G.  Fitch,  M.A.,  Her  Majesty’s  Inspector  of  Schools. 
Crown  8vo..  New  Edition.  5^. 

“ The  lectures  will  be  found  most  in-  has  got  at  his  fingers’ ends  the  working  of 


teresting,  and  deserve  to  be  carefully  studied, 
not  only  by  persons  directly  concerned  with 
instruction,  but  by  parents  who  wish  to  be 
able  to  exercise  an  intelligent  judgment  in 
t«e  choice  of  schools  and  teachers  for  their 
children.  For  ourselves,  we  could  almost 
wish  to  be  of  school  age  again,  to  learn 
history  and  geography  from  some  one  who 
teac]l  t!leiT1  after  the  pattern  set  -by 

Mi  r itch^to  his  audience But  perhaps 

Mr  P itch’s  observations  on  the  general  con- 
ditions  of  school-work  are  even  more  im- 
portant  than  what  he  says  on  this  or  that 
branch  of  study.” — Saturday  Review. 

‘It  comprises  fifteen  lectures,  dealing 
with  such  subjects  as  organisation,  discipline, 
examining,  language,  fact  knowledge,  science, 
and  methods  of  instruction;  and  though  the 
lectures  make  no  pretention  to  systematic  or 
exhaustive  treatment,  they  yet  leave  very 
little  of  the  ground  uncovered;  and  they 
combine  in  an  admirable  way  the  exposition 
of  sound  principles  with  practical  suggestions 
and  illustrations  which  are  evidently  derived 
from  wide  and  varied  experience,  both  in 
teaching  and  in  examining.  While  Mr  Fitch 
addresses  himself  specially  to  secondary 
school-masters,  he  does  not  by  any  means 
disregard  or  ignore  the  needs  of  the  primary 
school.’ — Scotsman. 

"The  volume  is  one  of  great  practical  val  tie. 
It  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  teacher 
and  of  every  one  preparing  for  the  office  of  a 
teacher.  I here  are  many  besides  these  who 
will  find  much  in  it  to  interest  and  instruct 
them,  more  especially  parents  who  have  chil- 
dren whom  they  can  afTord  to  keep  at  school 

till  their  eighteenth  or  nineteenth  year  ” 

The  Nonconformist  and  Independent. 

As  principal  of  a training  college  and  as 
a Government  inspector  of  schools,  Mr  Fitch 


. U - ‘•“V  UVlMUg  UI 

primary  education,  while  as  assistant  com- 
missioner to  the  late  Endowed  Schools  Com- 
mission he  has  seen  something  of  the  ma- 
chinery of  our  higher  schools.  . . . Mr 
Fitch’s  book  covers  so  wide  a field  and 
touches  on  so  many  burning  questions  that 
we  must  be  content  to  recommend  it  as  the 
best  existing  vade  mecum  for  the  teacher 

. . . He  is  always  sensible,  always  judicious 

never  wanting  in  tact.  . . . Mr  Fitch  is  a 
scholar  ; he  pretends  to  no  knowledge  that 
he  does  not  possess ; he  brings  to  his  work 
the  ripe  experience  of  a well-stored  mind 
and  he  possesses  in  a remarkable  degree  the 
art  of  exposition.  ” — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

“ In  his  acquaintance  with  all  descrin- 
tjons  of  schools,  their  successes  and  their 
shortcomings  Mr  Fitch  has  great  advantages 
both  in  knowledge  and  experience;  and  if  his 
work  receives  the  attention  it  deserves  it 
will  tend  materially  to  improve  and  equalize 
the  methods  of  teaching  in  our  schools  to 
whatever  class  they  may  belong.”—’  St 
James's  Gazette. 

“ In  no  other  work  in  the  English  language 
so  far  as  we  know,  are  the  principles  and 
methods  which  most  conduce  to  successful 
teaching  laid  down  and  illustrated  with  such 
precision  and  fulness  of  detail  as  thev  aw 
her e. "-Leeds  Mercury.  y are 

“Therefore,  without  reviewing  the  book 
for  the  second  time,  we  are  glad  to  avail 
ourselves  of  the  opportunity  of  calling  atten- 
tion to  the  re-issue  of  the  volume  in  the 
five-shilling  form,  bringing  it  within  the 
reach  of  the  rank  and  file  of  the  profession 
We  cannot  let  the  occasion  pass  without 
making  special  reference  to  the  excellent 
section  on  ‘punishments’  in  the  lecture  on 
Discipline.’  ” — School  Board  Chronicle. 


London ; Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Roie>. 


20 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


STATUTA  ACADEMIC  CANTABRIGIENSIS. 

Demy  8vo.  2 s.  sewed. 

STATUTES  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF 
CAMBRIDGE. 

With  some  Acts  of  Parliament  relating  to  the  University.  Demy  8vo. 

3 s.  6 d. 

ORDINATIONES  ACADEMICS  CANTABRIGIENSIS. 

Demy  8vo.  3^.  6d. 

TRUSTS,  STATUTES  AND  DIRECTIONS  affecting 

(i)  The  Professorships  of  the  University.  (2)  The  Scholarships  and 
Prizes.  (3)  Other  Gifts  and  Endowments.  Demy  8vo.  5 s. 

COMPENDIUM  OF  UNIVERSITY  REGULATIONS, 

for  the  use  of  persons  in  Statu  Pupillari.  Demy  8vo.  6 d. 

CATALOGUE  OF  THE  HEBREW  MANUSCRIPTS 

preserved  in  the  University  Library,  Cambridge.  By  Dr  S.  M. 
Schiller- Szinessy.  Volume  I.  containing  Section  1.  The  Holy 
Scriptures ; Section  II.  Commentaries  on  the  Bible.  Demy  8vo.  9 s. 

A CATALOGUE  OF  THE  MANUSCRIPTS 

preserved  in  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Demy 
8 vo.  5 Vols.  ioj.  each. 

INDEX  TO  THE  CATALOGUE.  Demy  8vo.  10s. 

A CATALOGUE  OF  ADVERSARIA  and  printed 

books  containing  MS.  notes,  preserved  in  the  Library  of  the  University 
of  Cambridge.  3J.  6d. 

THE  ILLUMINATED  MANUSCRIPTS  IN  THE 
LIBRARY  OF  THE  FITZWILLIAM  MUSEUM, 

Catalogued  with  Descriptions,  and  an  Introduction,  by  William 
George  Searle,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Queens’  College,  and  Vicar  of 
Hockington,  Cambridgeshire  Demy  8vo.  7s.  6 d. 

A CHRONOLOGICAL  LIST  OF  THE  GRACES, 

Documents,  and  other  Papers  in  the  University  Registry  which  con- 
cern the  University  Library.  Demy  8vo.  2 s.  6d. 

CATALOGUS  BIBLIOTHECAE  BURCKHARD- 

T I ANAL  Demy  4to.  5 s. 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


21 


Cl n Cambridge  33ible  for  £>r!)oote  anU 

Colleger 

General  Editor  : J.  J.  S.  Perowne,  D.D.,  Dean  of 

Peterborough. 

♦ 

The  want  of  an  Annotated  Edition  of  the  Bible,  in  handy  portions, 
suitable  for  School  use,  has  long  been  felt. 

In  order  to  provide  Text-books  for  School  and  Examination  pur- 
poses, the  Cambridge  University  Press  has  arranged  to  publish  the 
several  books  of  the  Bible  in  separate  portions  at  a moderate  price, 
with  introductions  and  explanatory  notes. 

The  Very  Reverend  J.  J.  S.  Perowne,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Peter- 
borough, has  undertaken  the  general  editorial  supervision  of  the  work, 
assisted  by  a staff  of  eminent  coadjutors.  Some  of  the  books  have 
been  already  edited  or  undertaken  by  the  following  gentlemen  : 

Rev.  A.  Carr,  M.A.,  Assistant  Master  at  Wellington  College. 

Rev.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Balliol  College , Oxford. 

Rev.  S.  Cox,  Nottingham. 

Rev.  A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew,  Edinburgh. 

Rev.  F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.,  Canon  of  Westminster. 

Rev.  A.  E.  Humphreys,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
Rev.  A.  F.  Kirkpatrick,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Regius 
Professor  of  Hebrew. 

Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  M.A.,  late  Professor  at  St  David’s  College , Lampeter. 
Rev.  J.  R.  Lumby,  D.D.,  Norrisian  Professor  of  Divinity. 

Rev.  G.  I . Maclear,  D.D.,  Warden  of  St  Augustine's  Coll.,  Canterbury . 
Rev.  H.  C.  G.  Moule,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Principal  of 
Ridley  Hall,  Cambridge. 

Rev.  W.  F.  Moulton,  D.D.,  Head  Master  of  the  Leys  School,  Cambridge. 
Rev.  E.  H.  Perowne,  D.D.,  Master  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cam - 
bridge,  Examining  Chaplain  to  the  Bishop  of  St  Asaph. 

The  Ven.  T.  T.  Perowne,  M.A.,  Archdeacon  of  Norwich. 

Rev.  A.  Plummer,  M.A.,  D.D .,  Master  of  University  College,  Durham. 
The  Very  Rev.  E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Wells. 

Rev.  W.  Sanday,  M.A.,  Principal  of  Bishop  Hatfield  Hall,  Durham. 
Rev.  W.  Simcox,  M.A.,  Rector  of  Weyhill,  Hants. 

Rev.  W.  Robertson  Smith,  M.A.,  Edinburgh. 

Rev.  A.  W.  Streane,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi  Coll., Cambridge. 
The  \en.  H.  W.  Watkins,  M.A.,  Archdeacon  of  Northumberland. 

Rev.  G.  H.  Whitaker,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge. 
Rev.  C.  Wordsworth,  M.A.,  Rector  of  Glaston,  Rutland. 


London : Cambridge  Warehouse,  1 7 Paternoster  Row. 


22 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  BIBLE  FOR  SCHOOLS  & COLLEGES. 

Continued . 

Now  Ready.  Cloth,  Extra  Fcap.  8vo. 

THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  By  the  Rev.  G.  F. 
Maclear,  D.D.  With  2 Maps.  2s.  6d. 

THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES.  By  the  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  M.A. 

With  Map.  3J.  6d. 

THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  By  the  Rev. 
Professor  Kirkpatrick,  M.A.  With  Map.  y.  6d. 

THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  By  the  Rev. 
Professor  Kirkpatrick,  M.A.  With  2 Maps.  y.  6d. 

THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES.  By  the  Very  Rev. 

E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Wells.  51-. 

THE  BOOK  OF  JEREMIAH.  By  the  Rev.  A.  W. 
Streane,  M.A.  With  Map.  4J.  6d. 

THE  BOOKS  OF  OBADIAH  AND  JONAH.  By  Arch- 
deacon Perowne.  2 s.  6d. 

THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  By  Archdn.  Perowne.  it.  6 d. 

THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  By  the  Rev.  T.  K.  Cheyne, 
M.A.  is.  6d. 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  MATTHEW. 

By  the  Rev.  A.  Carr,  M.A.  With  2 Maps.  2 s.  6d. 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  MARK.  By  the 
Rev.  G.  F.  Maclear,  D.D.  With  2 Maps.  2 s.  6d. 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  LUKE.  By 

the  Rev.  F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.  With  4 Maps.  41-.  6d. 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  JOHN.  By 

the  Rev.  A.  Plummer,  M.A. , D.D.  With  Four  Maps.  4s.  6d. 

THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  By  the  Rev. 

Professor  Lumby,  D.D.  Part  I.  Chaps.  I — XIV.  With  2 Maps. 
2s.  6d.  Part  II.  Chaps.  XV.  to  end.  2 s.  6d. 

Parts  I.  and  II.,  complete.  With  4 Maps.  4 s.  6d. 

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.  By  the  Rev. 
H.  C.  G.  Moule,  M.A.  y.  6d. 

THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 

By  the  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  M.A.  With  a Map  and  Plan.  2 s. 

THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 

By  the  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  M.A.  2s. 

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  By  the  Rev. 

F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.  y.  6d. 

THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  ST  JAMES.  By  the 

Very  Rev.  E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Wells,  is.  6d. 

THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST  PETER  AND  ST  JUDE. 

By  the  same  Editor.  2 s.  6d. 


London : Cambridge  Warehouse , 1 7 Paternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS.  23 

THE  CAMBRIDGE  BIBLE  FOR  SCHOOLS  & COLLEGES. 

Continued. 

Preparing. 

THE  BOOKS  OF  HAGGAI  AND  ZECHARIAH.  By 

Archdeacon  Perowne. 

THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST  JOHN.  By  the  Rev.  A. 

Plummer,  M.A.,  D.D. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  GREEK  TESTAMENT, 

FOR  SCHOOLS  AND  COLLEGES, 

with  a Revised  Text,  based  on  the  most  recent  critical  authorities,  and 
English  Notes,  prepared  under  the  direction  of  the  General  Editor, 

The  Very  Reverend  J.  J.  S.  PEROWNE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  PETERBOROUGH. 


Now  Ready. 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  MATTHEW.  By  the 

Rev.  A.  Carr,  M.A.  With  4 Maps.  4J.  6d. 

“With  the  ‘Notes/  in  the  volume  before  us,  we  are  much  pleased;  so  far  as  we  have 
searched,  they  are  scholarly  and  sound.  The  quotations  from  the  Classics  are  apt  • and  the 
references  to  modern  Greek  form  a pleasing  feature.’’ — The  Churchman. 

“ Copious  illustrations,  gathered  from  a great  variety  of  sources,  make  his  notes  a very 
valuable  aid  to  the  student.  They  are  indeed  remarkably  interesting,  while  all  explana- 
tions on  meanings,  applications,  and  the  like  are  distinguished  by  their  lucidity  and 
good  sense.” — Pall  Mall  Gazette.  3 


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  JOHN.  By  the  Rev. 

A.  Plummer,  M.A.,  D.D.  With  4 Maps.  6s. 

“A  valuable  addition  has  also  been  made  to  ‘The  Cambridge  Greek  Testament  for 
Schools/  Dr  Plummer’s  notes  on  ‘the  Gospel  according  to  St  John’  are  scholarly  concise 
and  instructive,  and  embody  the  results  of  much  thought  and  wide  reading  .’’—Expositor  ’ 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  MARK.  By  the  Rev. 

G.  F.  Maclear,  D.D.  With  3 Maps.  4J.  6d. 


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST  LUKE. 

Rev.  F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D. 


By  the 
[Preparing. 


The  hooks  will  be  published  separately , as  in  the  “ Cambridge  Bible 

for  Schools.” 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


24 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


THE  PITT  PRESS  SERIES. 


I.  GREEK. 

THE  ANABASIS  OF  XENOPHON,  Book  IV.  With 

a Map  and  English  Notes  by  Alfred  Pretor,  M.A.,  Fellow  of 
St  Catharine’s  College,  Cambridge  ; Editor  of  Persius  and  Cicero  ad  Atiicum 
Book  i.  is. 


“ In  Mr  Pretor’s  edition  of  the  Anabasis  the  text  of  Kiihner  has  been  followed  in  the  main, 
while  the  exhaustive  and  admirable  notes  of  the  great  German  editor  have  been  largely  utilised. 
These  notes  deal  with  the  minutest  as  well  as  the  most  important  difficulties  in  construction,  and 
all  questions  of  history,  antiquity,  and  geography  are  briefly  but  very  effectually  elucidated.” — The 
Examiner. 

“We  welcome  this  addition  to  the  other  books  of  the  A nabasis  so  ably  edited  by  Mr  Pretor. 
Although  originally  intended  for  the  use  of  candidates  at  the  university  local  examinations,  yet 
this  edition  will  be  found  adapted  not  only  to  rrieet  the  wants  of  the  junior  student,  but  even 
advanced  scholars  will  find  much  in  this  work  that  will  repay  its  perusal.” — The  Schoolmaster. 

“Mr  Pretor’s  ‘Anabasis  of  Xenophon,  Book  IV.’  displays  a union  of  accurate  Cambridge 
scholarship,  with  experience  of  what  is  required  by  learners  gained  in  examining  middle-class 
schools.  The  text  is  large  and  clearly  printed,  and  the  notes  explain  all  difficulties.  . . . Mr 

Pretor’s  notes  seem  to  be  all  that  could  be  wished  as  regards  grammar,  geography,  and  other 
matters.” — The  Academy. 

BOOKS  I.  HI.  & V.  By  the  same  Editor.  2s.  each. 
BOOKS  II.  VI. "and  VII.  By  the  same  Editor.  2s.  6d.  each. 

“Another  Greek  text,  designed  it  would  seem  for  students  preparing  for  the  local  examinations, 
is  ‘Xenophon’s  Anabasis,’  Book  II.,  with  English  Notes,  by  Alfred  Pretor,  M.A.  The  editor  has 
exercised  his  usual  discrimination  in  utilising  the  text  and  notes  of  ICuhner,  with  the  occasiona 
assistance  of  the  best  hints  of  Schneider,  Vollbrecht  and  Macmichael  on  critical  matters,  and  of 
Mr  R.  W.  Taylor  on  points  of  history  and  geography.  . . When  Mr  Pretor  commits  himself  to 

Commentator’s  work,  he  is  eminently  helpful.  . . Had  we  to  introduce  a young  Greek  scholar 

to  Xenophon,  we  should  esteem  ourselves  fortunate  in  having  Pretor  s text-book  as  our  chart  and 
guide.” — Contemporary  Review. 

THE  ANABASIS  OF  XENOPHON,  by  A.  Pretor,  M.A., 

Text  and  Notes,  complete  in  two  Volumes.  7 s.  6d. 

AGESILAUS  OF  XENOPHON.  The  Text  revised 

with  Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes,  Introduction,  Analysis,  and  Indices. 
By  H.  Hailstone,  M.A.,  late  Scholar  of  Peterhouse,  Cambridge,  Editor  of 
Xenophon’s  Hellenics,  etc.  2s.  6d. 

ARISTOPHANES— RANAE.  With  English  Notes  and 
Introduction  by  W.  C.  Green,  M.A.,  Assistant  Master  at  Rugby  School. 
3^.  6d. 

ARISTOPHANES— AVES.  By  the  same  Editor.  New 


Edition,  y.  6d. 

“The  notes  to  both  plays  are  excellent.  Much  has  been  done  in  these  two  volumes  to  render 
the  study  of  Aristophanes  a real  treat  to  a boy  instead  of  a drudgery,  by  helping  him  to  under- 
stand the  fun  and  to  express  it  in  his  mother  tongue.  The  Examiner. 

ARISTOPHANES — PLUTUS.  By  the  same  Editor.  y.6d. 

EURIPIDES.  HERCULES  FURENS.  With  Intro- 
ductions, Notes  and  Analysis.  By  J.  T.  Hutchinson,  M.A.,  Christ’s  College, 
and  A.  Gray,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Jesus  College.  2s. 

“Messrs  Hutchinson  and  Gray  have  produced  a careful  and  useful  edition.’ "-Saturday 
Review. 

THE  HERACLEID^E  OF  EURIPIDES,  with  Introduc- 

tion and  Critical  Notes  by  E.  A.  Beck,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  Hall.  3J.  6d. 

London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


25 


LUCIANI  SOMNIUM  CHARON  PISCATOR  ET  DE 

LUCTU,  with  English  Notes  by  W.  E.  Heitland,  M.A.,  Fellow  of 
St  John’s  College,  Cambridge.  New  Edition,  with  Appendix.  3J.  6 d. 


II.  LATIN. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  DE  AMICITIA.  Edited  by  J.  S. 

Reid,  M.L.,  Fellow  and  Assistant  Tutor  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College, 
Cambridge,  y. 

“Mr  Reid  has  decidedly  attained  his  aim,  namely,  ‘a  thorough  examination  of  the  Latin'ty 

of  the  dialogue.’ The  revision  of  the  text  is  most  valuable,  and  comprehends  sundry 

acute  corrections.  . . . This  volume,  like  Mr  Reid's  other  editions,  is  a solid  gain  to  the  scholar- 
ship of  the  country.” — A theuceum. 

“ A more  distinct  gain  to  scholarship  is  Mr  Reid’s  able  and  thorough  edition  of  the  De 
Amicitid  of  Cicero,  a work  of  which,  whether  we  regard  the  exhaustive  introduction  or  the 
instructive  and  most  suggestive  commentary,  it  would  be  difficult  to  speak  too  highly.  , . . When 
we  come  to  the  commentary,  we  are  only  amazed  by  its  fulness  in  proportion  to  its  bulk. 
Nothing  is  overlooked  which  can  tend  to  enlarge  the  learner’s  general  knowledge  of  Ciceronian 
Latin  or  to  elucidate  the  text.” — Saturday  Review. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  CATO  MAJOR  DE  SENECTUTE. 

Edited  by  J.  S.  Reid,  M.L.  3J.  6d. 

“The  notes  are  excellent  and  scholarlike,  adapted  for  the  upper  forms  of  public  schools,  and 
likely  to  be  useful  even  to  more  advanced  students.” — Guardian. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  ORATIO  PRO  ARCHIA  POETA. 

Edited  by  J.  S.  Reid,  M.L.  is.  6d. 

“ It  is  an  admirable  specimen  of  careful  editing.  An  Introduction  tells  us  everything  we  could 
wish  to  know  about  Archias,  about  Cicero’s  connexion  with  him,  about  the  merits  of  the  trial,  and 
the  genuineness  of  the  speech.  The  text  is  well  and  carefully  printed.  The  notes  are  clear  and 
scholar-like.  ...  No  boy  can  master  this  little  volume  without  feeling  that  he  has  advanced  a long 
step  in  scholarship.” — The  Academy. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  PRO  L.  CORNELIO  BALBO  ORA- 

TIO.  Edited  by  J.  S.  Reid,  M.L.  Fellow  of  Caius  College,  Camb.  1 s.6d. 

“ We  are  bound  to  recognize  the  pains  devoted  in  the  annotation  of  these  two  orations  to  the 
minute  and  thorough  study  of  their  Latinity,  both  in  the  ordinary  notes  and  in  the  textual 
appendices.” — Saturday  Review. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  PRO  P.  CORNELIO  SULLA 

ORATIO.  Edited  by  J.  S.  Reid,  M.  L.  3.r.  6d. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  PRO  CN.  PLANCIO  ORATIO. 

Edited  by  H.  A.  IIolden,  LL.D.,  late  Head  Master  of  Ipswich  School. 
4 s.  Gd. 

“As  a book  for  students  this  edition  can  have  few  rivals.  It  is  enriched  by  an  excellent  intro- 
duction and  a chronological  table  of  the  principal  events  of  the  life  of  Cicero  ; while  in  its  ap- 
pendix, and  in  the  notes  on  the  text  which  are  added,  there  is  much  of  the  greatest  value.  The 
volume  is  neatly  got  up,  and  is  in  every  way  commendable.” — The  Scotsman. 

“ Dr  Holden’s  own  edition  is  all  that  could  be  expected  from  his  elegant  and  practised 
scholarship.  ...  Dr  Holden  has  evidently  made  up  his  mind  as  to  the  character  of  the 
commentary  most  likely  to  be  generally  useful ; and  he  has  carried  out  his  views  with  admirable 
thoroughness.” — Academy. 

“ Dr  Holden  has  given  us  here  an  excellent  edition.  The  commentary  is  even  unusually  full 
and  complete;  and  after  going  through  it  carefully,  we  find  little  or  nothing  to  criticize.  There 
is  an  excellent  introduction,  lucidly  explaining  the  circumstances  under  which  the  speech  was 
delivered,  a table  of  events  in  the  life  of  Cicero  and  a useful  index.”  Spectator,  Oct.  79,  1881. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  IN  O.  CAECILIUM  DIVINATIO 

ET  IN  C.  VERREM  ACTIO  PRIMA.  With  Introduction  and  Notes 
by  W.  E.  Heitland,  M.A.,  and  Herbert  Cowie,  M.A.,  Fellows  of 
St  John’s  College,  Cambridge.  3J. 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


26 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


M.  T.  CICERONIS  ORATIO  PRO  L.  MURENA,  with 

English  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  W.  E.  Heitland,  M.A.,  Fellow 
and  Classical  Lecturer  of  St  John’s  College,  Cambridge.  Second  Edition, 
carefully  revised.  3J. 

“Those  students  are  to  be  deemed  fortunate  who  have  to  read  Cicero’s  lively  and  brilliant 
oration  for  L.  Murena  with  Mr  Heitland’s  handy  edition,  which  may  be  pronounced  ‘four-square’ 
in  point  of  equipment,  and  which  has,  not  without  good  reason,  attained  the  honours  of  a 
second  edition.” — Saturday  Review. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  IN  GAIUM  VERREM  ACTIO 

PRIMA.  With  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  H.  Cowie,  M.A.,  Fellow 
of  St  John’s  College,  Cambridge,  ij.  6d. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  ORATIO  PRO  T.  A.  MILONE, 

with  a Translation  of  Asconius’  Introduction,  Marginal  Analysis  and 
English  Notes.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  John  Smyth  Purton,  B.D.,  late 
President  and  Tutor  of  St  Catharine’s  College,  is.  6d. 

“The  editorial  work  is  excellently  done.” — The  Academy. 

M.  T.  CICERONIS  SOMNIUM  SCIPIONIS.  With  In- 

troduction and  Notes.  By  W.  D.  Pearman,  M.A.  [ In  the  Press. 

P.  OVIDII  NASONIS  FASTORUM  Liber  VI.  With 

a Plan  of  Rome  and  Notes  by  A.  SlDGWlCK,  M.A.  Tutor  of  Corpus  Christi 
College,  Oxford,  u.  6d. 

“ Mr  Sidgwick’s  editing  of  the  Sixth  Book  of  Ovid’s  Fasti  furnishes  a careful  and  serviceable 
volume  for  average  students.  It  eschews  ‘construes’  which  supersede  the  use  of  the  dictionary, 
but  gives  full  explanation  of  grammatical  usages  and  historical  and  mythical  allusions,  besides 
illustrating  peculiarities  of  style,  true  and  false  derivations,  and  the  more  remarkable  variations  of 
the  text.” — Saturday  Review. 

“ It  is  eminently  good  and  useful.  . . . The  Introduction  is  singularly  clear  on  the  astronomy  of 
Ovid,  which  is  properly  shown  to  be  ignorant  and  confused ; there  is  an  excellent  little  map  of 
Rome,  giving  just  the  places  mentioned  in  the  text  and  no  more  ; the  notes  are  evidently  written 
by  a practical  schoolmaster.” — The  Academy. 

GAI  IULI  CAESARIS  DE  BELLO  GALLICO  COM- 
MENT. I.  II.  With  English  Notes  and  Map  by  A.  G.  Peskett,  M.A., 
Fellow  of  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge,  Editor  of  Caesar  De  Bello  Gallico, 
VII.  6d. 

GAI  IULI  CAESARIS  DE  BELLO  GALLICO  COM- 
MENT. III.  With  Map  and  Notes  by  A.  G.  Peskett,  M.A.,  Fellow 
of  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge,  ij.  6d. 

“ In  an  unusually  succinct  introduction  he  gives  all  the  preliminary  and  collateral  information 
that  is  likely  to  be  useful  to  a young  student ; and,  wherever  we  have  examined  his  notes,  we 
have  found  them  eminently  practical  and  satisfying.  . . The  book  may  well  be  recommended  for 
careful  study  in  school  or  college.” — Saturday  Review. 

“The  notes  are  scholarly,  short,  and  a real  help  to  the  most  elementary  beginners  in  Latin 
prose.” — The  Examiner. 

BOOKS  IV.  AND  V.  AND  Book  VII.  by  the  same  Editor. 

2 s.  each. 

BOOK  VI.  by  the  same  Editor,  it.  6d. 


London : Cambridge  Warehouse , 1 7 Paternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


P.  VERGILI  MARONIS  AENEIDOS  Liber  II.  Edited 

with  Notes  by  A.  Sidgwick,  M.A.  Tutor  of  Corpus  Christi  College, 
Oxford,  ij.  6d. 


BOOKS  I.,  IV..  V.,  VI.,  VII.,  VIII.,  X.,  XI.,  XII.  by  the  same 

Editor,  is.  6d.  each. 

“ Mr  Arthur  Sidgwick’s  ‘ Vergil,  Aeneid,  Book  XII.’  is  worthy  of  his  reputation,  and  is  dis- 
tinguished by  the  same  acuteness  and  accuracy  of  knowledge,  appreciation  of  a boy’s  difficulties 
and  ingenuity  and  resource  in  meeting  them,  which  we  have  on  other  occasions  had  reason  to 
praise  in  these  pages.” — The  Academy. 

“As  masterly  in  its  clearly  divided  preface  and  appendices  as  in  the  sound  and  independent 
character  of  its  annotations.  . . . There  is  a great  deal  more  in  the  notes  than  mere  compilation 

and  suggestion No  difficulty  is  left  unnoticed  or  unhandled.”— Saturday  Review. 

This  edition  is  admirably  adapted  for  the  use  of  junior  students,  who  will  find  in  it  the  result 
of  much  reading  in  a condensed  form,  and  clearly  expressed.  ''—Cambridge  Independent  Press. 

BOOKS  VII.  VIII.  in  one  volume.  3t. 

BOOKS  X.,  XI.,  XII.  in  one  volume.  6d. 
QUINTUS  CURTIUS.  A Portion  of  the  History. 

(Alexander  in  India.)  By  W.  E.  Heitland,  M.  A.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer 
of  St  John  s College,  Cambridge,  and  T.  E.  Raven,  B.A.,  Assistant  Master 
in  Sherborne  School,  y.  6d. 

“Equally  commendable  as  a genuine  addition  to  the  existing  stock  of  school-books  is 
Atearander  in  India,  a compilation  from  the  eighth  and  ninth  books  of  Q.  Curtius,  edited  for 
the  Pitt  Press  by  Messrs  Heitland  and  Raven.  . . . The  work  of  Curtius  has  merits  of  its 
own,  which,  in  former  generations,  made  it  a favourite  with  English  scholars,  and  which  still 

make  it  a popular  text-book  in  Continental  schools The  reputation  of  Mr  Heitland  is  a 

sufficient  guarantee  for  the  scholarship  of  the  notes,  which  are  ample  without  being  excessive 
and  the  book  is  well  furnished  with  all  that  is  needful  in  the  nature  of  maps,  indexes,  and  ap- 
pendices. — Academy . * * 


M.  ANNAEI  LUCANI  PHARSALIAE  LIBER 

PRIMUS,  edited  with  English  Introduction  and  Notes  by  W.  E.  Heitland, 
M.A.  and  C.  E.  Haskins,  M.A.,  Fellows  and  Lecturers  of  St  John’s  Col- 
lege, Cambridge,  is.  6d. 

“A  careful  and  scholarlike  production.” — Times. 
tt  .",In  ?’ce  Parahels  of  Lucan  from  Latin  poets  and  from  Shakspeare,  Mr  Haskins  and  Mr 
Heitland  deserve  praise.” — Saturday  Review. 


BEDA'S  ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY,  BOOKS 

III.,  IV.,  the  Text  from  the  very  ancient  MS.  in  the  Cambridge  University 
Library,  collated  with  six  other  MSS.  Edited,  with  a life  from  the  German  of 
Ebert,  and  with  Notes,  &c.  by  J.  E.  B.  Mayor,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Latin 
andj.  R.  Lumby,  D.D.,  Norrisian  Professor  of  Divinity.  Revised  edition' 
7 s.  6d. 

“lo  young  students  of  English  History  the  illustrative  notes  will  be  of  great  service  while 
the  study  of  the  texts  will  be  a good  introduction  lo  Mediaeval  Latin.”—  The  Nonconformist 

In  Bede  s works  Englishmen  can  go  back  to  origines  of  their  history,  unequalled  for 
form  and  matter  by  any  modern  European  nation.  Prof.  Mayor  has  done  good  service  in  renl 
dering  a part  of  Bedes  greatest  work  accessible  to  those  who  can  read  Latin  with  enw  M 
has  adorned  this  edition  of  the  third  and  fourth  books  of  the  “Ecclesiastical  History”  wifi, 
amazing  erudition  for  which  he  is  unrivalled  among  Englishmen  and  rarely  equalled  bv  Hermann 
And  however  in-eresting  and  valuable  the  text  may  be,  we  can  certainly  apnlv  to  his  nfU 
the  expression,  La  sauce  vaut  mieux  que  le  poisson.  They  are  literally  crammed  with  intfl„ofS 
nig  information  about  early  English  life.  For  though  ecclesiastical  in  name,  Bede’s  historv  I 
of  a.l  parts  of  the  national  life,  since  the  Church  had  points  of  contact  with  all/* E xavmier  a * 

Books  I.  and  II.  In  the  Press. 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse,  17  Paternoster  Row . 


28 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


III.  FRENCH. 

LA  GUERRE.  By  Mm.  Ercicmann-Chatrian.  With 

Map,  Introduction  and  Commentary  by  the  Rev.  A.  C.  Clapin,  M.A., 
St  John’s  College,  Cambridge,  and  Bachelier-es-Lettres  cf  the  University  of 
France;  Assistant  Master  at  Sherborne  School,  y. 

LA  PICCIOLA.  By  X.  B.  SAINTINE.  The  Text,  with 

Introduction,  Notes  and  Map,  by  the  same  Editor,  is.  The  Notes  sepa- 
rate, is. 

LAZARE  HOCHE— PAR  EMILE  DE  BONNECHOSE. 

With  Three  Maps,  Introduction  and  Commentary,  by  C.  Colbeck,  M.A., 
late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge;  Assistant  Master  at  Harrow 
School.  2 s. 

HISTOIRE  DU  SIECLE  DE  LOUIS  XIV  PAR 

VOLTAIRE.  Parti.  Chaps.  I. — XIII.  Edited  with  Notes  Philological  and 
Historical,  Biographical  and  Geographical  Indices,  etc.  by  Gustave  Masson, 

B. A.  Univ.  Gallic.,  Officier  d’Academie,  Assistant  Master  of  Harrow  School, 
and  G.  W.  Prothero,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  King’s  College,  Cam- 
bridge. 2 s.  6d. 

"Messrs  Masson  and  Prothero  have,  to  judge  from  the  first  part  of  their  work,  performed 
with  much  discretion  and  care  the  task  of  editing  Volta're’s  Siecle  de  Louis  XIV  for  the  ‘Pitt 
Press  Series.’  Besides  the  usual  kind  of  notes,  the  editors  have  in  this  case,  influenced  by  Vol- 
taire’s ‘summary  way  of  treating  much  of  the  history,’  given  a good  deal  of  historical  informa- 
tion, in  which  they  have,  we  think,  done  well.  At  the  beginning  of  the  book  will  be  found 
excellent  and  succinct  accounts  of  the  constitution  of  the  French  army  and  Parliament  at  the 
period  treated  of.” — Saturday  Review. 

Part  II.  Chaps.  XIV. — XXIV.  With  Three  Maps  of  the 

Period.  By  the  same  Editors,  is.  6d. 

Part  III.  Chap.  XXV.  to  the  end.  By  the  same  Editors. 

is.  6d. 

LE  VERRE  D’EAU.  A Comedy,  by  Scribe.  With  a 

Biographical  Memoir,  and  Grammatical,  Literary  and  Historical  Notes.  By 

C.  Colbeck,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge;  Assistant 
Master  at  Harrow  School,  is. 

"It  may  be  national  prejudice,  but  we  consider  this  edition  far  superior  to  any  of  the  series 
which  hitherto  have  been  edited  exclusively  by  foreigners.  Mr  Colbeck  seems  better  to  under- 
stand the  wants  and  difficulties  of  an  English  boy.  The  etymological  notes  especially  are  admi- 
rable. . . . The  historical  notes  and  introduction  are  a piece  of  thorough  honest  work.”—  Journal 
of  Education. 

M.  DARU,  par  M.  C.  A.  Sainte-Beuve,  (Causeries  du 

Lundi,  Vol.  IX.).  With  Biographical  Sketch  of  the  Author,  and  Notes 
Philological  and  Historical.  By  Gustave  Masson,  is. 

LA  SUITE  DU  MENTEUR.  A Comedy  in  Five  Acts, 

by  P.  Corneille.  Edited  with  Fontenelle’s  Memoir  of  the  Author,  Voltaire’s 
Critical  Remarks,  and  Notes  Philological  and  Historical.  By  Gustave 
Masson,  is. 

LA  JEUNE  SIBERIENNE.  LE  LEPREUX  DE  LA 

CITF  D’AOSTE.  Tales  by  Count  Xavier  de  Maistre.  With  Bio- 
graphical Notice,  Critical  Appreciations,  and  Notes.  By  Gustave  Masson. 
is. 


London:  Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


29 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


LE  DIRECTOIRE.  (Considerations  sur  la  Revolution 

Franjaise.  Troisieme  et  quatrieme  parties.)  Par  Madame  la  Baronne  de 
Stael-Holstein.  With  a Critical  Notice  of  the  Author,  a Chronological 
Table,  and  Notes  Historical  and  Philological,  by  G.  Masson,  B.A.,  and 
G.  W.  Prothero,  M.A.  Revised  and  enlarged  Edition,  is. 

“ Prussia  under  Frederick  the  Great,  and  France  under  the  Directory,  bring  us  face  to  face 
respectively  with  periods  of  history  which  it  is  right  should  be  known  thoroughly,  and  which 
are  well  treated  in  the  Pitt  Press  volumes.  The  latter  in  particular,  an  extract  from  the 
world-known  work  of  Madame  de  Stael  on  the  French  Revolution,  is  beyond  all  praise  for 
the  excellence  both  of  its  style  and  of  its  matter.” — Times. 

DIX  ANNEES  D’EXIL.  Livre  II.  Chapitres  i— 8. 

Par  Madame  la  Baronne  De  Stael-Holstein.  With  a Biographical 
Sketch  of  the  Author,  a Selection  of  Poetical  Fragments  by  Madame  de 
Stael’s  Contemporaries,  and  Notes  Historical  and  Philological.  By  Gustave 
Masson,  is. 

“ The  choice  made  by  M.  Masson  of  the  second  book  of  the  Memoirs  of  Madame  de  Stael 
appears  specially  felicitous.  . . . This  is  likely  to  be  one  of  the  most  favoured  oi  M.  Masson’s 
editions,  and  deservedly  so.” — Academy. 

FRIlDEGONDE  ET  BRUNEHAUT.  A Tragedy  in  Five 

Acts,  by  N.  Lemercier.  Edited  with  Notes,  Genealogical  and  Chrono- 
logical Tables,  a Critical  Introduction  and  a Biographical  Notice.  By 
Gustave  Masson,  is. 

LE  VIEUX  CELIBATAIRE.  A Comedy,  by  Collin 

D’PIarleville.  With  a Biographical  Memoir,  and  Grammatical,  Literary 
and  Historical  Notes.  By  the  same  Editor,  is. 

“ M.  Masson  is  doing  good  work  in  introducing  learners  to  some  of  the  less-known  French 
play-writers.  The  arguments  are  admirably  clear,  and  the  notes  are  not  too  abundant.” — 
Academy. 

LA  METROMANIE,  A Comedy,  by  Piron,  with  a Bio- 
graphical Memoir,  and  Grammatical,  Literary  and  Historical  Notes.  By  the 
same  Editor,  is. 

LASCARIS,  ou  LES  GRECS  DU  XVE.  SIECLE, 

Nouvelle  Historique,  par  A.  F.  Villemain,  with  a Biographical  Sketch  of 
the  Author,  a Selection  of  Poems  on  Greece,  and  Notes  Historical  and 
Philological.  By  the  same  Editor,  is. 


IV.  GERMAN. 

ERNST,  HERZOG  VON  SCIiWABEN.  UHLAND.  With 

Introduction  and  Notes.  By  PI.  J.  Wolsteniiolme,  B.A.  (Lond.), 
Lecturer  in  German  at  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.  3J.  6ci. 

ZOPF  UND  SCHWERT.  Lustspiel  in  ftinf  Aufziigen  von 

Karl  Gutzkow.  With  a Biographical  and  Historical  Introduction,  English 
Notes,  and  an  Index.  By  the  same  Editor.  $s.  6d. 

“We  are  glad  to  be  able  to  notice  a careful  edition  of  K.  Gutzkow’s  amusing  comedy 
‘Zopf and  Schwert’  by  Mr  H.  J.  Wolstenholmc.  . . . These  notes  are  abundant  and  contain 
references  to  standard  grammatical  works.”— Academy. 


London : Cambridge  Warehouse , 1 7 Paternoster  Row. 


30 


PUBLICATIONS  OF 


®oetf)c’«  flnctbenjctfjre.  (1749— 1759.)  GOETHE’S  BOY- 

HOOD:  being  the  First  Three  Books  of  his  Autobiography.  Arranged 
and  Annotated  by  Wilhelm  Wagner,  Ph.  D.,  late  Professor  at  the 
Johanneum,  Hamburg,  is. 

HAUFF.  DAS  WIRTHSHAUS  IM  SPESSART.  Edited 

by  A.  ScHLOTTMANN,  Ph.  D.,  Assistant  Master  at  Uppingham  School. 
y.  6d. 

DER  OBERHOF.  A Tale  of  Westphalian  Life,  by  Karl 

Immermann.  With  a Life  of  Immermann  and  English  Notes,  by  Wilhelm 
Wagner,  Ph.D.,  late  Professor  at  the  Johanneum,  Hamburg.  3.1. 

A BOOK  OF  GERMAN  DACTYLIC  POETRY.  Ar- 

ranged and  Annotated  by  the  same  Editor,  y. 

£>er  cvfte  tfteujjug  (THE  FIRST  CRUSADE),  by  Fried- 
rich von  Raumer.  Condensed  from  the  Author’s  ‘Plistory  of  the  Hohen- 
staufen’,  with  a life  of  Raumer,  two  Plans  and  English  Notes.  By 
the  same  Editor,  is. 

“Certainly  no  more  interesting  book  could  be  made  the  subject  of  examinations.  The  story 
of  the  First  Crusade  has  an  undying  interest.  The  notes  are,  on  the  whole,  good.” — Educationc.1 
Times. 

A BOOK  OF  BALLADS  ON  GERMAN  HISTORY. 

Arranged  and  Annotated  by  the  same  Editor,  is. 

“It  carries  the  reader  rapidly  through  some  of  the  most  important  incidents  connected  with 
the  German  race  and  name,  from  the  invasion  of  Italy  by  the  Visigoths  under  their  King  Alaric, 
down  to  the  Franco-German  War  and  the  installation  of  the  present  Emperor.  The  notes  supply 
very  well  the  connecting  links  between  the  successive  periods,  and  exhibit  in  its  various  phases  of 
growth  and  progress,  or  the  reverse,  the  vast  unwieldy  mass  which  constitutes  modern  Germany.” 
— Times. 

DER  STAAT  FRIEDRICHS  DES  GROSSEN.  By  G. 

Freytag.  With  Notes.  By  the  same  Editor  is. 

“Prussia  under  Frederick  the  Great,  and  France  under  the  Directory,  bring  us  face  to  face 
respectively  with  periods  of  history  which  it  is  right  should  be  known  thoroughly,  and  which 
are  well  treated  in  the  Pitt  Press  volumes.” — Times. 

GOETHE’S  HERMANN  AND  DOROTHEA.  With 

an  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  the  same  Editor.  3.1. 

“The  notes  are  among  the  best  that  we  know,  with  the  reservation  that  they  are  often  too 
abundant.  ” — A cademy. 

2)a«  3al)r  1813  (The  Year  1813),  by  F.  Kohlrausch. 

With  English  Notes.  By  the  same  Editor,  is. 


V.  ENGLISH. 

THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  PRACTICE  OF  EDU- 
CATION. Delivered  in  the  University  of  Cambridge  in  the  Easter 
Term,  1882,  under  the  direction  of  the  Teacher’s  Training  Syndi- 
cate. 2 s. 

MILTON’S  TRACTATE  ON  EDUCATION.  A fac- 
simile reprint  from  the  Edition  of  1673.  Edited,  with  Introduction  and 
Notes,  by  Oscar  Browning,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  King’s  College, 
Cambridge,  and  formerly  Assistant  Master  at  Eton  College,  is. 


London : Cambridge  Warehouse , 17  Paternoster  Row. 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS.  31 

LOCKE  ON  EDUCATION.  With  Introduction  and  Notes 

by  the  Rev.  R.  H.  Quick,  M.A.  y.  6d. 

price ^accu r °t d v^rin  t e d*  i n r rnm^  ,be  desircdL.  is  of  convenient  form  and  reasonable 
price,  accurately  printed,  and  accompanied  by  notes  which  are  admirable  There  is  no  teacher 

*«  “ - "ii » find  l.  PXbTj“S 

THE  TWO  NOBLE  KINSMEN,  edited  with  Intro- 

dfCri°n-  fTldr.ISI,0tes  th,e  £ev-  rrofessor  Skeat,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow 
t °f  Christ  s College,  Cambridge.  $s.  6d. 

, This  ^d‘tk>n  of  a play  that  is  well  worth  study,  for  more  reasons  than  one  bv  so  careful  a 
scholar  as  Mr  Skeat,  deserves  a hearty  welcome.*’— A thenceum  ’ y 

Mr  Skeat  15  a conscientious  editor,  and  has  left  no  difficulty  unexplained.”—  Times. 

BACON’S  HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN  OF  KING 

HENRY  VH.  With  Notes  by  the  Rev.  J.  Rawson  Lumby,  D.D.,  Nor- 
nsian  Professor  of  Divinity  ; late  Fellow  of  St  Catharine’s  College. 

SIR  THOMAS  MORE’S  UTOPIA.  With  Notes  by  the 

RrCe  Lumby>  d-d->  Norrisian  Professor  of  Divinity;  late  Fellow 

of  St  Catharine's  College,  Cambridge.  31-.  6d. 

“To  enthusiasts  in  history  matters,  who  are  not  content  with  mere  facts,  but  like  to  pursue 
their  investigations  behind  the  scenes,  as  it  were,  Professor  Rawson  Lumby  has  in  the  work  now 

,0  ,l“  ”*  “““"r 

. nlTkl  Dr  Lun^y  we  TF  giver  Haise  un(lualified  and  unstinted.  He  has  done  his  work 
admirably.  . . Every  student  of  history,  every  politician,  every  social  reformer,  every  one 
interested  in  literary  curiosities,  every  lover  of  English  should  buy  and  carefully  read  Dr 
Lumby  s edition  of  the  Utopia.  We  are  afraid  to  say  more  lest  we  should  be  thought  ex- 
travagant, and  our  recommendation  accordingly  lose  part  of  its  force.’’—  The  Teacher 

“ V was  originally  written  in  Latin  and  dots  not  find  a place  on  ordinary  bookshelves  A verv 
great  boon  has  therefore  been  conferred  on  the  general  English  reader  by  the  managers  of  the 
Fitt  Press  Series,  in  the  issue  of  a convenient  little  volume  of  More’s  Utopia  not  in  the  original 
Latin,  but  in  the  quaint  English  Translation  thereof  made  by  Raphe  Robynson , which  adds  a 
linguistic  interest  to  the  intrinsic  merit  of  the  work.  ...  All  this  has  been  edited  in  a most  com- 
pete and  scholarly  fashion  by  Dr  J.  R.  Luinby,  the  Norrisian  Professor  of  Divinity,  whose  name 
alone  ,s  a sufficient  wairant  for  its  accuracy.  It  is  a real  addition  to  the  modem  stock  of  classical 
English  literature.’ — Guardian. 

OF 


RICHARD  III. 

[Nearly  ready. 

PHILOSOPHY  FROM 

B.  Mayor,  M.A.,  Professor  of 


SIR  THOMAS  MORE’S  LIFE 

With  Notes,  &c.,  by  Professor  Lumby. 

A SKETCH  OF  ANCIENT 

THALES  TO  CICERO,  by  Joseph 

Moral  Philosophy  at  King’s  College,  London.  3j.  6d. 

“ In  writing  this  scholarly  and  attractive  sketch,  Professor  Mayor  has  had  chiefly  in  view 
* undergraduates  at  the  University  or  others  who  are  commencing  the  study  of  the  philosoDhical 
works  of  Cicero  or  Plato  or  Aristotle  in  the  original  language,’  but  also  hopes  that  it  ‘ mav  h 
found  interesting  and  useful  by  educated  readers  generally,  not  merely  as  an  introduction  to  the 
formal  history  of  philosophy,  but  as  supplying  a key  to  our  present  ways  of  thinking  and  iudo-i™ 
in  regard  to  matters  of  the  highest  importance.’” — Mind.  J s *» 

“Professor  Mayor  contributes  to  the  Pitt  Press  Series  A Sketch  of  Ancient  Philosofihv  ' 
which  he  has  endeavoured  to  give  a general  view  of  the  philosophical  systems  illustrated  b r\ th” 
genius  of  the  masters  of  metaphysical  and  ethical  science  from  Thales  to  Cicero.  In  the  ^ - 

of  his  sketch  he  takes  occasion  to  give  concise  analyses  of  Plato’s  Republic,  and  of  the  Ethip1^! 
Politics  of  Aristotle  ; and  these  abstracts  will  be  to  some  readers  not  the  least  useful  norti  an<r 
the  book.  It  may  be  objected  against  his  design  in  general  that  ancient  philosophy  is  tnn'v  °. 
and  too  deep  a subject  to  be  dismissed  in  a ‘ sketch '—that  it  should  be  left  to  those  who  will  b 
it  a serious  study.  But  that  objection  takes  no  account  of  the  large  class  of  persons  who*  J!!-0 
to  know,  in  relation  to  present  discussions  and  speculations,  what  famous  men  in  the  whol  > S-M 
thought  and  wrote  on  these  topics.  They  have  not  the  scholarship  which  would  be  necess  W°f 
original  examination  of  authorities ; but  they  have  an  intelligent  interest  in  the  relations  • 
ancient  and  modern  philosophy,  and  need  just  such  information  as  Professor  Mayor’s  sketch^h 
give  them.” — The  Guardian.  crv  Wl‘* 

[ Other  Volumes  are  in  preparation .] 

London : Cambridge  Warehouse , 1 7 Paternoster  Row. 


of  ©ambribge* 


LOCAL  EXAMINATIONS. 

Examination  Papers,  for  various  years,  with  the  Regulations  for  the 
Examination.  Demy  8vo.  i s.  each,  or  by  Post,  2 s.  2 d. 

Class  Lists,  for  various  years,  Boys  is.,  Girls  6 d. 

Annual  Reports  of  the  Syndicate,  with  Supplementary  Tables  showing 
the  success  and  failure  of  the  Candidates,  is.  each,  by  Post  is.  id. 


HIGHER  LOCAL  EXAMINATIONS. 

Examination  Papers  for  1882,  to  which  are  added  the  Regulations  for 
1883.  Demy  8vo.  is.  each,  by  Post  is.  id. 

Class  Lists,  for  various  years,  ij.  By  post,  is.  id. 

Reports  of  the  Syndicate.  Demy  8vo.  is.,  by  Post  is.  id. 


LOCAL  LECTURES  SYNDICATE. 

Calendar  for  the  years  1875—9.  Fcap.  8vo.  cloth. 

1875  80.  ,,  » 

1880-81. 


u 


is. 

IS. 

IS. 


TEACHERS’  TRAINING  SYNDICATE. 

Examination  Papers  for  various  years,  to  which  are  added  the  Regu- 
lations for  the  Examination.  Demy  8vo.  6 d.,  by  Post  'jd. 

CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  REPORTER. 

Published  by  Authority. 

Containing  all  the  Official  Notices  of  the  University  Reports  of 
Discussions  in  the  Schools,  and  Proceedings  of  the  Cambridge  Philo- 
sophical, Antiquarian,  and  Philological  Societies,  id.  weekly. 


CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  EXAMINATION  PAPERS. 

These  Papers  are  published  in  occasional  numbers  every  Term,  and  in 
volumes  for  the  Academical  year. 


VOL.  IX.  Parts  105  to  119. 
VOL.  X.  „ 120  to  138. 

Vol.  XI.  „ 139  to  159- 


Papers  for  the  Year  1879 — 80,  I2Y.  cloth. 

1880—81,  15J.  cloth. 
, 1881 — 82,  15 s.  cloth. 


Oxford  and  Cambridge  Schools  Examinations. 

Papers  set  in  the  Examination  for  Certificates,  July,  1882.  is.  6 d. 

List  of  Candidates  who  obtained  Certificates  at  the  Examinations 

held  in  1881  and  1882  ; and  Supplementary  Tables.  6 d. 


Regulations  of  the  Board  for  1883.  6 d. 

Report  of  the  Board  for  the  year  ending  Oct.  31, 1882.  is. 


Uonifon:  c.  j.  clay,  m.a.  and  son. 

CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  WAREHOUSE, 
17  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 


CAMBRIDGE  *. 


PRINTED  BY  C.  J. 


CLAY,  M.A.  AND  SON,  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  TRESS, 


4? 


fmSgm 


c&fi.vV; 


NMH 


wmt 


V-.'  v 


I [lW  w llPll  i ii 

tMMii 


kV  .*•  » v>» 


